I am very pleased to agree with the cabinet secretary whenever I can, so I am sure that all Labour and SNP members—and, I hope, some others—agreed with him when he said that the bedroom tax was an “iniquitous and damaging policy”. Unfortunately, of course, Murdo Fraser and his colleagues do not agree with that view. Murdo Fraser spuriously compared the bedroom tax to the local housing allowance. The fact is that the bedroom tax penalises people who are already disadvantaged and are sitting in tenancies from which they cannot move. The reality is that the local housing allowance affected no sitting tenant. Labour and the SNP may, of course, disagree about how to end the bedroom tax in law, but we have always agreed that it needs to end and we now agree, at the end of the budget process, that we must do whatever it takes to hasten its demise in Scotland. I think that most people in Scotland will be pleased to see us working together in this way; they would probably like to see it happen more often. Notwithstanding our differences over the next few months, I hope that it may be seen to happen in some other areas. It is true that there was nothing in the budget originally about the current approach to the bedroom tax. It is certainly the case that it would not have happened without the pressure of campaigners and the demands from Labour. It is also true that no approach was made to the UK Government until Friday. We could certainly make many comments about that. One that I will make is that I intervened on the cabinet secretary on 19 December in the chamber and raised specifically the suggestion of a letter to the UK Government, but no action was taken until Friday. Clearly, much more could be said about that, but let us not dwell too much on it today. What we really ought to concentrate on today and over the next few weeks is ensuring that everyone who needs and is entitled to help to deal with the bedroom tax receives that help. That is what John Swinney, Jackie Baillie and others need to set their minds to over the next few weeks, because everyone who is suffering from the bedroom tax needs to receive the help that has been promised today. As Iain Gray said at the end of his speech, this has therefore become a “sink the bedroom tax” budget, having started life as a “don’t rock the boat” budget. The fact that it was a “don’t rock the boat” budget is evidenced by the lack of discussion today about other elements of the budget, even from the Conservatives; the bedroom tax took up the majority of, for example, Murdo Fraser’s speech today. The debate has concentrated a great deal on the bedroom tax and childcare; it is no accident that those are the two big demands that Labour decided we would put forward for the budget this year. There was also the free school meals argument, but since the SNP has not repeated the inaccurate comments about Labour that it used in previous debates, I will not reopen that subject today, except to repeat briefly the point that I made to John Swinney in the Finance Committee last week, which was that quite a few schools have problems accommodating the increased numbers from the free school meals policy—I can think of at least one such school in my constituency. However, I note that Mr Swinney undertook to work with COSLA to try to address that problem. Let us concentrate on practical implementation of the policies that have been agreed in the budget, whether on free school meals, the bedroom tax or childcare, which I must come to in the last couple of minutes of my speech. I pay tribute—although he is not here at the moment—to Willie Rennie for his persistence on the issue, but I am sure that he would, if he were here, acknowledge that Labour’s big ask on childcare in the early stages of the budget process was crucial to the announcement in January about childcare for two-year-olds. As with many other policies, we cannot absolutely prove that, but we all know that that is how politics works. When opposition parties campaign effectively on an issue, governments often have to give way. I therefore welcome what was announced at that time about childcare for two-year-olds, and I welcome the previous announcement on 600 hours of provision in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. The effect of that on women’s participation was overstated a little by John Swinney today, but that is just one part of it. The child development that Willie Rennie emphasised is clearly important as well. As with the bedroom tax, the Scottish Government has not been able to resist making childcare, too, a referendum issue. I think that we will continue to debate that over the next few months. All that I will say about it today is that, if there were to be a yes vote, the chances of finding more money for childcare in the early years of independence would be no better than the chances now, so let us get on with it. That is what Labour has been saying. We need money up front, even if we are going to have increased revenues from increased employment thereafter. On that other point—which in a sense is the fundamental referendum point on childcare in the white paper, as I said in a previous debate—the benefits of increased employment in Scotland can just as well come to Scotland through devolution of income tax and fiscal devolution more generally. The arguments will go on, but today I will concentrate on two things. First, let us implement the policies on which we have agreed on the bedroom tax and childcare and, finally, let me congratulate my front-bench colleagues, who have had a superb budget. They have won all the demands that they made on the bedroom tax and some of the demands that they made on childcare for two-year-olds.

I congratulate Jenny Marra on lodging her important motion and I commend the passionate and empathetic way in which she has championed this and other causes. Female genital mutilation is an appalling human rights abuse that we must do everything that we can to completely eradicate. I believe that we must approach it with the right kind of cultural sensitivity—not the kind that turns a blind eye to human rights abuses and becomes a kind of racism, as Kenny Gibson said, when taken to extremes. I am a great admirer of multiculturalism in general, but human rights always trump multiculturalism and we cannot make an exception for any groups of people. The kind of cultural sensitivity that I have in mind is, first, a recognition that the problem of FGM exists to a significant extent in certain communities and, secondly, a recognition that effective action comes from working on the front line with the communities affected in ways that have a chance of being effective. We must therefore support organisations doing front-line work. I certainly know of one organisation that has been doing such work. I hope that the Government will continue to give it and any other front-line organisations the support that they need. It is only by doing that front-line work that it is possible to uncover the extent of this crime, because it is a crime that in many cases is hidden. However, we must believe the estimates that have been made on the basis of the census, which lead to the conclusion that there are 3,000 to 4,000 girls at risk in Scotland at present.

I entirely agree with that. In a way, that is a good example of the positive cultural sensitivity that I have in mind. It is important that people who work on the front line understand how they can work effectively with people in the communities that are affected and how they can gain their confidence and possibly make progress. Mainstream services are also crucial, and they need to link up with each other as well as with the front-line organisations that I mentioned. The health service is clearly crucial. I am told that women survivors are not getting the healthcare that they need and, in many cases, they are not identified at all. Health professionals in general need training so that they can ask the required questions and give examinations when that is appropriate. Midwives are particularly important, so I am glad that the minister mentioned the Royal College of Midwives in recent announcements on the matter. It has a report about identifying, recording and reporting the issue, and I know that Gillian Smith of the RCM is doing some work on that at present. That is clearly important. Passing on information is also an important part of the work, as this is a child protection issue and those who are at risk must be regarded as such. I noticed that Chief Superintendent Gill Imery said recently that all children of FGM survivors should be on the child protection register. I do not know whether there could be exceptions where people are confident that the children are not at risk, but we should listen seriously to what she is saying. The police in general are clearly important in this regard. Other agencies must work closely with them, and when information is passed on to the police they must be prepared to take serious action. The minister mentioned England. There was an interesting report about England in The Times on Friday, and one issue that was mentioned was that there is to be an investigation of the police in England to see whether they are doing everything that is required. The other big issue in the English context that was highlighted in that article was the failure of schools to play a role as well. All the agencies are important. The scoping exercise is a good start, but only if it leads to action, so I support Jenny Marra’s call for an action programme following that piece of work.

I congratulate Dave Stewart on lodging his important motion, and I pay tribute to his passionate championing of the issue during the past 17 years. As his motion commends the International Diabetes Federation, it is appropriate that I pay tribute to the work of Sir Michael Hirst as the president of that organisation. His position is a great honour for Scotland and, as some members will know, he was formerly a Conservative member of Parliament. The motion refers to the Melbourne declaration and the World Health Organization, and highlights the great increase in the number of diabetes cases worldwide. In Scotland, the number of those with diabetes has increased from 150,000 in 2002, when the first framework was launched, to 258,000 now. Of course, those figures do not take account of the many people whose diabetes is undiagnosed; the figure of 46 per cent is generally accepted as a good guide to the proportion of type 2 diabetes cases that have not been diagnosed. In addition to the importance of general prevention programmes on exercise, diet and so on, support should be given to activities that aim to raise awareness of the risks of diabetes, which are perhaps not so well known. I support the work of Diabetes UK Scotland, for example, which takes roadshows to local communities. More focus is needed on early diagnosis, as Dave Stewart emphasised with regard to effective targeted screening programmes. Perhaps the minister will say something about that—I am not sure where we are at with screening, but it is clearly necessary given that so many cases remain undiagnosed. There has been progress as a result of the focus on diabetes in the quality and outcomes framework, and I know that GPs do a lot of good work on diabetes that they did not necessarily do before, but I do not know whether any of that work encompasses screening. There has been other progress—a lot of progress, really—in the past decade. There is now a high uptake of screening for retinopathy, which is important as blindness is one of the serious potential complications of diabetes. There have also been many other great advances. When the first action plan was launched in 2002, during my time as Minister for Health and Community Care, I was a great admirer in particular of the work of the Tayside diabetes managed clinical network. The current minister is very lucky to have Professor Andrew Morris, who was the main driving force behind that network, as his chief scientist at present. We should pay tribute to Professor Morris for all his great work on diabetes, which has been internationally recognised. His work has included the diabetes register, and more generally work on the therapeutics and genetics of diabetes. We in Scotland have a lot to be proud of in dealing with diabetes, but the focus of this debate—as in other health debates—must be on what more needs to be done. Dave Stewart mentioned insulin pumps, on which he has done a great deal of work. I had a constituent at my surgery two weeks ago who told me that her daughter was not able to achieve blood sugar control through the normal means, and she asked me to write to NHS Lothian about the provision of an insulin pump. I hope that she will get that if it is appropriate for her, and I hope that insulin pumps will become more generally available. It is perhaps time to update the action plan, which must recommit to bringing down the numbers of diabetes cases and continuing to improve the care of those who have the condition.

I am very much looking forward to the third Scottish Commonwealth games of my adult life. As the first two were in Edinburgh, I am very happy that, on this occasion, the games are going to Glasgow. I do not intend to talk about arrangements for the games, as many members know far more about that than I do. Instead, I want to concentrate on the content of the Labour amendment and the legacy of improving “participation in physical activity and sport for all”, and the resulting “improvements to the nation’s health”. In preparing for the debate, I was very interested to read the Scottish Government research paper, “Legacy Lessons from Past Large-Scale Sporting Events”, which said: “The evidence for increases in physical activity was very limited and often of low quality.” In particular, it said that there was “No automatic ‘trickle-down effect’.” It went on to say: “Rather than happening naturally, the evidence stresses that long–term legacy needs to be carefully planned and implemented.” Credit should go to the Scottish Government for taking that message on board some time ago. The first games legacy for Scotland document was produced in 2009, with its four themes of being flourishing, active, connected and sustainable. Underlying each of those themes are five laudable principles, which include ensuring equality and encouraging community engagement. I will concentrate on the active element of the legacy. In relation to the sustainable element, I echo what Patricia Ferguson said about sponsorship from high-interest lenders. It would help if the minister in summing up ruled out such sponsorship. In preparation for the debate, I looked at the legacy website—I am ashamed to say that that was the first time that I have done so. I was taken by the amount of detail on it and by the amount of activity that is and has been going on throughout Scotland. Other members probably know more about that than I do. For example, sportscotland has been involved in many sport hubs being established throughout Scotland, and it has the £10 million active places fund. I was reminded not just by the website but by the Big Lottery Fund stand outside the chamber of the BIG 2014 communities programme, which has given hundreds of grants to sports clubs and to voluntary and community organisations. A great deal of activity is going on; much of it is funded by the Scottish Government and much is funded by the lottery. I cannot give such a glowing report of Edinburgh, because I must highlight issues in my area. To be fair, the refurbishment of the Commonwealth pool has proceeded apace. The pool is a legacy of the 1970 games, and I well remember swimming in it for the first time in 1970. We should also acknowledge the sport hubs in Edinburgh. However, another legacy from previous Commonwealth games in Edinburgh is Meadowbank sports centre. It would be remiss of me not to flag up to the minister the problem that Edinburgh’s major sporting venue, which was used in previous Commonwealth games, is in dire need of rebuilding. The City of Edinburgh Council is preparing proposals for that, but there are two funding problems. The short-term problem is that £300,000 is needed for a feasibility study and the longer-term problem is the capital cost of a new build, which will run into millions of pounds. Some of that might come from elsewhere, but I hope that, in the not-too-distant future, the Scottish Government might make a significant contribution to that. I raised the general issue of participation in sport for all. The Scottish Government has flagged up the health dimension of that, particularly through Sir Harry Burns, whom we will all miss as chief medical officer when he goes. From hearing him speak on several occasions, I think that the fact that physical activity is important for health has almost become the single most important health improvement message. I have no doubt that that is why increasing physical activity is one of the Scottish Government indicators in the Scotland performs framework. Physical activity is important for people of all ages. The older people are, the less likely they are to be active, in general. Perhaps the most important health advice that can be given to older people, such as me, is to take more exercise. That is important for young people and people of all ages, so it is a concern that levels of participation in sport and exercise are not improving. Patricia Ferguson gave the figures, which seem to have gone down over the past three or four years. That was pointed out a few years ago in an Audit Scotland report, which said that figures for adult participation were declining, while elite athlete performance was satisfactory. We want to encourage good elite athletic performance, but the really important issue for the legacy is taking action to improve activity levels and sport participation rates among all sections of the population. As Patricia Ferguson said, the physical activity targets are being met least in deprived areas. There could well be a financial dimension to participation in sport. A recent Health and Sport Committee meeting included a round-table discussion about community sport. I was not on the committee when it did its original study, so perhaps its convener, Duncan McNeil, will mention that in his speech. Quite a lot of interesting points were made in that discussion, on 14 January, some of which I will refer to in my last minute. I was particularly struck by what was said by Charlie Raeburn, who is a sports consultant and can often be quite critical of what we as politicians are doing, but is always worth listening to. He emphasised issues such as the lack of affordable access and the importance of improving the quality of coaching, and he raised the possibility that the self-management of sports facilities by local communities could be helpful. Christine Scullion of the Robertson Trust made that point, too, and said that community-owned facilities would help to bring down costs. The importance of more investment in training and volunteers was also highlighted in that round-table discussion. Kim Atkinson of the Scottish Sports Association, for example, made that point and emphasised the importance of employer-supported volunteering. There are many suggestions and ideas out there to deal with the problem. We have to be honest. We are not really succeeding in improving and increasing the scope of participation in physical activity and sport, and we need to address our attention to that this year. For me, that will be the key part of the legacy. However, that does not, of course, take away from all the great work that has been done in preparation for the games.

9. To ask the Scottish Government, in light of recent severe weather conditions, whether it can provide an update on the outcome of any discussions of new arrangements or additional funding to deal with flooding. (S4O-02825)

The minister has stated previously that more targeted support may be required for those likely to be most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. How is that concern being addressed? When will he be in a position to report any actions that the Scottish Government will take to support vulnerable communities and households?

Labour’s objective, at budget time and throughout the year, is to achieve gains for the people and causes that we came to the Parliament to represent. I could give many examples. After Ed Miliband’s speech on energy, the UK Government and the Scottish Government were suddenly forced to make statements about the actions that they want to take in the area. After the great campaigns of Stella Creasy at UK level and Kezia Dugdale here, we saw action on payday loans from the UK Government and the Scottish Government. Two weeks ago, the real significance of the first budget debate that we had—this year’s budget is really in two parts—was that the Scottish Government was forced, by the Labour Party’s active and vigorous campaigning on childcare, to allocate a reasonably significant sum of money to childcare for two-year-olds. No one can doubt that, if Labour had not made the issue its number 1 budget priority, the Scottish Government would never have announced the policy on budget day. That was the significance of what happened two weeks ago. Today, however, members on the SNP benches have repeated—to my great disappointment, because Kenneth Gibson is very sensible when he wears his Finance Committee convener’s hat but today he reverted to party-political mode—the sustained nonsense that we have seen in the chamber, the newspapers and social media about Labour’s vote two weeks ago. The absolute final proof that we could not vote for that motion because it was about independence is the vote of the Liberal Democrats. Nobody in this chamber or this country doubts that the reason why we have free school meals here is the instigation of the Liberal Democrats at UK level—let us congratulate them on that. However, two weeks ago today the Liberal Democrats voted against the Government’s motion. That is the final proof that the SNP has been talking absolute nonsense about our vote on free school meals. John Swinney said today that he hoped that members will show support for free school meals. We will, and we will vote for the budget, but the SNP and the Scottish Government should listen carefully to the reason that Iain Gray gave for that. It is connected to our single most important objective as we debate the budget at this stage: to achieve gains in relation to the bedroom tax. We can already claim some advances on that. Members will remember that it was Labour that first advocated the allocation of money to alleviate the consequences of the unjust bedroom tax, and the Scottish Government announced the £20 million in response to Labour’s demand. Our simple priority and objective over the next two weeks is to ensure that the £20 million sum is significantly increased. Members on the SNP benches were laughing in a disrespectful way when David Mundell was mentioned, but they cannot lightly dismiss the words of a UK Government minister in that way. Members on the SNP benches and indeed members on my side of the chamber might not like the words of a UK Government minister, but they cannot be dismissed as irrelevant to this discussion.

There are several suggestions for that, which should be the subject of discussions between the cabinet secretary and my colleagues over the next two weeks. I am sure that Jackie Baillie and perhaps others will go into the various options. With only two minutes left, I do not have time. One obvious way to proceed—albeit not the most desirable—would be to allocate money for housing to housing associations or councils to make up for any shortfall. In the first instance, explanations should be made of whether and how the money can be targeted at individuals. There is no doubt that a way can be found. That is our objective in the budget process. I do not have much time to deal with the rest. We have had the Government’s response to the Finance Committee’s report, which bears scrutiny. Iain Gray started his speech by reminding us that the Finance Committee made the central point—which Kenneth Gibson would have made today, had he been in Finance Committee convener mode—of the failure to link spending with the intended impact of policies in the budget. We had quite an interesting discussion about that in December, and the point still stands. The cabinet secretary came back by saying that we should judge the budget by the outcomes, and we heard of economic indicators again today. Two points must be made in response to that. First, people can debate how good or bad the economic indicators are. I accept some of the figures that have been given, but I also note an employment drop of 37,000 among 16 to 64-year-olds over the past year. It is a rather grey area. In its own report, the Government showed concern about the increase in the number of 16 to 19-year-olds not in education, employment or training. There is a mixed picture. The other point—and this is a pattern—is that the Scottish Government will always claim credit when there is some progress, but if the figures are going in the opposite direction, it will blame the UK Government. It is an easy strategy for the Scottish Government to adopt. I have lots more to say, but I have only 10 seconds, so let us keep it simple this year. Let us have more on the bedroom tax and we will continue to support the budget.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

By the cabinet secretary’s logic, is he therefore saying that the Liberal Democrats—the instigators of the policy—also voted against free school meals because they voted against the same motion?

Is it not the case that the UK Government has signed but not ratified the convention, and that it becomes legally binding only when ratified? If the minister thinks that it is legally binding now, is she not also going to have to take action in relation to articles 7, 8, 10, 11, 17, 22 and 25, as we are not at present compliant with any of them?

In 2005, I introduced a consultation on forced marriage and listened to the views of violence against women organisations, such as Scottish Women’s Aid, Hemat Gryffe Women’s Aid and Shakti Women’s Aid. As co-convener of the cross-party group on men’s violence against women and children, I feel strongly that the Scottish Government should listen to their views and concerns now about consultation and other matters. I know that the deputy convener of that group, Claudia Beamish, shares those views; she asked me to make that clear. The point that I made in my intervention is that the UK Government has signed the Istanbul convention and expressed its intention to ratify it, but it has not yet done so. It is with ratification that the treaty becomes legally binding for the state that has ratified it, which means that the UK and Scottish Governments will be required to bring the provisions into force through domestic policy and legislation. However, the obligations in the convention derive from the ratification of the treaty, not from the signing of it. I hope that the minister will clarify the Scottish Government’s point of view on that issue. From what she said in her opening speech, it seems that she believes that the Scottish Government must criminalise forced marriage in order to comply with the convention before it has been ratified. If that is the case, she will have to take action on a lot of other areas, which was the second point that I made in my intervention. Why is she picking one particular area and saying that such action is required under the convention? Engender has made it clear that articles 7, 8, 10, 11, 17, 22 and 25 would all require to be acted on once the convention has been ratified. I would like the minister to clarify the Government’s position on that in her winding-up speech. I think that it would be far better to proceed slowly on the matter, as the Justice Committee has recommended.

There is disagreement on the legal advice, because that is not the legal advice that Scottish Women’s Aid has received. However, if the minister takes that view, what is the Scottish Government’s response to my other point—that action will have to be taken on at least seven other articles of the convention?

I am pleased to support the bill in its totality, although, as the local member for Leith Links, I have a particular interest in the first part of the bill. I believe that the bill has local support, as is evidenced by the local community councils and other groups and individuals that support it. The only concern that I have occasionally heard has been about the bill maybe taking up public funds. However, it clearly involves not public funds but fundraising by the Leith Rules Golf Society. There is a great sense of history in Leith. We have a rich and varied history, and there is an on-going campaign for a Leith museum, which I shall speak about in Parliament on another occasion. Part of that history is the significance of Leith Links, which is one of the first places where golf was played. I do not want to enter into an argument about where golf was played for the very first time, but it is indisputable that the rules of golf were first written down by those who played golf on Leith Links. Indeed, in the 1740s, the City of Edinburgh Council, the promoter of the bill, offered a silver club to the winner of a golf competition on Leith Links on the condition that the rules be written down. I am pleased that the rules were written down on 7 March 1744, which is my birthday—well, 7 March is. It is appropriate that a statue of John Rattray will be put up, as he won that trophy on three occasions. He was a very colourful character, being a surgeon, an archer and a Jacobite as well as a distinguished golfer. It is fitting that his statue will be put up on Leith Links as quickly as possible. It is also timely, given that there will be heightened interest in golf in Scotland this year because of the Ryder cup. I hope that that will provide a boost to the fundraising for the statue. For the reasons that John Lamont has explained, it is clear that a bill is required to change the law. I know that explaining that to people has provided a great deal of amusement and attracted interest, but that is in the nature of some private bills. It was not quite so clear that a bill was required to change the Surplus Fire Fund. In fact, I was rather alarmed to read that the drafting of section 42 of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005 was ambiguous and that its interpretation was difficult. Apparently, the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator thought that legislation was not required, but the City of Edinburgh Council decided that it would play safe and ensure that nobody could challenge the way in which it wanted to broaden the scope of the purposes of the Surplus Fire Fund in order to attract more applications for grants and awards. I support that objective. The reason why I was disturbed by the comment about section 42 of the 2005 act is that the people who were responsible for that act are Johann Lamont and myself. I was amazed to think that we should be in any way connected with defective legislation. That apart, I commend the committee for its very detailed and conscientious examination of the bill. I read its report and the Official Report of the evidence session, and I thought that the committee interrogated every nook and cranny of the bill. I am pleased that the next member to speak, Anne McTaggart, was one of those distinguished interrogators.

Will the member give way?

I know that the member is a visitor to Leith Links because I remember bumping into her at the funfair at the Leith festival last year. The statue will obviously be a very welcome development for people who live in Leith, but does the member think that people from Glasgow, like her, or from further afield will now visit Leith Links to see the statue as well as attend the funfair?

I congratulate Tavish Scott on bringing the debate to the chamber. Clearly, I am not speaking as a local member, but I am pleased, with Nanette Milne, to be co-convener of the cross-party group on cancer. I also think that the debate raises interesting general issues. First, it raises the issue of the staffing of radiotherapy centres, but it also reminds us of what I regard as an important principle: that healthcare should be provided as near to home as is clinically appropriate. At a fairly recent meeting of the cross-party group, which discussed radiotherapy, Professor Alan Rodger, former director of the Beatson centre, reminded us of the importance of radiotherapy, which not everybody recognises. He talked about a survey that showed that 89 per cent of people had heard about radiotherapy but only 9 nine per cent thought that it was a modern cancer treatment. How wrong the rest are. Quite apart from its palliative role, far more people are cured by radiotherapy than by chemotherapy. Again according to Professor Rodger, research suggests that 52 per cent of cancer patients can benefit from radiotherapy; he also said that the percentage receiving it in Scotland is 45 per cent, ahead of England, where the figure is 37 per cent. Because of the increasing incidence of cancer with an elderly population, there is clearly a rising demand for services, and some of the general pressures are illustrated by what has been happening in Aberdeen. It took me back to the beginning of the century, when we had the enormous crisis at the Beatson cancer centre based on several staff shortages in different clinical grades, but particularly a shortage of clinical oncologists. Since then, there has been a general improvement with far more clinical oncologists being employed across Scotland and the development of new forms of radiotherapy such as intensity-modulated radiotherapy. However, today we hear that, once again, there is a problem with the number of clinical oncologists—and not just in Aberdeen, as there are also great pressures on cancer centres in the central belt. There are clearly other shortages as well, particularly of physicists, but clinical oncology is the particular focus of the debate today. I mentioned the principle that care should be provided as near to home as is clinically appropriate. Clearly, for radiotherapy, that cannot be on people’s doorsteps. People have to go to one of the five cancer centres in Scotland, and Aberdeen is certainly the appropriate one for Tavish Scott’s constituents. Chemotherapy can be delivered in Shetland, Orkney and all sorts of localities, and I believe that that is increasingly happening. That has been a great development. However, for radiotherapy, Aberdeen is the appropriate place. I share the local members’ concerns about the problems that have arisen in Aberdeen, particularly in relation to clinical oncology. I am told, and Tavish Scott reminded us, that the situation has improved recently, no doubt partly due to his campaigning and that of my colleagues Lewis Macdonald and Richard Baker, but it illustrates the problem that there is a national shortage of clinical oncologists, which has been even more serious in Aberdeen than in some other places. The matter clearly continues to demand the attention of the Scottish Government and indeed the UK Government. The other important point that Tavish Scott made is that there are particular reasons for his constituents wanting to receive treatment in Aberdeen given the superb services that are provided by CLAN Haven. I watched the video on its website before the debate and I was impressed, as others have been who have seen the service at first hand. It reminds us of the importance of person-centred, holistic care as part of cancer treatment. CLAN Haven clearly provides that. That is another reason why treatment must be provided in Aberdeen for all those for whom it is the appropriate centre.

I am told that there has been some progress on the matter since we discussed it at stage 1, so I will be interested to hear what the minister has to say. When I read the reports on the bill by the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, I was struck by the range of bodies that were expressing concerns about the definition. Some of those were environmental groups, as we might have expected, but a much broader range of bodies, such as the STUC, expressed concerns, and even some business organisations were sceptical about the definition. I am genuinely puzzled as to why the phrase, which we know is central to the Government’s purpose, should be introduced into legislation for the first time. I recall one academic saying in evidence that the definition was ambiguous and that some people might even take it to mean growth that was economically sustainable, which I do not think is the intention of the Government’s wording. The ambiguity around the definition leads to a lack of clarity. I will be interested to hear the minister’s response, but I believe that supporting Alison Johnstone’s second set of amendments on the concept of sustainable development would be a much more sensible and consistent approach, because the concept already exists in legislation—for example, I remember that there were debates about the concept during the passage of what became the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006. The idea of balancing economic and environmental considerations is established, and the concept of sustainable development is well established in law. As I indicated, I think that there has been progress on the issue, so I will listen with an open mind, but I am still concerned about the definition and I am struck by the wide range of bodies giving evidence. I remember the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee saying that there should be a definition in the text of the bill and, given the ambiguity of the term in question, I would be interested in hearing an explanation of why that suggestion has not been taken up.

I think that we can all understand the theoretical reasons for section 41, but we can also understand that it could have one or two negative consequences. First, if an authority is penalised, the service may well get worse. What is equally worrying is that the prospect of penalty may mean that an authority emphasises speed at the expense of the quality of the process of scrutinising the planning application. I am worried about those possible negative consequences. I think that Margaret McDougall’s amendments address some of the concerns. It is certainly surprising that there is such an unconstrained power in section 41, with no regulations or criteria attached to it. Margaret McDougall has very sensibly said that we must have criteria and an assurance that the Scottish Government will take every possible action before imposing a penalty, and that we must not have negative consequences as a result of the penalty. I therefore think that it would be reasonable for everyone to support amendments 10 to 13, even if they do not support amendment 14.

I regret the fact that the cabinet secretary did not make a statement on the consequentials so that the figures could have been clear before the debate on Tuesday. Given that, can he tell us now exactly how much of the money is going to childcare for two-year-olds and how much is going to free school meals—which of course we support, although it was not our first choice?

Did the First Minister see today’s article in The Scotsman by Liberal Democrat Tavish Scott in which he said that George Osborne’s £25 billion mistake will seal the fate of the Conservative Party and hasten the election of a Labour Government? Given that the First Minister’s whole referendum strategy is based on having a Tory Government in London, how will he scare the Scottish people when they are faced with the prospect of a Labour Government that will boost employment, freeze energy prices and provide the resources for a massive expansion of childcare?

I, too, congratulate Paul Martin on lodging his important motion following the terrible attack that took place in his constituency, and on all the campaigning action that he has taken following that attack. It is not just Paul Martin’s constituency that is affected. Unfortunately, most of us here have stories to tell from our constituencies about terrible attacks, some of which have got into the newspapers. Not long ago, a dog attacked five people in a block of flats in my constituency. Jenny Marra will describe similar attacks. However, attacks take place every day that we never hear about in the newspapers. It is a massive problem that must be addressed. That is why I welcome the Government’s consultation paper, which I hope will lead to changes in the law. The consultation paper ranges broadly and includes important issues such as dog fouling. While we need action there, too, that is not the subject of today’s debate, which is attacks by dogs on human beings. I start with the principle that all that matters here is the safety of children and other people. The rights of no single dog owner override that. We must do whatever is necessary to protect children and young people. As I said in a recent debate on microchipping, I feel particularly strongly about that now that I have four young grandchildren. There is no debate about it—we need microchipping. Patricia Ferguson clearly demonstrated why microchipping is necessary and important. Licensing should be seriously considered; my current view is that reintroducing it would help in assessing whether owners are fit to possess a dog. We are told that there are issues with enforcement, and indeed when licensing was previously in force, half of dog owners did not license their dogs. However, what we are saying today rests on the assumption that we have a strong dog warden workforce, as we already do in many areas. With regard to assessing fitness for ownership, we should be saying more frequently, “That person will never have a dog again in their life.” If a person has been found guilty of having a dog that has attacked someone, particularly if the attack is serious, they should forfeit the right to have a dog for the rest of their life. Some of my constituents expressed that concern recently, following the attack in the block of flats that I mentioned. I will not go into the details of that situation, but it impressed on me the need for such provision. The issue of leads and muzzles is more controversial—Paul Martin dealt with it comprehensively and fairly, and I take more or less the same position on the matter. Dog control notices require leads and muzzles for certain dogs, but there are two problems with such notices. First, they are not used often enough—in fact, I believe that some local authorities never use them at all—and secondly they are used after a problem has arisen or an attack has occurred. We need more dog control notices, but—

I am in my last minute—I am not sure that I can. Can I take the intervention, Presiding Officer?

Okay.

I thank Christine Grahame—who obviously knows about the 2010 act, as she introduced the bill—and I take her point on the matter. In a sense it is consistent with what I am saying. I am not speaking against dog control notices, but we should use them more frequently; that was my fundamental point. However, pre-emptive action over and above dog control notices may be necessary, particularly as they are not used very frequently. I am inclined to support the Irish system in which certain breeds of dog must be muzzled and on leads at all times. That is the precautionary principle, and I am of course happy to listen to views on and objections to that suggestion in the next few months. However, I restate the principle that nothing is more important than the safety of children and other people, and precautionary action should therefore be supported.

I may have nodded off by that page, but can the First Minister tell me what page of the white paper commits the Scottish Government to free school meals?

I am genuinely puzzled by the Scottish Government’s approach to free school meals, as I indicated in my intervention on the First Minister. Progress on this since 2007 has been slower than glacial. Looking to the future, the 600 pages of the white paper contain not one mention of free school meals, although everything else is promised in an independent Scotland. Our view is that free school meals are a valuable policy but not the top priority. Maybe that was the SNP’s position until today.

In a moment. It seems that the Scottish Government does not want to be outdone by the UK Government. I had better give way to the First Minister as he may have found a reference in the white paper.

I will check that afterwards. I did actually get past page 159 over Christmas, but I obviously missed the reference, so I apologise to the First Minister. As I indicated, perhaps the SNP does not want to be outdone by the UK Government. On that basis, it should also be worried about childcare—and not just what the UK Government is doing on childcare for two-year-olds, but what the Labour Party promised at its conference in September, which we should remember because it bears a very strong resemblance to what appeared in the SNP’s white paper more than two months later. Labour made commitments in September on two to five-year-olds and, crucially, also on after-school care, which is not an issue that the SNP has prioritised in its white paper. With a Labour victory in 2015 those childcare policies will be delivered. We would also deliver them if we took over here in 2016, so those advances can be made without independence. I regret the overpoliticisation of childcare as part of the referendum debate. I have been a member of the early years task force. I pay tribute to the commitment of Aileen Campbell and her predecessor Angela Constance to early years and childcare and I pay tribute to Harry Burns, the best chief medical officer Scotland has ever had. However, to be honest, the task force has been beset by two problems. One is that there has never been the prioritisation of resources to enable the early years to really get to the top of the political agenda. Secondly, childcare for two-year-olds has been a particular problem. I welcome what has been announced today. Clearly the very heavy pressure that we have applied for a number of weeks has had some effect. That is the way that politics works; I do not complain about it. If we had not pushed on two-year-olds, we would not have had the announcement today, which I welcome. However, the reality is that we must still have the suspicion that, for the First Minister, childcare is primarily of interest for political reasons. Why do I say that? When have we heard the First Minister making a speech about childcare in 27 years in politics? That is why Johann Lamont and I get not just a little bit suspicious, but a little bit annoyed. Johann Lamont has talked about and prioritised childcare for more than 27 years, and I have certainly done so for 22 years, since it was the main topic of my maiden speech in Parliament in 1992. I emphasised the economic and anti-poverty importance of comprehensive childcare policies. That is why we object to the way in which childcare is being used to score referendum political points—and not very good political points at that. Why do I say that? The fundamental argument in the white paper, and up until today the fundamental reason why we could not really have the progress that we want on childcare, is that the money to pay for it will have to come from tax receipts staying here.

I have read what Bronwen Cohen said on the matter, but I have, of course, already referred to what the Labour Government is committed to in 2015 and what we would be committed to in 2016, so I have already answered that point. I see four problems with the approach in the white paper. First, even although tax receipts would, of course, be beneficial, up-front money is still needed to start the policy off. The white paper famously says that, in the first budget after independence, 600 hours of childcare would be provided to around half of Scotland’s two-year-olds. That is exactly what we are proposing now. That exactly mirrors the first budget promise of the SNP. Secondly, contrary to what the motion says, the Scottish Government is not proposing the Swedish model. I cannot make a long speech about that now, but the approach will not produce the employment benefits that the Swedish model would produce, although it would produce some employment benefits. [Interruption.] I do not have time to give way as I am in my final minute. The Government’s approach is mainly, I think, a child development policy, which I support, but it would not produce the employment benefits of the Swedish model, in which far more comprehensive childcare is provided. Thirdly, the attitude towards tax receipts makes a nonsense of what is called the purpose of the Scottish Government: economic growth. If we are saying, “Well, we can’t do things because the tax receipts go to London,” how can economic growth be the primary purpose of the Scottish Government? The last point that I want to make is the most important. The argument in the white paper is an argument for more fiscal devolution, not independence. If we have more fiscal devolution, even if it is just all income tax staying in Scotland, the benefits of increased employment will come to the Scottish Parliament and we will have those economic advantages without the economic disadvantages of independence, which would, of course, make the implementation of the up-front childcare costs in 2016 difficult, if not impossible. So do this now. It can be done with the money that the Government has. Show that you are really committed to childcare rather than just using it for political posturing and referendum point scoring.

I thank the member for giving way. I just want to make a clarification. The First Minister referred to page 159 of the white paper and implied an extension of free school meals. However, page 159 says: “we also plan to maintain access to passported benefits, such as free school meals”. I hope that the First Minister will apologise before the end of the debate.

I think that we will have more fiscal devolution, but the point that I want to make goes back to free school meals. We think that it is a good thing to have free school meals, but politics is about choices. What genuinely puzzles me is that the SNP now supports free school meals in a devolved context, but the white paper makes no mention of delivering the policy in an independent Scotland. It is an incomprehensible position—absolutely incomprehensible.

I agree with what the cabinet secretary is saying, but I am absolutely bamboozled about why he thought the opposite until today and why he thinks the opposite in the white paper.

When Ed Balls and Ed Miliband made their announcements in September, Johann Lamont and our front bench said that we would meet the consequences of that policy if we were in government in 2016.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Given the logic of what the cabinet secretary says, if the economic indicators go the other way, as they have from time to time over the past few years, that demonstrates the failure of the particular policy prescriptions of his Government.

The Finance Committee has done the Parliament and perhaps Scotland more generally a service by helping to bring Scotland performs out of the shadows. We certainly heard many compliments about it in the Finance Committee, but it is a fact that it is not widely known, and to many people its purpose and intended audience are not clear. Although compliments were paid about Scotland performs, many qualifications were also made about it. The key qualification, of course, related to there being no clear link between spending and outcomes. The cabinet secretary was very concerned to rebut that, of course, but it is a fact that expert witnesses in significant numbers and several committees made that point, so it cannot be so easily brushed aside. I was not overimpressed by the cabinet secretary’s line of argument on that. I intervened during his speech because it seemed odd to me that he would judge the success of all the measures that he put in his economic policy by the outcomes. First, because the outcomes are open to debate, as Iain Gray said, and, secondly, we all know—the Scottish Government emphasises this repeatedly in other contexts—that the Scottish Government by no means has control of all the external economic factors. I was not overimpressed by that argument. It would be a good discipline to connect individual spending decisions to Scotland performs and, perhaps most obviously, to the indicators. If we do not do that, the danger is that spending decisions will be made for political reasons. The charge has been made—in fact it was the Government’s spin doctors who set the hare running—about Scotland for independence. Be that as it may, the suspicion will be that the decisions are made for political reasons rather than because of the objectives of Scotland performs. If we focus on the indicators and relate spend to them that would be a step forward. There was a lot of discussion about the indicators; many people thought that there were too many and we should certainly discuss that as part of the budget process. I was impressed by the idea of having median household income as a new economic indicator. I hope that the Government will look at some of those issues. We commend the Government’s intentions on preventative spend and pay tribute to the Finance Committee in this and the previous session for doing a lot of the initial work on the topic. Everyone is signed up to those intentions in principle but the committee has made several points about that. First, more evaluation and monitoring are needed. Secondly—to cite a quote in the committee’s report—the Health and Social Care Alliance was concerned that the change funds may “prop up existing service provision so that it is maintained rather than driving the change agenda.” I do not think that the committee necessarily endorsed that view, but it highlights the need for monitoring and evaluation because that is the view expressed by some expert players in the field. The Finance Committee’s main point was that we are not seeing the disinvestment that is required in order to make preventative spend of a sufficient scale to be effective. The committee was not being overcritical in that regard, because many witnesses highlighted the difficulties of disinvestment at this time, particularly with regard to demography, which I think was Glasgow City Council’s main point, as quoted by the convener earlier. That is a very challenging situation, given the financial circumstances that we face. However, if we cannot get more focus on disinvestment, it will be very difficult to get the scale of preventative spend investment that we want. However, we have a golden opportunity in the budget—I am two thirds of the way through my speech and I am moving on from the Finance Committee’s report—because we need to start considering what spending shifts we want. As someone who has supported further investment in childcare for several decades—certainly during all my time in politics—I am very attracted to what Labour is putting forward with regard to using the consequentials from the Westminster budget to start the process of expanding childcare. The big gap in the Scottish Government’s childcare arrangements is in provision for two-year-olds, yet all of us, because of our commitment to preventative spend, believe in early intervention. Crucially, one of the main insights that we had on preventative spend when I was on the Finance Committee is that nought to three are the crucial years. I do not think that anyone can argue in principle against more investment for two-year-olds. I find the Government’s objection to investing in childcare under devolution absolutely absurd. In other contexts—I think it was the Deputy First Minister who said this—the Government says that it cannot invest in childcare because the economic fruits will go to Westminster. For goodness’ sake—that argument undermines the whole purpose of the Government. Why on earth is its main purpose economic development when the fruits of taxation go to Westminster? That is a completely illogical argument. Iain Gray’s second proposal related to the bedroom tax. On that matter, I merely quote Danny Alexander, Chief Secretary to the Treasury, who was asked specifically whether the Scottish Government would be penalised if it gave more than £20 million to bedroom tax alleviation. He said: “what the Scottish Government does with its block grant is a matter for the Scottish Government.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 4 September 2013; c2890.] He was clearly signalling that how much money is given to local authorities and housing associations to deal with the bedroom tax is entirely at the discretion of the Scottish Government. Labour has flagged up its two main priorities for the budget: childcare—particularly for two-year-olds—and the bedroom tax. I hope that the Finance Committee members will forgive me for using the last third of my speech to repeat those points.

Given that the cabinet secretary is questioning the interpretation that Jenny Marra and I have put on Danny Alexander’s comments, has he written to him or will he write to him to ask him to clarify them?

An important argument in favour of increasing levels of fiscal devolution is that it can incentivise economic activity that brings more revenues to this Parliament. However, this particular piece of fiscal devolution works in the opposite direction since, ultimately, we want to collect as little tax as possible by incentivising people to move away from landfill. That move has profound consequences for the block grant adjustment, which should basically be as small as possible. The bill’s financial memorandum predicts that landfill tonnages in Scotland will “significantly decrease over the coming decade with a corresponding reduction in receipts.” That is a necessary consequence of the laudable targets outlined in the zero waste plan, which proposes long-term targets of recycling 70 per cent of all Scotland’s waste and only 5 per cent of remaining waste ending up in landfill by 2025. The Scottish Government estimates that landfill tax receipts will fall from £107 million in 2015-16 to around £40.5 million in 2025—that should be our guiding figure when it comes to negotiations on the block grant adjustment. Once we have this devolved tax, we need to drive it forward for economic purposes without worrying about the revenue consequences because the whole aim of the bill is to have less revenue, but we must also recognise the constraints facing us. Those have most commonly been expressed in terms of illegal dumping and waste tourism. Sometimes the factors pull in opposite directions. For example, setting the rate for asbestos at zero would be good in stopping illegal dumping but would encourage waste tourism from England, and setting rates too high would encourage waste tourism from Scotland to England. The issues are complex, and careful deliberation is needed. It is therefore entirely right that the affirmative procedure should apply to the relevant secondary legislation. Matters are a lot clearer in relation to the tax on illegal dumping. That is unreservedly good, as is the enhancement to the landfill communities fund, of which the cabinet secretary reminded us. Of course, we are disappointed that the Government rejected Michael McMahon’s amendment, which took the right approach in insisting on a link between a project and a landfill site. I hope that the guidance will embody that principle in some way. The principles of the bill are sound when it comes to incentivising new technologies that take us away from landfill and challenging illegal dumping. The bill falls short, however, in that there is no certainty about the rates or whether there will be an escalator. Those matters are within the control of the cabinet secretary, and I hope that we will hear about them as soon as possible, if not today.

The motion reminds us of “the valuable contribution that voluntary and third sector organisations have made to the shaping of Scotland’s approach to violence against women.” As it happens, many of those organisations celebrate their anniversaries this year. I pay tribute to 20 years of Zero Tolerance, 40 years of Glasgow Women’s Aid, 40 years of Edinburgh Women’s Aid and 35 years of the Edinburgh Women’s Rape and Sexual Abuse Centre. I am glad that all those events have been marked in one way or another by the Parliament this year. The organisations’ importance does not lie just in their contribution to the strategy, which the motion refers to, or in the briefings that they sent us for this debate. For decades, they have led, educated and challenged, and in many cases they have provided essential and invaluable services. Of course it is important that men are involved in challenging men who abuse, and I am glad that some Edinburgh footballers and rugby players have been involved in highlighting that today, but the reality is that it is women who brought the issue out of the shadows in the 1970s and, crucially, placed it within the context of gender inequality and unequal power relations between men and women. We all recognise and celebrate the progress that has been made in many ways during the years of this Parliament, but there is no point in us spending the whole of this debate congratulating ourselves, although a great deal of good work has been done. We have to pay heed to the briefings that we have been sent by some of the organisations that I mentioned. Jackie Baillie has already mentioned the Scottish Women’s Aid briefing, and I will refer to two points from that, without getting into the interesting area that Sandra White raised in her intervention. Scottish Women’s Aid states that 68 per cent of women’s aid groups have reported greater demand for their services, whatever the reason for that, and nearly a third of them have had to make cuts to their services as a result of reduced funding. We all understand the financial difficulties, but equally it is right that we highlight the concerns that Scottish Women’s Aid has raised. Zero Tolerance also sent us an interesting briefing that echoes some of the points that were made in the human rights action plan last week. It highlights concerns about domestic abuse courts. They were a great innovation, but there is a 23-week wait in Glasgow and a postcode lottery in Edinburgh. It also highlights other issues including the way in which rape cases are badly handled. If the Government would not accept Margaret Mitchell’s amendment last week, it must at least take some action in regard to the human rights of rape victims. There is also the issue of there being no prosecutions for female genital mutilation and very few for trafficking. I pay tribute to Jenny Marra’s work in that regard and hope that the Government will support her bill on trafficking. An important part of the new strategy is prevention. It is an important part of the Istanbul convention, which I know the Government wants to accept. Again, the work of Zero Tolerance has been crucial in that area, both in challenging men in its groundbreaking campaigns and in developing materials for use in schools, for example. I hope that its updated respect materials can be widely used in schools as the evidence is that they have been effective. However, it is not just a question of challenging individual men. It is a question of challenging the wider culture, because increasingly we see that that is where the problems are perpetuated. Alison McInnes emphasised that. Last week, we heard at the cross-party group on men’s violence against women and children about the horrific bus incident in Stirling, which is one example of the prevalence of a lad culture that is reinforcing those attitudes of men towards women that lead to violence and abuse.

Violence against women is a profound societal and cultural problem, but it is also perpetuated and reinforced by many of the products of that culture, which is why action against lads mags and indeed page 3 is also important.

2. To ask the Scottish Government when it will publish its final proposals concerning prison visiting arrangements. (S4O-02708)

Why, having appointed Professor Coyle, did the cabinet secretary then reject Professor Coyle’s recommendation for an independent volunteer-led model with a single tier of independent monitors for each prison? Why, instead, has he reverted to proposals that were widely criticised 18 months ago?

I support Graeme Pearson’s amendment 12 and Margaret Mitchell’s amendments. As her amendments may prove to be more controversial, I will speak briefly to them. The amendments might appear to be unusual, but they deal with unusual circumstances. What complainer or victim, apart from a rape victim, has all her or his personal and medical details revealed in court, as happens in such cases? In the past few days, Rape Crisis Scotland has produced a report that details the information that is routinely and regularly given in Scottish courts in rape cases. For example, one woman said: “my mental health was all I felt was talked about, not being raped”. Someone else said that they were put off having therapy and counselling because they knew that that would be used against them in court. Others might not come forward to complain of what has happened to them because they know what might happen in court. The matter is problematic in relation to the right to privacy, but be that as it may, women have no real choice in such situations. Whatever the guidelines say, such information can routinely be used in court. The least that we can do to protect such women and their rights is to ensure that they have independent legal advice and representation, so that their case can be put in such situations.

It is particularly important that we are debating Scotland’s first human rights action plan on international human rights day and the day on which we remember Nelson Mandela—although I am sure that we will always remember him. He said: “As long as women are bound by poverty and as long as they are looked down upon, human rights will lack substance.” He was addressing the pervasive gender inequality and oppression that is one of the two most widespread human rights abuses throughout the world. The other abuse that he referred to is poverty, and in other contexts he would have emphasised the poverty of men as well as the poverty of women. Kofi Annan, the former secretary-general of the United Nations, narrowed it down further when he said that violence against women and girls is “perhaps the most pervasive violation of human rights across the globe”. I had intended to talk about that in the debate but, a few minutes before the debate, I discovered that we are belatedly going to have a debate on violence against women next week, so I will make just two summary points on that. First, four significant points are made in the action plan about violence against women. It states that additional measures to tackle human trafficking are required and that legal protection is disparate, so we need to consider several issues around that. The plan says that domestic abuse courts “should be replicated, with appropriate support”; that is an important recommendation. It also reflects on concerns about access to legal aid for those seeking remedies for domestic abuse. That is an important part of the action plan. Secondly, I briefly back up what Jenny Marra said. She has been a passionate and empathetic campaigner on the issue of female genital mutilation, as on other issues, and she was quite right to highlight the omission of that issue from the plan. It emphasises a more general point about human rights. There has been no greater supporter of multiculturalism than me when multiculturalism has been under attack from many people in the UK, but we should remember that human rights always trump multiculturalism. Even if female genital mutilation or some other human rights abuse is accepted in some cultures, that does not make it right. We must always remember that human rights come first. I mentioned poverty. Article 25(1) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that “Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family”, although it should say “himself or herself”. Interestingly, the ECHR does not include a specific right to a minimum standard of living, which might be—actually, I am sure that it is—a weakness of that convention. I am glad that the action plan has interesting actions and recommendations on that issue, including on a human rights action group on standard of living, which will involve the Scottish Trades Union Congress and others. That is an important development. There are lots of other interesting suggestions, such as that on a human rights-based approach to taxation. I look forward to the conclusions on that. I have one minute to go in my speech, and I have a lot to cover. Health and social care has come up in the context of the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill. It is good to see a human rights approach being recommended on that, particularly the idea of independent living being a basic human right for disabled people. There is an interesting reference to health inequalities being seen through the human rights lens, which is another fruitful angle. I have 30 seconds left. The tricky area is that of human rights and justice issues. Of course we need more emphasis on victims, and we will come back to that issue on Thursday, but the accused has rights, too. I welcome the fact that reforms had to be introduced as a result of the Cadder case. Alex Johnstone mentioned the most difficult area, which is the human rights of people in prison. They rightly have certain rights taken away, but they also have certain rights that should be preserved. We need more debate and discussion on that, but it is not an argument for abolishing the Human Rights Act 1998. It is important—this is my final sentence—that fundamental human rights are embedded in law, but we must act on them, and I hope that the action plan will help us to do that.

I am very sorry to hear what the minister is saying. Does she understand that Jenny Marra’s addendum accepts all the wording of the minister’s motion, but that she lodged the amendment because the serious crime in question was not included in the action plan, there have been no prosecutions, and there is a perception that it is easier to commit that horrendous crime in Scotland than elsewhere in the United Kingdom? As the minister says that there will be a strategy, I can see no reasonable or legitimate reason why she should not support the amendment.

Once again, the cabinet secretary is entirely missing the point—or, rather, the points. Will she accept two things that she rejected last week? First, does she accept that, if there is a vote for independence, it is totally irrelevant what I, any of the Opposition parties or anyone in this chamber thinks about a single currency, because the decision will be for the rest of the UK, over which we will have no influence whatever? Secondly, does she accept that even if there were a common currency we would not have the fiscal independence that she kept talking about last week? Will she accept those two facts, which she completely failed to understand last week?

Can the First Minister tell us why the report of an obscure Westminster committee has become the lead debating point in favour of independence from him and his party colleagues this week? Is it because his substantive economic and financial arguments in favour of independence have fallen apart within days, so that his “project wish” of last week has become “project scare” today?

Will the minister give way?

It is a great pleasure to follow Christian Allard because, in welcoming the general increase in Scotland’s population over the 10-year period, I also welcome the increase in the ethnic minority population from 2 to 4 per cent, which is a significant reason, but not the only one, for the general increase. As the cabinet secretary reminded us, that increase came about partly because of the encouragement that was given to inward migration by successive Administrations in Scotland. One of the most interesting, but not so well-known, facts in the census relates to the number of single-person households. At 35 per cent, single persons now make up the largest percentage of households, whereas 50 years ago, they made up, at 14 per cent, the lowest percentage of households. That is a really significant social change that is not often commented on, and it has significant implications for housing and lots of other issues. The better-known figure is that the number of people who are aged 80 and over increased by 19 per cent in that 10-year period. That issue is much discussed, along with the implications for health and many other policies. However, the situation should not be overstated because the ideal is healthy ageing. Having said that, I think that it presents a significant challenge and, as we have been reminded today, it has become part of the constitutional debate. I do not really want to go into that in too much detail but it is worth quoting—or requoting, because I think that Patricia Ferguson mentioned this—what the Scottish Government’s fiscal commission said, which is that Scotland’s dependency ratio will increase more rapidly than that of the UK. The issue is quite simply the dependency ratio, so when we are having debates about that, that is what we should concentrate on, rather than the absolute number of pensioners, which the cabinet secretary highlighted in comparing Scotland with the UK. That is really good news about older people, and it is based on lots of reasons, including advances in health. Of course, older people are not the only ones who are living longer. For example, in Edinburgh, the total number of people with learning disabilities who are known to the council increased by an average 5 per cent per year between 2006 and 2012, and the number of children and adults with physical disabilities has also increased. People are now living longer than they would have done in the past. Of course that is good news, but it has implications for services. The most striking feature of the census was the increase in the number of children aged under five. For Scotland as a whole, the increase was 6 per cent, but for Edinburgh it was 18 per cent. From my local constituency point of view, that was the single most salient fact in the census. Cameron Buchanan alluded to that point, with particular reference to schools. The City of Edinburgh Council has projected a 20 per cent increase in many of the city’s school rolls until 2019. Many of the spaces that are available in schools are not in the catchment area where there is current demand. That is manifesting itself in my constituency, because seven primary schools either have or will have within the next 12 months extra classrooms in their playgrounds. I welcome the population increase, as did the cabinet secretary, but I have to say that there must have been some deficiencies with the previous administration of the City of Edinburgh Council. I do not want to be too party political about it, but that administration must have known five years ago what the population increase was going to be, yet it still closed schools. We must learn lessons from that. The other issue that is emerging relates to the number of general practitioner practices, some of which are closing their lists, which affects both young and old people. We must also use the census information to plan services effectively. For example, in 2001 one of the problems with the original costings for free personal care was that people did not have the benefit of the 2001 census, and that is the main reason why the figures were not totally accurate. Let us use the information that we have to plan services effectively.

I thank Rhoda Grant for lodging the motion, which reminds us that 8,000 babies are born prematurely in Scotland each year. That is 8,000 families, all of whom have the right to the highest possible quality of care, and 8,000 reasons why we should all join Rhoda Grant today in welcoming the new quality framework for neonatal care and commend our healthcare professionals, in partnership with Bliss Scotland, for producing it. When put in place, the framework will offer new guidance to the NHS and offer support in the delivery of safe and effective person-centred care. In this field of study, the impact of premature birth on adult development is at present still relatively unknown. The Bliss campaign, however, has engaged with the EPICure study at University College London over the past 18 years and has contributed to a longitudinal study of the effects of premature birth. The next phase in that study was announced on Sunday 17 November. The purpose of the study is to ensure that the interventions made at an early stage are based on well-informed evidence. With so much riding on the success of the framework, it is vital that we establish a better picture of which interventions are most effective. That can be determined only by looking at the long-term development of premature babies as they grow into adulthood. In its response to NHS Scotland’s 2007 publication, “Better Health, Better Care: A Discussion Document”, Bliss outlined the importance of getting it right for premature babies and their parents. At the time of the consultation, the main issue that was identified to be working against the shift towards better-quality neonatal care was a shortage of nurses to deliver the specialist support. As Bliss stated at the time, “While the care that neonatal nurses, doctors and other health professionals provide for sick and premature babies is excellent, the service is compromised by nursing shortages. While demand for neonatal services is increasing, the numbers of neonatal nurses employed is remaining almost static.” That was in 2007. It is therefore encouraging to see that the new quality framework aims to improve safety through ensuring that duty rotas always have the appropriate level of staff on hand to meet the neonatal unit’s needs, with a high baby to nurse ratio. Rhoda Grant quoted the British Association of Perinatal Medicine recommendations on that, which are: one nurse to one baby in neonatal intensive care; one nurse to two babies in neonatal high dependency care; and one nurse to four babies in neonatal special care. Until recently that was not the case in Scottish units, so Bliss was right in its contribution to the development of the framework to make the case for a greater number of nurses. Perhaps the minister will update us on that in his wind-up speech. All parents going through the pregnancy and birth process hope for a positive experience and the chance to bond with their newborn baby. Wherever possible, that should not be compromised by the baby being premature. Anyone who has experienced the birth of a baby as a mother or father will know what a moving and indescribably special time it is. Quality neonatal care does not simply mean creating a safe clinical environment; it also means providing a nurturing and understanding place for parents and their new babies at that crucial point. “Neonatal Care in Scotland: A Quality Framework” seems to recognise the importance of that point. I have no doubt that Bliss was in part responsible for the immense progress made in changing the quality of care accordingly. It is great to see that steps are being taken to provide better person-centred care and a chance for parents to have greater involvement in the decision-making process. That includes clinicians collaborating with parents in the production of a care plan, including time spent with the baby as and when it suits the parents. Today we recognise the incredible work done by healthcare practitioners, campaigners and parents themselves, who in times of great difficulty can show such fortitude when given the right support. We also acknowledge, as I have done several times in my contribution, the vital role played by Bliss. I commend Rhoda Grant for bringing forward the motion and give it my full support.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s aspirations on childcare, although I would give more emphasis to two-year-olds and would do it now. However, how could she deliver that or any of her other spending wishes with a neo-liberal economic policy, higher interest rates and a hope-for-the-best relationship with the rest of the UK? Does the Deputy First Minister realise how absurd the Government looks when the white paper says that the Bank of England will continue to be the lender of last resort? Does she not understand that, even if there were a currency union, there would be no fiscal independence, contrary to what she said on the radio this morning? Is she not leading project wish against project reality, as will become increasingly clear in the months ahead?

I was lucky enough to be on the Health and Sport Committee temporarily and so was able to read much of the written evidence as well as hearing all the oral evidence. I was particularly struck during the first session of oral evidence when we heard from Professor Alison Petch, who is probably the leading Scottish academic on community care. She said: “The bill per se will not make any of what is proposed happen” and “legislation is not really what drives day-to-day delivery.” She was not the only person who gave evidence who said that the issues were culture change, leadership, bringing teams together on the ground, and so on. She also said: “the most important aspect of the bill is that it states the integration principles”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 10 September 2013; c 4193, 4204, 4196.] She and several other witnesses said that they would like to see that section of the bill strengthened, so I hope that we will look at it at stage 2. Many members will have received an interesting paper from the Royal College of Nursing and others yesterday about this important aspect of the bill. I was struck by the RCN’s wish to see two principles, among many others, in the bill. One was about protecting and enhancing the safety and welfare of service users, which is pretty crucial, and the other was about enabling service users to participate in decisions about their need for services and the provision of those services to them. That is also important and it connects with the recent debate that we had on person-centred care. My conclusion from the evidence of Alison Petch and others is that we need the bill, or some amended version of it, and that it is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the delivery of more integrated care. That said, we have to make sure that the bill will help, that it is clear and that it does not get in the way. Clarity is an issue because, at several points in the committee’s report, we say that we want more information. One particular aspect that I want to mention is the surprise that I felt when we received some very late evidence from the Government—it came in after all the evidence sessions, including the Government’s—about the extent of health board budgets that were to be delegated to the integration authority. I will read it very quickly: “we anticipate that approximately half of the total Health Board budgets ... will be included within the scope of the integrated strategic plan. This would represent approximately 75% of total expenditure on unplanned bed days for people aged 75+”. That is a crucial piece of evidence that we ought to have been able to interrogate. I have been thinking about it since we received it. How would it work in practice? Those unplanned bed days in my area would mean the Edinburgh royal infirmary, the Western general hospital and St John’s hospital at Howden in Neil Findlay’s constituency. That sounds as if the integration authority will have money that it will presumably then have to pay to the acute sector in a kind of commissioning relationship. That seems to be going back towards the bureaucracy of the internal market that we have got away from. I might be overstating that, but that is what it sounds like. It seems to me that one of the dangers of the bill is that we will increase horizontal integration, but reduce and damage vertical integration. That needs to be explored at stage 2 and further on. The other issue is that although we can reduce income to Edinburgh royal infirmary and the Western general hospital, that will not mean that their costs will be reduced. That is a practical problem as well. Some of these issues need to be thought through, particularly for some of the large health boards such as NHS Lothian and NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. That uncertainty is connected to other uncertainty about the relationship of the integration body to the parent bodies. Peter Gabbitas of the City of Edinburgh Council and the health board—he already has a joint appointment—gave powerful evidence to the committee about that. At stage 2 we need to look in detail at the wording of the bill in that respect. For example, section 21 says that the chief officer “is in all respects as if the person who delegated the function”, which gives the impression that the chief officer is fairly autonomous. All that wording needs to be looked at and if the Government intends something else, it or we will have to amend the bill at stage 2. The locality arrangements and clinical involvement are crucial. CHPs were meant to be local but often turned out to be otherwise, to my disappointment. They were meant to be the places where primary and secondary care clinicians engaged with each other but often that did not happen. The role of GPs is crucial to the new bodies, as are, of course, service users and the third sector. I would like to see a bit more in the bill on all that and I would like it to be included in negotiations on the GP contract. I have 10 seconds left. Let us look at good practice, wherever it is to be found. I apologise to the cabinet secretary, as this is the second debate in a row in which I am referring him to a good example in England. “Integrating health and social care in Torbay: Improving care for Mrs Smith” is an excellent publication by the King’s Fund about how integration has worked successfully in Torbay in Devon and realised the objectives that we want: fewer emergency admissions and more care in the community.

I congratulate Richard Lyle on introducing this debate and I welcome the American consul to the gallery. I tweeted last week that everyone of a certain age would be obsessed with the assassination of JFK this week, not surprisingly, because we can all remember where we were on the night of Friday 22 November 1963. I can go further than that, because 1963 was a momentous year in many ways as it was really the beginning of the 1960s in terms of the cultural shift, the first Beatles records and so on, and it was also a momentous year in politics. However, I can remember only one sentence that I heard in 1963. I was at a club at my secondary school on the evening of 22 November when somebody came into the room and then, 10 seconds later, the person in charge stood up and said—I can hear it as clearly as if it was yesterday—“President Kennedy has been shot three times in the head and he is dead.” I am told that 40,000 books have been written about that event and about President Kennedy more generally. I must say that I have not read any of them, so I will not deal with who killed him. However, I have been convinced that the ballistic evidence shows that it could not have been just Lee Harvey Oswald. Clearly, many people speculate about who else was involved. I am told that JFK’s nephew, Robert Kennedy Jr, is going to write a book, which will come out next year, saying that the Central Intelligence Agency was involved.

I do not have time. The best way to get mythologised is to die young, but I suppose the most interesting question for this debate is, what was John F Kennedy really like? What was he all about? He had a lot going for him, as Christine Grahame has reminded us, because he was not just young but glamorous, charismatic and eloquent, and he talked the language of change. There was a remarkable contrast between the politics that he represented in America and what was happening in the United Kingdom at the time. Conservative members will probably agree with that point, because it was the end of the old Conservative party when the grandees in 1963 picked the 14th Earl of Home as the next prime minister; after that, the Conservative party modernised itself. JFK had a lot that contributed to the myth, but there have of course been many debunkers since then, although I think that some people have gone too far. I think that the feminist critique of his attitude to women is probably valid—in fact, it is certainly valid. However, others have gone too far. George Kerevan, for example, said in an article in The Scotsman a month ago that JFK was a fraud and liar, and that he generated cynicism about the effectiveness of democratic politics—I think that all that went too far. George Kerevan also said, quite strangely, that JFK won the election in 1960 through denying millions of black Americans the vote. In fact, the exact opposite of that is the truth. I urge people to read a really interesting article in The Guardian yesterday by Candace Allen, who said that it was basically the black vote that won Kennedy the 1960 election. That is also what is stated in Theodore White’s book “The Making of the President 1960”. It is true that, in retrospect, Kennedy can be criticised for not moving faster, but he tried to get the civil rights bill through and, of course, Congress blocked it. A book that has recently come out—I have only read a review of it—“The Letters of John F Kennedy”, apparently has many letters between Kennedy and Martin Luther King that show the former’s commitment to the civil rights movement. Of course, partly out of respect and in memory of John F Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson made sure that the civil rights bill went through Congress the year following JFK’s assassination. A lot has been written about JFK’s role in foreign affairs and nuclear weapons. I think that he learned a lot of lessons in that regard from the fiasco of the Bay of Pigs invasion. The correspondence with Khrushchev that is in the book of JFK’s letters shows them both trying to hold the line against their respective hard-liners. That resulted, for example, in the test ban treaty of 1963, so there were positive aspects to JFK’s role in foreign affairs and nuclear weapons. Christine Grahame referred to MAD, but let us be honest: MAD is a lot better than the first-strike madness that many of JFK’s advisers advocated. I think that I am more or less out of time. There is a lot of controversy about whether JFK would have got involved in Vietnam. Part of his appeal is that people feel that he might have been able to stop the disaster of the Vietnam war. That is suggested by some evidence, which I have no time to go into. I do not really know the answer to that question. There are many uncertainties and controversies about JFK, but it is absolutely appropriate to commemorate today a defining moment of the 1960s and a key moment in modern American history.

My voice is on pause, so the wisest course of action might be not to take six minutes, but this is an important debate, so I wanted to speak in it. We agree with the objective of the bill, which is to provide for a “fair, open and truly democratic process which is conducted and regulated to the highest international standards” in the lead-up to next year’s referendum, and I was pleased to receive a briefing from the Electoral Commission yesterday that indicated that it has confidence in the process that the bill will put in place. We welcome some of the developments that have taken place during the bill’s consideration. We welcome the fact that the Scottish Government has extended the franchise for the referendum to include children of armed forces personnel living abroad who are aged 16 or 17. We are also pleased that the Scottish Government has responded to some of the concerns that were raised about the bill by ourselves, by other parties and by the Electoral Commission. I am slightly disappointed that there was not unanimity on the amendments that Lewis Macdonald moved earlier. The result of that is that the only people to vote no during today’s stage 3 consideration of amendments were SNP members, on amendments 56 and 57. We support the bill because it provides the opportunity for the independence question to be settled. It is important that the result of the referendum is clear and accepted internationally so that Scotland can move forward—as part of the UK, we hope—with the question settled once and for all, or certainly for a generation. We want the referendum campaign to be conducted fairly and transparently, with each side respecting the other. I have a fear, which I think that other people share, that although the procedures are now generally agreed to be right, the tone of the debate is sometimes in danger of going wrong.

I am sure that Margo MacDonald heard my qualification—I said that the question would be settled at least for a generation. I hope that we can agree on the latter, if not the former. How we conduct the debate will be important not just for the next few months but for the months and years that follow the referendum. It is understandable that there is a great deal of emotion on both sides of the debate. That underlies a lot of the arguments that we use, particularly on the economic questions, which will be central to the referendum. Notwithstanding the emotions, we should always remember—perhaps particularly on a day such as today, which is an important stage in the process—that the two sides on the question are not enemies. We all inhabit the same country and we share many values. We agree on many policies in other parts of the political debate. That applies in the chamber, where SNP and Labour members can agree in broad terms on the approaches to many aspects of domestic and even international policy but have a profound difference on the constitutional question. The position is similar in the country. In many families, one member might be voting yes and another might be voting no. It is important that we conduct the debate without losing the friendships and positive relationships that we have in this country and in the chamber. We must say that today, because that will be important, not least to what will happen after the referendum. Whatever the result, we will all have to come together on 19 September 2014. Whatever the people decide, we will have to act on that. [Applause.] We must not create a legacy of bitterness and hatred. We need to have a civilised debate, rather than warfare between two tribes.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in this members’ business debate. I congratulate Dennis Robertson on bringing the debate to the chamber and on all the passionate campaigning that he has done to raise awareness of body image issues and eating disorders. It is encouraging that some of our larger department stores—particularly flagship stores in high-profile city centres—are starting to challenge the unvarying use of size 10 mannequins. I hope that that will set a precedent that others will follow. There is nothing wrong with size 10 mannequins in the presence of other sizes, but sizes 10 to 16 are all considered healthy for different body types. The issue is that mannequins are not representative of that fact. Various studies have examined the link between low self-esteem, eating disorders and the reinforcement of an unrealistic physical ideal through media and advertising. The Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology carries a range of articles, but one entitled “Does Size Matter? The impact of model’s body size on women’s body-focused anxiety and advertising effectiveness” is particularly pertinent to the motion. Emma Halliwell and Helga Dittmar of the University of Sussex write: “An increasing number of studies shows that exposure to thin ideal bodies in the media has negative effects on young women’s body images, at least in the short-term.” The findings of their research were significant. In a study analysing the content of three different types of advertisement, they measured how effective campaigns were in promoting products and examined the psychological impact on body anxiety. They concluded that, as they expected: “exposure to thin models resulted in greater body-focused anxiety among women who internalize the thin ideal than exposure to average-size models or no models. Yet, advertisements were equally effective, regardless of the model’s size.” If that is indeed the case, there is cause to push for the adoption of models who will challenge the industry’s perception of what sells. There has been a long-term trend toward very thin and living models and mannequins. That results in culturally embedded preconceptions of attractiveness and acts against the reality for most people. The unrelenting use of thin models serves a broader agenda that feeds a multimillion pound industry, but the psychological wellbeing of thousands of people—old and young alike—is detrimentally impacted if the education and reinforcement of positive alternatives is non-existent. The UK Government held a body image summit in June 2000 to discuss the need for policies regarding such media images, and the British Medical Association concluded: “the media play a significant role in the aetiology of eating disorders”. It is essential to reach people at an early stage in school and ensure that all young people have support in establishing their own positive sense of self and being healthy in body and mind. The majority of eating disorders evolve in the teens and early 20s but, increasingly, negative self-image is becoming apparent in children, not teenagers. We simply cannot dismiss such a deeply ingrained and damaging psychological disorder as a teenage fad or some form of attention-seeking behaviour. Debenhams has set a precedent in placing size 16 models beside the standard size 10. It has also recently agreed to discontinue the use of airbrushed images and urged others in the industry to follow suit. We have only to dip into news coverage of the issue to see that the move has been accepted with immense positive reactions across the board, from industry commentators to activists and the broader public. The ethical imperative that the emerging research and figures place on retail groups means that the argument for the status quo is rapidly becoming unsustainable. Profit margins cannot take precedence over the mental health of future generations and all in the advertising industry must recognise that they and the customer both stand to benefit from the exchange. They will continue to sell the same amount of clothing. They will continue to be able to use attractive people to promote their products. However, those models will reflect the beautiful diversity of the citizens of this country who, rather than feeling like uncomfortable visitors in stores, will see their own images reflected back in the clothes that they desire. What an empowering step that will be towards finally accepting the bodies that we have and celebrating differences rather than an abstract and culturally embedded physical ideal. I congratulate Dennis Robertson and commend his remarkable strength of character in continuing to fight for such a worthy cause.

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on lodging the motion, and I congratulate the great no more page 3 campaign, whose petition I believe has now garnered 122,000 signatures. I also congratulate all the groups that are mentioned in the motion and, of course, my constituent Terri Smith on her success in getting the Scottish Youth Parliament to oppose page 3. An increasing number of people now oppose page 3. It was 43 years ago, in 1970, that a group of men—forgetting the half of the population who are women—decided that they would introduce page 3 for men. I hope that an increasing number of men are now challenging that and seeing that page 3 is negative not just for the rights and wellbeing of women—as it clearly is—but, ultimately, for the wellbeing of men as well, because it damages and poisons their relationships with women. Of course, some men are fighting back against the campaign. Yesterday, I discovered a Twitter account—which I will not name—that had on it the message, “No to the few.” It was quite wrong about that, as I will show in a minute. It also said: “No to those who despise the female form.” How wrong it is. I hope that I speak for a large number of men who love and respect women in their totality, body included, but who oppose the sexual objectification of women, the subjugation and belittling of women, and the rampant sexism and inequality that are splashed across page 3 every day under the cover of press freedom. I am sure that we all support press freedom in principle, but I reject the freedom of men to exploit and oppress women, I reject the freedom of men to objectify and stereotype women, and I reject the freedom of men to deprive women of their rights, respect and equality. The men who introduced page 3 in 1970 certainly did not think about how women would feel about being represented in such a way. I referred to the Twitter account that said that just a few people are opposed to page 3. An increasing number of men oppose it, and I am sure that the vast majority of women do. I do not know any women who are happy with page 3—except, of course, the few women who benefit financially from being photographed for it. It is not surprising that women are negative about page 3, because they know a lot better than I do what a negative effect it can have. There is a great deal of evidence and research on the effect that page 3 has in terms of stereotyping women and the effect that it may have on the self-esteem of young women and girls, in particular. They know how page 3 is negative for them. If we look at the no more page 3 website, we see a large number of such testimonies, including from a vast range of bodies, such as Girlguiding UK, to which Jackie Baillie referred. Of course, the other side of the coin is page 3’s effect on men, which is something that women experience throughout their lives in many different forms. They know—I certainly do not—what it feels like to be treated as a sexual commodity, to be sexually objectified and to be harassed partly because of the messages that are sent by page 3 and other such representations. Ultimately, of course, there is the sexual violence that is not unconnected—as research again shows—to many of the messages and influences that affect men in our society. It is therefore not at all surprising that the vast majority of women are opposed to page 3; I hope that an increasing number of men are, as well. As I have only half a minute left, I have no time to talk about the flash mob at the Unison conference, which members might have read about. The point behind it was that although such images are illegal in the workplace under equality legislation they are, nevertheless, splashed across workplaces and public places every day. I have two grand-daughters and do not want to have to explain to them why they are being treated differently from boys and men. I want them to grow up in a society where there is increasing gender equality and where they are not subjected to the misogyny of lad culture and all the other negative male attitudes that are fed by page 3, as well as by other features of society. No one is saying that getting rid of page 3 will in itself create gender equality, but it will be another step in that direction. Finally, as one woman on the no more page 3 website says, all women are asking for is to be treated, and represented, with respect—as men are.

Person-centred care is defined as “providing care that is respectful of and responsive to individual patient preferences, needs and values”. The words in the Scottish Government’s quality strategy directly echo a description of person-centred care by the Institute of Medicine in its seminal work, “Bridging the Quality Chasm”. In more detail, I would say that person-centred care is about recognising and responding to patients as unique individuals, supporting patients’ personal autonomy and ability to make choices about their care and treatment, being flexible in responding to each patient as a person and emphasising—as the briefing from Macmillan Cancer Support does—the relational aspects of care, especially the principles of dignity and respect. That collection of phrases gives us a good starting point for describing person-centred care. Another way of looking at person-centred care is as the opposite of the kind of paternalistic and often aloof approach to the care of patients that was so common in the past. The reality is that that approach is not unknown now. Unfortunately, as MSPs, we sometimes still hear examples of that unacceptable attitude, which used to be so common. However, as the cabinet secretary has concentrated on primary care and GPs in particular, I should say that my GP is a model for person-centred care in action. I am sure that we can all think of many clinicians to whom that statement would apply. That is not always the case in primary care or in hospitals. I understand why the cabinet secretary wanted to turn the debate into a debate about primary care, but the reality is that many of the concerns about the absence of person-centred care relate to what happens in hospital. Neil Findlay was absolutely right to relate the debate to pressures on the system. There are time pressures in primary care, but there are even more acute pressures in our hospitals, and that makes the achievement of person-centred care much more difficult. We should certainly acknowledge that. Person-centred care would not flourish automatically if the pressures in the system eased, so specific actions must be taken to make the service more person centred. Some actions are being taken, to which I will refer shortly, but we should remember that some developments towards personalised care will happen because of scientific advances. In the cancer debate three or four weeks ago, we talked about developments in drugs that will mean that medicines will be more targeted to a specific individual. That will happen independently of the other actions that we must take to address the relationship between clinicians and patients. One of several examples mentioned in the debate is the health and care collaborative. I wish that the cabinet secretary had said more about that because it seems to be a critical initiative in improving and advancing person-centred care. We have heard over many years about the involvement of patients in service redesign, which is another important way of helping to create more person-centred care. Many examples could be given. The Minister for Public Health spoke at the spina bifida reception in the Parliament last week about the Neurological Alliance and the good work that it does. One of its projects is called neurological voices, which is to do with training and involving people who have suffered from neurological conditions in developing and redesigning services. We will all know of positive examples of person-centred care in the NHS. I remember debates on that in the chamber, particularly the MS debate and the Parkinson’s debate a few months ago, when clinical nurse specialists were praised as models for person-centred care. Of course, we heard earlier in today’s debate from Mark McDonald and Nanette Milne about the patient experience surveys, which are another important feature of person-centred care. Of course, we must ask the right questions in those surveys and act on what we find, because person-centred care is about not just better care for an individual, but improving the quality of care for all. I started by talking about the Government’s quality strategy, and the whole issue of person-centred care must be put right bang in the middle of the quality agenda. I hope that members will forgive me for quoting two sentences only from a speech that I gave more than 10 years ago on 18 June 2003. When I was thinking about this debate, I remembered what I had said in that speech, which was: “The starting point for improving quality must be the experience of every single patient who passes through the health care system ... We might be missing important aspects of patients’ experiences because we are not asking them properly or not asking them at all.”—[Official Report, 18 June 2003; c 803.] That is why I thought that it was important to fund research into patient experience, and patient surveys are obviously a feature of that. However, we must ask the right questions and act on the findings. I think that there has been some progress on that, which is absolutely key to improving quality, but there is still quite a long way to go. If we learn from patients’ experiences, that in itself will ensure a much better quality of person-centred care. I agree with the cabinet secretary’s criticisms of the English health system, but I have two points to make about that. We should not be too complacent about how much better we are. Our system is better, but we should still look to England, because many of the issues there are the same as those here and many of the actions being taken in England are about trying to improve person-centred care. I have been very struck by the work of Jocelyn Cornwall—I follow her on Twitter, and members can do so—who is director of the point of care programme. The work that it is doing to improve the delivery of compassionate patient-centred care focuses to an extent on work that is no doubt similar to that of the health and care collaborative in working with clinicians to develop that kind of care. We need to be a little bit careful in criticising the English health system so that we do not cut ourselves off from the many examples of good practice and good developments in England that we could learn from. I think that we are all moving in the same direction on patient-centred care, but we must remember the points that Neil Findlay made, because all of this becomes very difficult in a system that is under pressure.

I, too, congratulate Sandra White on bringing this important motion to the chamber, and I join her in paying tribute to all the superb and—sadly—much-needed work that Glasgow Women’s Aid has been doing for the past 40 years. I was struck by a statement on Glasgow Women’s Aid’s website: “Abuse is a violation of your human rights. You are entitled to live your life free from abuse. It is not your fault.” That is a clear and straightforward statement that is beyond dispute, as I am sure we all agree, but it was not so long ago when that would not have been a statement that was widely accepted by society. I think that there was a turning point 40 years ago. As it happens, Edinburgh Women’s Aid was started at more or less the same time. I think that there is a bit of a dispute about which one started first; in fact, Edinburgh Women’s Aid claims that prize, but I will not get involved in that debate this afternoon. It was an important turning point and, of course, it was not an accident that both groups were established at the same time because both grew out of the strong and growing feminist movement of the time. Obviously, it is important that men have joined the campaign and are now an important part of it but—let us be realistic—it was women who brought the issue out of the shadows and, crucially, placed it within the context of unequal gender relations within society. Our understanding of domestic violence has changed, but, as Sandra White reminded us, Glasgow Women’s Aid still receives, sadly, 5,000 contacts each year. That reminds us that domestic abuse is still a massive problem, which is why the prevention work that Glasgow Women’s Aid is doing in schools is important. However, the centre is most noted for the various kinds of support that it provides, including its refuge accommodation. We should certainly pay tribute to that superb work as well as to its multi-agency approach, which has already been mentioned. I do not know all the detail of what happens on the ground in Glasgow, although I was pleased to visit some of the projects and initiatives a few years ago, but I remember that in the debate that I held on zero tolerance earlier this year, Anne McTaggart talked about a women’s aid centre in Drumchapel that is open 24/7. I vividly remember her description of that. Clearly, there are a broad range of important domestic abuse services in Glasgow, with Glasgow Women’s Aid very much heading them up. I should not really talk about Edinburgh Women’s Aid—I am pleased that Marco Biagi has lodged a motion on it, so perhaps it will be up for debate soon—but, among other things, Edinburgh Women’s Aid provides the support service for the Edinburgh domestic abuse court. As Jackie Baillie mentioned, there have been problems in the Glasgow domestic abuse court, which was a great initiative that I remember well from when it started some time ago. If, in winding up the debate, the minister could say something about that and offer further support for the ASSIST service, that would be welcome. In my remaining minute, I want to talk about Glasgow Women’s Aid’s services for children, which have been supported by the current Scottish Government as well as by previous Administrations. It is important to recognise that children and young people are also in need of support and refuge. I was struck by the animated video on the website that explains, through the eyes of a child, both what the real, lived experience of domestic abuse is and how young people can seek help. The ultimate goal, of course, is to ensure that young people have the necessary information and are given the tools to seek support whenever they feel capable. As my time is up, I will mention that I agree with the motion that the Parliament wishes Glasgow Women’s Aid every success for the future, but I am sure that all members will join me in sincerely hoping that Scotland’s women and children will need such services less in the future. Once again, I congratulate Sandra White on lodging the motion, which I whole-heartedly support, and I say thanks from all of us to Glasgow Women’s Aid.

I am pleased to speak to my motion. I think that this is the first time that the Parliament has discussed issues that relate to spina bifida, so I will begin by talking about the condition. The term “spina bifida” is Latin for “split spine” and refers to a fault in the development of a baby’s spinal cord. The neural tube, which goes on to become the spine and brain, fails to close properly—that fault may occur as early as 28 days after conception. Spina bifida is, along with its associated condition, hydrocephalus, the most common and severe birth defect in Europe. Moreover, Scotland has historically had a higher prevalence of neural tube defects than anywhere else in Europe. The conditions profoundly affect the lives of more than 3,500 children, young people and adults in Scotland. A woman usually does not know that she is carrying a baby that is affected by spina bifida until she has her 20-week scan. She might then have only 48 hours to decide whether to keep or abort her child, which is by then fully formed. That is an extremely traumatic situation for the mother. Most people who have spina bifida are born paralysed from the waist down, and also suffer severe bladder and bowel problems. Eighty per cent have hydrocephalus, which causes a range of neurological conditions. There is no known cure, and both conditions cause lifelong and complex disabilities. However, a significant number of affected pregnancies could be prevented; I will come back to that key point. The Scottish Spina Bifida Association is the only charity in Scotland that is dedicated to providing advice, advocacy and support for people who are born with spina bifida and/or hydrocephalus, and for their families. I am delighted that some of its supporters are in the gallery today. I had the privilege of hosting a reception in the Parliament yesterday evening, which a number of MSPs attended. The Minister for Public Health, Michael Matheson, spoke at it, along with a wonderful 10-year-old girl from Glasgow called Ella, and Dr Margo Whiteford, who is a clinical geneticist from Glasgow with spina bifida and who I am pleased to say is also in the gallery. Dr Whiteford is the SSBA’s chairperson; earlier this year, she became president of the International Federation for Spina Bifida and Hydrocephalus. To reflect that wider focus, the association decided that Scotland should for the first time mark world spina bifida and hydrocephalus day, which was on 25 October. The day serves to remind the public and policy makers of the need to increase awareness of the conditions, in order to help to improve the lives of people who live with them. The association’s contribution is its major public health campaign, which is entitled, “Are you getting enough?” The campaign was triggered by the shocking statistic that only 48 per cent of women in Scotland are aware that they could help to reduce the risk of their pregnancy being affected by spina bifida by taking a folic acid supplement before conception. Most women do not start taking folic acid until they have tested positive for pregnancy, when it is often too late to prevent spina bifida. There is strong evidence that taking folic acid—vitamin B9—at least three months before conception can help to reduce the risk of spina bifida and other neural tube defects by 72 per cent. The association’s campaign is about getting that message across to women who are planning a pregnancy or who might become pregnant. It is also about making folic acid awareness part of family planning education throughout Scotland. The campaign builds on the advice that has been issued by NHS Health Scotland that every woman who might become pregnant should take a daily tablet that contains 0.4mg of folic acid before they conceive and during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. It is easy to buy folic acid tablets and many multivitamin formulas also contain 0.4mg of folic acid. Women who are eligible for the healthy start scheme can also get free vitamins containing folic acid, vitamin C and vitamin D. Some women are at increased risk of having a baby with a neural tube defect. They include women with diabetes, women who are taking anti-epilepsy medication, women who have coeliac disease and women who have a partner who has a neural tube defect or a family history of such defects. They should ask their general practitioner to prescribe the higher daily dose of 5mg. Moreover, women who are very overweight are at greater risk of having babies with spina bifida, so the advice is that they should seriously consider trying to lose weight before planning a pregnancy. People can also get folic acid through their diet, in which it is known as folate. Good sources of folate are berries, oranges, peas, lentils, granary and wholemeal breads and fortified breakfast cereals. However, supplementation is still required for maximum benefit. In relation to fortification, the Food Standards Agency has for some years recommended mandatory fortification of bread or flour with folic acid in order to reduce the risk of neural tube defects. That recommendation has been reinforced by the scientific advisory committee on nutrition. The Scottish Spina Bifida Association strongly supports fortification, because it would help to avert the risks that are associated with unplanned pregnancies. I believe that ministers are considering fortification; I hope that Michael Matheson has something to say about it in his reply to the debate. I am grateful for the opportunity to use the debate to raise awareness of these little-known conditions. As my motion indicates, I also wish the Scottish Spina Bifida Association every success with its campaign to encourage greater numbers of women, in my constituency and throughout Scotland, to understand the importance of taking folic acid prior to pregnancy, in order to help prevent spina bifida and other neural tube defects.

The landfill tax has been a fairly successful environmental tax at a UK level, with a 30 per cent reduction in the amount of waste sent to landfill since 1997. That reduction has to a significant extent been driven by the tax escalator, which I hope will also become a feature of the Scottish landfill tax. Unfortunately, however, we do not know anything about the escalator; indeed, we do not know very much at all about landfill tax rates, except that they will be no lower than those under the UK system. As the committee convener Kenny Gibson has reminded the chamber, that uncertainty was criticised at committee by a range of bodies, including COSLA and the Scottish Environmental Services Association, which argued that it made investment difficult. The cabinet secretary told the committee that rates do not drive investment, but I put it gently to him that rates are not entirely irrelevant in that respect. I hope that he will take on board the committee’s recommendations with regard to his clarifying why he will not make an announcement before December and that he will say something before then on whether he will adopt an escalator and on the period for which he will announce tax rates. That is not the only uncertainty on this issue; there is also uncertainty about the amount of landfill tax revenue that is currently raised in Scotland. We certainly cannot blame the cabinet secretary for that. There are no directly available data on the Scottish share of landfill tax and the figure of 9.2 per cent of UK revenues that has been bandied about in the committee and elsewhere is derived solely from SEPA-collected data on the quantity of waste sent to landfill in Scotland. The OBR uses that 9.2 per cent estimate for its own estimates on landfill tax revenues; in other words, it estimates UK landfill tax revenues and then takes 9.2 per cent of that for Scotland. However, as we have heard, there is a degree of concern particularly about the OBR’s initial projections for the next two or three years, which were not only wildly out but unbelievable. Although the OBR has now adjusted those figures, this is clearly an important issue for the block grant adjustment and I hope that the OBR will look seriously at the Scottish Government’s projection of a reduction in revenues to £40 million by 2025, which seems credible—even conservative, as Kenny Gibson has suggested. We had better ensure that we do not take that remark out of context as a description of Scottish Government policy. In any case, I would support the Scottish Government in urging the smallest possible block grant reduction; after all, the whole point of the tax is to drive down revenues, which might seem paradoxical from a Treasury point of view but is entirely sensible from an environmental point of view. Speaking from an environmental point of view, I think that our instinct would be to drive hard on this tax in order to reduce waste as quickly as possible. However, there are two constraints in that respect: first, we have to be mindful not to encourage illegal dumping; and, secondly, we must remember the issue of waste tourism. Those constraints have to be taken into account in considering whether to have different rates, bands or exceptions from the UK. For example, if we set a different rate that is too high, we might collect less revenue because people would start to take their waste to England. On having different bands, SEPA has recommended that incinerator bottom ash be at the top level. Although that seems like a good suggestion, it might result in people taking all their ash to England. Finally, on having different exceptions, although there is a lot of merit is setting no rate for asbestos—after all, we do not want to encourage illegal dumping—the problem is that, if we have no such rate, we might also get all of England’s asbestos. Such matters have to be weighed up very carefully and I certainly support the committee’s recommendation that, given their difficulty and complexity, any legislation to decide additional rates or the removal of exceptions be taken under the affirmative procedure. One thing we do know is that there is going to be a tax as well as a fine on illegal dumping. Like the committee, I strongly welcome such a move but I wonder whether the cabinet secretary will clarify what additional revenues will be available to SEPA if it has the enforcement function in that respect. In response to a question that I think I asked in committee, SEPA said that the £300,000 that it had would not cover any enforcement activity. Indeed, in general we need some clarification of the respective roles of SEPA and revenue Scotland on this matter. I am glad that they are working together, but they need to work out exactly where the demarcation lines are. One means of mitigating the impact of landfill at a local level is the Scottish landfill communities fund, which the cabinet secretary described in some detail in his speech. I am pleased that the current system of providing landfill operators with tax credits in exchange for a percentage of tax liability will be followed and that the 6.8 per cent of liabilities under the current system will be boosted by 10 per cent by the Scottish Government. That is certainly welcome. However, evidence to the committee from the Scottish landfill communities fund forum and others suggested that many areas that could benefit from such support are put off by an overcomplicated application process. Therefore, if the fund is to be properly benefited from under the new regime, we should look to simplify the system. For example, SEPA said that the regulation is top heavy and could be streamlined. I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary has listened to SEPA and has made an announcement about that today. On the eligibility radius, there is some tension between looking for more creative ways to reduce environmental impacts throughout Scotland and compensating communities that are closer and, therefore, more directly adversely impacted by the consequences of landfill. I would err on the side of caution and suggest that, for the sake of environmental justice, any finite funding should be distributed among those communities. That is consistent with the committee’s recommendation supporting the principle of those most affected benefiting the most.

I congratulate Jim Hume on bringing this important subject to the chamber and I pay tribute to Citizens Advice Scotland and all the citizens advice bureaux across Scotland, which provide such an important service to thousands of people in the country. The motion is about a particular age group in a particular place in Scotland, but the pressures that face people under the age of 25 throughout Scotland today are just as severe as, if not more severe than, those that are faced by the wider population. It is therefore vital to ensure that there are adequate services to meet their specific needs. An important aspect of what Citizens Advice Scotland does is its research on a range of trends. Part of its recent research has told us that young people are finding it increasingly difficult to access the housing ladder and are coming into conflict with landlords and debt collectors more frequently. As we know, changes to benefits for young people are also set to continue, so the importance of advisory groups like Citizens Advice Scotland and the citizens advice bureaux across Scotland is becoming ever more apparent. The project that is highlighted in the motion illustrates a new way of mainstreaming the work of Citizens Advice Scotland by using a medium that is familiar to younger people. What young people need as a minimum at this time is reliable and accessible information, and today we can celebrate the fact that independent services are responding to their needs, and we can live in hope that others will follow the example of best practice that we are discussing. I am told that the youthinfo@CAB project ran for an eight-week trial period in the Jedburgh health centre on Tuesday afternoons, with financial support from the fairer Scotland fund and the Bank of Scotland Foundation. What is important in the setting up and running of the services is that young people informed the development, and they now take part in delivery of a drop-in centre solely for use by young people. What interests me is the fact that it is about disseminating information not just in a reactive way, but in a preventative manner. The CAB not only has drop-ins and information on its website, but engages with individuals of school age to ensure that when they move on to life as adults they are fully aware of the support that is available. The Jedburgh project is an exemplar that other areas of Scotland could look at carefully and benefit from copying. In its report “Being Young Being Heard—the impact of the recession on young people in Scotland”, Citizens Advice Scotland highlights the magnitude of the challenge that it faces in provision of services in the future. As the report points out, young people are three times more likely to be unemployed than the average worker, and in Scotland alone the number of 18 to 24-year-olds claiming jobseekers allowance increased by 79 per cent after 2007. As we know, many are going to be required to engage in voluntary work in return for support, and all will be required to attend the jobcentre and prove that they have been looking for work on a daily basis, much of which now depends on access to digital services. All that puts people at high risk of losing support if they are not kept informed about their rights and what will be expected of them in the new benefits system. With welfare reform, the need for services such as Citizens Advice Scotland will grow ever greater and more urgent. Parental support and an adult life that starts with state support as the sole source of income will be the lived reality for so many of the younger generation. Furthermore, greater numbers resorting to short-term lending is a very real possibility as the effects of austerity are felt, so it is absolutely vital that the consequences of engaging with payday lenders are made clear to young people. CAS’s research also shows that young people are unhappy claiming benefits and long to find employment, but many are underclaiming the benefits to which they are entitled. The new project will give those youngsters the tools with which to navigate the benefits system with greater confidence and knowledge. I join Jim Hume in congratulating the Roxburgh and Berwickshire Citizens Advice Bureau on its innovative project in the Borders, and in thanking citizens advice bureaux across Scotland for all the great work that they do.

I join the petitioners and external organisations in welcoming the announcement that was made yesterday, although, as Beat Bowel Cancer said, the devil is in the detail. Clearly most of that is still to come, but we should certainly pay tribute to those organisations and petitioners for setting the process going. We should also pay tribute to the Parliament’s committee system, because it has been seen at its best in the way that it has engaged with this subject. Clearly, the system for access to new medicines had to change, but we should join the cabinet secretary in paying tribute to the SMC, which over the past 12 years has been a globally respected organisation. I was privileged in the first years of its existence to be Minister for Health and Community Care, so I followed it closely at that time. More recently I have taken an interest, particularly as co-convener of the cross-party group on cancer and the cross-party group on rare diseases. Those two groups of illnesses have been very much to the fore in recent discussions. Before I concentrate on some of the announcements made by the Government yesterday, I will make some general points. It seems that the elephant in the room is value-based pricing. It is not clear to me how that will interrelate with the SMC—I am not sure whether it is clear to the minister or anybody else—but it would be good to hear about that in the winding-up speech if possible. We are certainly moving towards an era of more personalised medicine, which is good news not only because individual patients will get better targeted drugs, but because it will make many medicines more cost effective. Everybody knows what the problems were, and I hope that members will forgive me for concentrating only on cancer and rare diseases. Many of the witnesses noted that it was difficult to generate robust and cost-effective data for rare diseases, and the system must be more flexible in that respect. On cancer, the committee was told that the SMC accepted two thirds of non-cancer drugs but only one third of cancer drugs. It is clear that there were particular problems in that area, particularly in relation to end-of-life criteria, and we were told that other health technology organisations have more flexibility in that respect. Those were the key issues that needed to be addressed. The other big issue that was very much the focus of attention was the individual patient treatment request system. Again, we heard in committee—and I have begun to hear at the cross-party group—about the particular problems with regard to rare diseases. The referral criteria are extremely difficult to satisfy and I am told that it has been difficult for those organisations that are involved with rare diseases to access the new fund over the past year, because much of it was available through the IPTR process, which—as is well known—was already not working for cancer patients. I welcome the Government’s acceptance that the existing cost-effective thresholds are not appropriate for end-of-life medicines or medicines to treat rare diseases. That was the Government’s central recommendation yesterday, and it is a positive response to the committee’s recommendation for modification of the quality-adjusted life years in those two circumstances. The other key announcement yesterday concerned the peer-approved clinical system. The Government said that it wants to link access to those drugs that are to be prescribed in exceptional circumstances with clinical opinion. That met the demands of those involved with rare diseases, cancer and other diseases, and was consistent with the committee’s recommendation that we could not have a system that was based only on exceptionality. That is all very positive, although some concerns have been raised about the idea of a national system that is delivered locally, because in some sense the whole system, since its inception, was supposed to have been a national system that is delivered locally. I remember that, in its first year, I had to intervene to say, “Boards, you have to follow these SMC recommendations”, and there have been continuing problems and doubts about whether the boards have always been doing that. There are two further recommendations that interest me. One is the recommendation that the SMC should engage proactively with patient representative organisations. I wrote to the minister—although I do not know whether he has seen my letter yet—a week or two ago on behalf of a constituent from one of the prostate cancer organisations. The SMC was revisiting a prostate cancer drug, and he said that his organisation and the patient organisations did not know about it but would like to have been involved. The Government’s recommendation in that respect should address that particular concern. In addition, Myeloma UK said that it would like the SMC to explain how it takes into account patient groups’ submissions, so it is clear that the whole area is important. I was interested to read at the very end of the Government’s response to the committee’s report that there is no “robust evidence to suggest a decline in Phase III commercial clinical trials.” That seems to contradict Professor Gourley’s evidence to the committee, in which he stated: “there is absolutely no doubt that a number of examples of clinical studies cannot be done in Scotland”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 21 May 2013; c 3826.] because of the standard drugs factor. Professor David Cameron said the same, both in his written submission and to the cross-party group on cancer, as well as in other places. There has been a genuine threat to Scotland’s great reputation for clinical research because the standard drugs that were the comparators in clinical trials have often not been available to cancer clinicians in Scotland. I hope that yesterday’s announcement will deal with that problem too. That will benefit not only patients, who are fundamentally what the system is about, but clinical research and the life sciences industry, which is an important part of the Scottish economy.

12. To ask the Scottish Government how many female students were enrolled in colleges in 2007 and 2012. (S4O-02453)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer. He gave the answer very quickly so it was quite difficult to catch the detail, but is not it the case that there has been a sharp decline in the number of part-time students in further education colleges and that the majority of those students are women? What gender impact assessment did he apply before changing college policy and reducing the part-time places available?

The background to the debate is the fact that, in 38 of the past 39 months since the coalition Government was elected, prices have been rising faster than wages. Clearly, some of those factors are beyond the UK Government’s or the Scottish Government’s control, but the background is that the UK Government’s economic policy has failed. That was well summed up by Mark Carney, the new governor of the Bank of England, who obviously is politically independent, when he said: “fiscal adjustment has been a drag on growth.” Economic failure is really what underlies the problem and the crisis in the cost of living. Labour and the SNP have responded differently to the situation. Although many of our policy prescriptions might be similar, the SNP has used the issue as part of its constitutional argument, and we had that again in Angela Constance’s speech. Another thing that the SNP says as part of its referendum strategy is that, really, there is no alternative at UK level because Labour and the Tories are basically the same. Again, that theme came through in Angela Constance’s speech when she said that there was no difference in child poverty under the previous UK Government and the current one. However, that is simply untrue, because child poverty levels fell significantly under the previous Labour Government, as the issue was a priority for it. If anyone doubted the significant policy differences between Labour and the Conservatives, they were highlighted in the speeches last week by Ed Miliband, Ed Balls and others. The people of the UK will have a clear choice at the next UK election. Angela Constance said that at least she believes that the energy freeze proposal is well intentioned. I welcome that, because it is not what Mike Weir or any other SNP MP or MSP has said in the past few days. Ms Constance said that it would be better if Ed Miliband had had a better record as energy minister, although I point out that, when he was minister, energy bills fell on average by £100. However, he would of course admit that, at that time, he did not make the fundamental changes that he wants to make and that it is through his experience of the operation of the energy market that he realises that he has to reset that market, which is the other key ingredient of the policy, apart from the price freeze. That example shows something wider, which is that Ed Miliband is willing to challenge vested interests and to take on and question the neo-liberal consensus. He is making a significant break with that consensus on economic policy. SNP members should look at Labour’s economic policy stance at UK level. I would argue that, although it is not traditional socialism, it is radical and it is a left-wing policy that is far to the left of the SNP’s economic policy. In general, the SNP is far more comfortable about cosying up to big business. For example, it proposes big cuts in corporation tax. The exciting announcements that we had last week were not just on energy. The Scottish Government could look closely at childcare. Of course I support the proposal for 600 hours a year of childcare, but that is put in the shade by the proposals of Labour at UK level—which we have said that we would implement if we were the Government in Scotland—for 25 hours a week for any three or four-year-old whose parent is working, and a massive extension of after-school care. A third example is housing. At UK level, we have been saying that we have to deal with supply, yet housing supply is a red light in the Scottish Government’s indicators. The SNP should look carefully at what Labour at UK level is proposing and stop spreading the myth that somehow any Government at Westminster will be the same. I turn my attention to what the Scottish Government is or should be doing. In general, we want to help the many at the expense of the few. That can be seen in the taxation of the ultra-rich that would be part of the energy and childcare policies. My doubt about the SNP’s council tax freeze is that, although it supports the many, it is at the expense of council services, which benefit disproportionately those on lower incomes. That is why the energy policy is fundamentally different from the council tax freeze policy. Jackie Baillie and others have talked about how the Scottish Government could do more on fuel poverty, food banks and the bedroom tax, which at present is to the fore in public concerns. At the Finance Committee this morning, in a discussion on the Scottish Government’s poverty policy, Jim McCormick of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation said that Scotland does not appear to have a delivery plan for its child poverty strategy. Studying the 50 indicators that the Scottish Government has, we find that only two are focused on poverty. We know that growth is not the only factor but that the distribution of wealth is also significant, so why is there not an indicator targeting median household disposable income? That would show a concern for the cost of living for the majority of people. Why is there nothing about poverty in the guidance on single outcome agreements for community planning partnerships? Again, the poverty strategy is not joined up with what is demanded of local authorities. There is a great deal more that the Government could do to focus on poverty in its policy priorities and in its guidance to local authorities.

I congratulate Aileen McLeod on lodging her motion and pay tribute to all the work that she has done, over the years, in this important area. I also congratulate the Teenage Cancer Trust for all the superb work that it has done. The education programme is the main topic of the debate but, as Aileen McLeod reminded us, the trust has also been involved in supporting and funding specialist units in national health service hospitals such as the Beatson, providing dedicated staff. We should remember that very important part of its work. This evening we are concentrating on the trust’s work to educate young people and health professionals about cancer, in order to help improve the speed and quality of diagnosis. Early diagnosis is crucial for all cancers and it is a matter of particular concern that for teenagers and indeed children there is often a particular problem of late diagnosis. In fact, this is a problem in relation to children that several people have drawn to my attention in the past few weeks. The programme that is provided by the Teenage Cancer Trust is extremely important. The trust offers a unique service that no other charity provides, in that it provides free outreach services to schools, clubs and youth associations. Between 2011 and 2012, for example, it visited as many as 95 schools, passing information to 11,000 young people. In the teenage cancer action week, which will come up very shortly, the trust will focus on the five most common signs of cancer. The trust clearly has a very important role in communicating in the presence of teenagers, but it also has a wide range of accessible advice on its website. As the teenage cancer action week approaches, the trust has used the opportunity to invite young people on to its forum to share their stories and the challenges that they have faced. The example of Amy Quinn has already been referred to and we are all very grateful to her for sending her letter to us. I do not have time to read out very much of her letter, but I noticed what she wrote towards the end of it: “I told my doctor and she dismissed me as just being a grumpy teenager. Eventually she said she thought it might be a cyst” that is an ovarian cyst “but I disagreed. I told her I didn’t think a cyst would make me feel so weird all the time, but she wouldn’t listen.” As the Teenage Cancer Trust points out, such dismissal of teenagers with cancer is not uncommon. In the case of Amy, after she persistently argued that she would require further help, she eventually succeeded in having the treatment that she needed. If it had not been for the advice given to her through the outreach scheme, this young woman might not have been so resolute in continuing to seek help. That is one example of the vital work that is done by the Teenage Cancer Trust. We should also refer to wider services for teenage cancer patients in general. Before this debate, I read the cancer plan for children and young people, which is very commendable. In particular, it focuses on a managed service network—a particularly Scottish feature of the health service over the past decade or so—for teenage cancer. That is a very positive development, although it is a bit worrying that some of the key aims are not being met, such as equity of access to the best possible care and equity of access to clinical trials. It is clear that there is room for improvement, but we should commend the Government on the detect cancer early programme and welcome the partnership between the Teenage Cancer Trust and that programme. There is much to celebrate. Today, in particular, we celebrate the work of the Teenage Cancer Trust. I am sure that we would all like to unite in thanking it for all that it has done and will do. Finally, we should once again pay tribute to Aileen McLeod.

I congratulate Jim Eadie on lodging this important motion and, of course, the University of Edinburgh on achieving top 20 status in the world rankings. Mr Eadie took us on a very interesting excursion through the university’s history but omitted to mention that it had the first English literature department certainly in the United Kingdom and possibly in the world. Given that I studied there several decades ago, I find it of interest that, in 1762, Hugh Blair was appointed regius professor of rhetoric and belles lettres, 100 years before English literature was studied at Oxford and Cambridge. The motion refers to the quality of staff and students. When I looked into the criteria for the rankings, I found that employers were asked about the quality of their students—I have to say that I was not asked; I do not know whether that would have made things better or worse—and the many students who were asked about the university gave it a high commendation. On the basis of my experience, I would second that. The quality of staff is also crucial. Of course, I cannot talk about the present staff but, in my day, the university had many outstanding teachers. I do not want to introduce a sour note into the debate but, on the subject of staff, I think it appropriate to recall the recent publicity about zero-hours contracts not for lecturers but for other important university staff, and I am very pleased—and think it important to point out—that the university has now pledged to get rid of those contracts. The main but of course not the only criterion for getting into the top 20 is the research that a university carries out. The motion refers to “£300 million in competitive research grants”; those grants clearly cover a wealth of disciplines and research areas, and Jim Eadie mentioned some outstanding examples of projects at the university. I want to mention three pioneering projects: the recently opened Scottish centre for regenerative medicine, which Mr Eadie referred to; the major new test facility for marine energy research and development at King’s buildings; and the Higgs centre for theoretical physics, which is obviously going to expand insights in that field. The links between those projects and our key economic areas are, I think, very obvious; indeed, one area that springs to mind is renewable energy and its vast importance for our economy, for climate change and not least for Edinburgh and our hopes for a marine energy hub at Leith docks. The motion also refers to “the commercialisation activities of the university’s research and innovation arm” and the fact that they have contributed “over £140 million in gross value added”. However, I think it relevant to highlight a report that came out this week on the performance of Scotland’s research base in chemical and life sciences, which pointed out that, although Scotland was ahead in collaboration between its universities and foreign companies, it lagged behind in forming alliances between home-grown firms and academics. I did not see a breakdown of individual universities in the report, but the point is that we cannot be complacent about the commercialisation of innovation, which is, after all, a key area of economic progress.

I have a strict four minutes, so I cannot really take an intervention.

Okay then.

I thank Joan McAlpine for that very useful contribution. Going back to my last point, I was pleased, however, by Scottish Enterprise’s plans to open innovation centres at universities to help businesses and academics develop products and services. Indeed, a site for digital health and care has already opened at Edinburgh. Finally, on the life sciences and the bioquarter referred to in the motion, this is clearly a massive area for the University of Edinburgh with great spin-offs for the economy and, indeed, health; indeed, only this week, we heard about great research by Professor Sarah Wild in an international collaboration on type 1 diabetes. There is, therefore, much to celebrate. I congratulate Jim Eadie on drawing the matter to our attention.

In welcoming the comprehensive learning disabilities strategy, we should also remember, as Mary Scanlon did, that great policy document from the Parliament’s early years, “The same as you?”, which was completed with an exemplary consultation. For all of that, we should be grateful to Iain Gray. I decided yesterday to do my own little consultation on the matter via Facebook and Twitter and got some interesting responses. Brian Cavanagh, who was a chair of social work in the former Lothian Regional Council, and is a great champion of inclusive services for people who have learning disabilities, said that there should be “less strategies, more champions and consistency of process that parents, carers and service users can rely on across Scotland”. I think that “consistency” should be an important word for the strategy. Sue Kelly, who is a constituent of mine, said that we should “Let people with learning difficulties speak for themselves. Give them a voice and listen to what they have to say. Give them the resources and the support they need to live independently”. Independent living has to be right at the heart of the strategy. Another constituent of mine, called Lesley Montgomery, who has championed integrated and inclusive services for people with learning disabilities for decades, got back to me with far more words than could be put on Twitter or Facebook. She knows all about the issue because she had a daughter, Kimberly, who had profound and multiple learning disabilities and who, sadly, died five years ago. I will mention two of the things that she said. She feels that there is still too much emphasis on day centres, rather than on living in the community with more stimulation and inclusion. On that she would disagree with Bob Doris; she has always championed integration in schools and in the community. Lesley’s second comment relates to her experience of looking after her daughter when she had to go into hospital. She is concerned that there is still too much acceptance of invasive feeding, which her daughter never liked, so Lesley always made sure that she was there with her as much as possible, helping to feed her. She also says that she had to guard her daughter to make sure that she was not neglected and that the positive things that her daughter needed to have done were done. That was more than five years ago now, so we hope that the situation has improved. She gave me her daughter’s personal hospital passport, which she carried every time she went into hospital. It contains comprehensive information about her daughter and was available to all the healthcare professionals. That is probably a good idea. I think that things have probably moved on; there have been a lot of positive developments, many of which Lesley Montgomery praises. In relation to health, the minister mentioned the collaborative. I always support collaboratives, and I hope that good things will come out of that. The learning disability observatory also sounds like a positive development, as do other recommendations, including on epilepsy, which Bob Doris mentioned, and access to specialist neurological services. Things are getting better, but in this area—as in any other—we can never be complacent. The last thing that I will say specifically about health is that I hope that the Government will work with the third sector. I know that Bowel Cancer UK has had a great initiative around bowel screening for people with learning disabilities, on which it wants to work with the Government. I hope that that offer is being taken up. Clearly, there are big opportunities on health and social care, and the Health and Sport Committee is currently considering the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill. I found the Inclusion Scotland briefing useful. It suggests that we should strengthen recommendation 5, so that people with learning disabilities and their carers are, rather than account merely being taken of their views, involved in commissioning. That is an important theme that is coming through in a lot of evidence to the Health and Sport Committee.

I do not want to get into that controversy; I was just giving the views of my constituent. I think that the general thrust of policy has been towards more integration and inclusion. Clearly, however, the views of people with learning disabilities have to be central, and I would not disagree with what Bob Doris says about that, in general terms. I had a bit more to say on that subject, but I had better move on as we do not have unlimited time. I want to say a bit about independent living and about advocacy in particular, because that is central to independent living. I have just lodged a motion on the subject, which I hope everybody will sign, and I notice that Jim Eadie is hosting a meeting on Thursday lunchtime with the Independent Advocacy Alliance Scotland, to which I hope members will go. Members will be aware of the publication of the report by the Independent Advocacy Alliance Scotland—if they are not aware of it, they will be once they have signed my motion. Under the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) Scotland Act 2003, people with learning disabilities and people with a mental illness have a right to independent advocacy. It plays a key role in enabling the most vulnerable members of society to lead fuller and more independent lives. Within the context of this debate, independent advocacy is a crucial element of safeguarding and progressing civil and human rights, and of implementing the social justice agenda. It supports person-centred services, helps to avoid or resolve crisis situations and is effective in helping to move people’s lives forward. Commissioners must be open to partnership working and to working together to properly assess the number of residents who are eligible for that kind of support. As is pointed out in “The keys to life”, health and social care partnerships must “gather robust information on unmet eligible need” and then ensure that tailored services are provided to best address individual need. Independent advocacy can then act as a route for those who have difficulties in communicating those needs to access the services that can create for them a more independent future. “Having your say?” was a 2006 report that was produced by the advocacy sub-group of the national implementation group for “The same as you?” The report heavily recommended that the Scottish Government continue to encourage the development of local independent advocacy services, as a matter of priority. I have some concern that recommendation 32 talks about that being taken forward “by 2018”. There is a statutory obligation under mental health legislation, which I hope will ensure that everyone who has a learning disability and who wants and requires advocacy services will be able to access those services as soon as possible.

I have the answer that the minister gave to Liz Smith, but what precise assessment has the Government made of how many extra health visitors are needed for two of its policies—having a health visitor as a named person for all young children and the admirable policy of having checks for all children at two and a half years?

13. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will extend the inspection of older people’s care programme to include national health service continuing care beds. (S4O-02394)

Does the cabinet secretary not think that there is a glaring gap between the inspection of older people in acute care, which Nicola Sturgeon instituted, and the inspection of older people in care homes, which a previous health minister started? Is it not time for the cabinet secretary to take action and responsibility to ensure that frail older people who spend all their time in NHS continuing care beds also benefit from having a rigorous inspection regime?

In yesterday’s Scotsman, Peter Jones reminded us of the interesting distinction that Professor Neil MacCormick made between existentialist nationalists and instrumentalist nationalists. It is fair to say that all the SNP members opposite are existentialist nationalists, in that they will vote for Scottish independence irrespective of the economic arguments for or against it, whereas thousands of people out there—possibly a majority—will base their decision on what they think the economy in an independent Scotland would be like. It was therefore strange that the First Minister hardly mentioned the economy today. He made three points on it, to which I will refer.

Not yet. Our argument for remaining part of the United Kingdom is based partly on social solidarity with the rest of the UK, partly on believing that strong devolution gives us the best of both worlds and—crucially—partly on the assessment that we have relative economic advantages in being part of the UK. Today’s debate and the First Minister’s speech seem to be all about something else. Notwithstanding the fact that he is an existentialist nationalist and so, in a sense, the other arguments do not matter to him at all, the First Minister tried to frame the debate in two ways. First, he tried to undermine any critique of independence and particularly its economics as scaremongering. Secondly, he tried to frame the debate in terms of Scotland versus the Tories. That is why he is interested in debating only with David Cameron. I am sure that lots of us would like to debate with David Cameron and would have quite a lot of easy points to make against him. The First Minister is not interested in debating with Alistair Darling— Margo MacDonald rose—

In a minute—I need to move on. Alistair Darling is the perfect person with whom to debate the economics of independence. [Interruption.]

That is because of his knowledge, his experience and what he achieved, as I shall remind members in a moment—I cannot take interventions until I have done that. The First Minister made three points about the economy, although one was in response to Gavin Brown. First, we had the selective quotation of facts, which always happens. We were told that, in each of the past two or perhaps three decades, we have paid more tax per head than the rest of the UK. That is of course correct because of oil, which we all welcome but which will not last for ever. However, the SNP never says what the spending was. The fact is that in only six of the past 22 years have Scottish revenues as a percentage of UK revenues been higher than Scottish spending as a percentage of UK spending. The figure this year is quoted, because it happens to be higher, but that has been the case in only six of the past 22 years. The First Minister talked about control of tax policy, but Gavin McCrone—I recommend that everybody reads his book as the standard one on the economy—makes it clear that the rest of the UK would oversee fiscal policy. All the economists say that—even John Kay and others who are the First Minister’s advisers. The First Minister responded to Gavin Brown’s point about the comment that Scotland would not inherit a share of debt, which is absolutely ludicrous, as Scotland would of course inherit a share. The very important point is that long-term interest rates for borrowing would be higher. Even with all the weaknesses and problems of the present UK economy, we have the advantage of low interest rates, which we would not have after 2016.

I have already given the three facts that drive us, which I do not need to repeat. Margo MacDonald rose— I have only two minutes left. The economic situation that faces us in 2016 will be crucial to the debate. I wanted to make lots of other economic points, but it has somehow taken me four minutes to say what I have already said. Even in the current adverse economic circumstances, we have advantages from being part of the UK. Four times as many of our exports go to England as go to the rest of the world put together. We have the advantages of financial services jobs as part of the UK, of twice our population share of research funding to our universities, and so on. The argument is partly about social solidarity, as I said, but it is also about pooling risk.

I do not have time. Alistair Darling was derided by people, but he did many important things as chancellor, one of which was to rescue the Scotland-based banks. I refer again to Professor Gavin McCrone, whom the SNP generally respects. He says that, if we had been independent back in 2008, our finances would have been overwhelmed and, like Ireland, we would have had to seek a bailout from international organisations. The same principle of pooling risk applies to welfare spending. Currently—even excluding health—Scottish welfare spending is £3,972 per head compared with £3,658 per head in England and our welfare spending is expected to grow more rapidly: because of our demography and the balance of our population, we will have more older people relative to the working age population. It is therefore an advantage for pensioners to remain part of the United Kingdom. Finally, I am glad that Alex Salmond went with Nicola Sturgeon to the best childcare centre in Scotland—in West Pilton in my constituency—this morning. In the past few months, we have heard a little bit from Alex Salmond about childcare. I did not hear anything from him between 1987 and 2013, while Johann Lamont was talking about it, and I spoke about it in my maiden speech in 1992, but I will pass on that. The point that I want to make is twofold. First, many of the advances in childcare came from the UK Labour Government. I regret the fact that the current Government has cut the childcare tax credit; it was one of Gordon Brown’s great achievements that he instituted the childcare tax credit, which helped many parents afford childcare.

Secondly, the Scottish Government can do far more on childcare now, as it can on other policies. Devolution can do a great deal and more enhanced devolution can do even more—that is the message that I will be speaking about in the next twelve months.

Once again, the cabinet secretary quotes figures selectively, and she has not answered my more substantive point, which was that in only six of the past 22 years has Scottish revenue as a percentage of UK revenue been above Scottish expenditure as a percentage of UK expenditure. She is not taking account of Scottish expenditure when she quotes figures on tax.

I congratulate Nanette Milne on bringing this important issue to the chamber, and I congratulate Marie Curie Cancer Care on its involvement in this work and, indeed, on its superb contribution to palliative care. As the report with which the charity is associated confirms, there is a huge disparity between the 75 per cent of cancer patients and the 20 per cent from the non-cancer group being identified for palliative care; furthermore, the support that is given to the non-cancer patients is often too little, too late. Those include patients diagnosed with heart, lung, liver or kidney organ failure or with dementia. The research team, which investigated the cases of 684 patients from nine general practices, concluded that a gradual and long-term approach to phasing in supportive and palliative care while continuing with other treatment care planning would benefit patients and their families. I want to make three general points about palliative care not necessarily for members in the chamber but for people outside. First, palliative care, as defined by the Scottish Partnership for Palliative Care, “is a proactive approach involving a multi-professional team. As well as controlling pain and other distressing symptoms, it applies a holistic approach to meeting the physical, practical, functional, social, emotional and spiritual needs of patients and carers facing progressive illness and bereavement.” Secondly, such care is not location-specific and can take place in the community as well as in the hospices that are well known to everyone. Thirdly, general practitioners keep a palliative care register, from which the 20 per cent figure has been derived. As the motion points out, it is fundamental that we break the stigma of talking about death. The good life, good death, good grief campaign highlighted in the motion not only supports those going through the death and grieving process but seeks to normalise that process and open up conversations on the surrounding issues. Like the report, the campaign points out that it is never too early to think about planning ahead for illness and death and that making plans when we are healthy means that the pressure of making crucial decisions is lessened at the point when sickness takes hold. Professor Scott Murray from the University of Edinburgh, who was involved in the research, points out: “if we are going to better improve the chances for everyone with both cancer and non-cancer diagnoses to benefit from palliative care, doctors and nurses should be comfortable and able to talk to and listen to patients when they want to talk about death and dying. The big challenge for patients is to talk about how you feel, and what you would like if you become ill, so that your relatives and friends and doctors know what to do.” Only by doing that will we be able to ensure that maximum numbers of people receive the emotional, spiritual and practical support through services that all patients deserve. That is beginning to happen in the Lothians, where a complete redesign of the NHS palliative care programme is being directed by Marie Curie in partnership with NHS Lothian. In fact, NHS Lothian, along with the University of Edinburgh, should be congratulated on its association with the research. Using a whole-systems approach to delivery, they hope to reduce the number of avoidable emergency admissions and give patients the choice of place of death and, by doing so, work to improve the community-based model of end-of-life care and make the process less intimidating for those involved. Based on the delivering choice model that was found to be successful in Somerset, the redesign will involve three key stages of design and implementation and it is hoped that, through an effective assessment of local need, services can be developed to operate more effectively while ensuring that local clinical staff are engaged with process and have ownership of the models. Finally, continued support is necessary in the implementation of the redesign structures throughout the area. As this consultative approach between the NHS and Marie Curie to providing a more accessible and coherent framework for care delivery has been seen to work elsewhere, I am glad that it is being implemented in this area. Once again, I congratulate Nanette Milne on bringing this motion to Parliament, and I whole-heartedly support it.

I support the motion and I congratulate Claire Baker on bringing it to the Parliament. Many reasons for microchipping can be advanced. First, it causes no harm to dogs. It is important to state that at the beginning, since some people have suggested that it could cause harm. The Dogs Trust supports the proposal, so we can have no doubt that it is in the interests of dog welfare. Another fundamental reason for microchipping is that it can be beneficial for owners who might be highly distressed as a result of losing a dog. Clearly, through microchipping, it is easy to connect a lost animal with the owner. Some people might accept those two points but argue that it should be up to the individual owner to decide whether to go ahead with microchipping. There are several responses to that, some of which have already been suggested. One example is the public cost of kennelling a large number of stray dogs, and we could add to that the fact that dogs often eventually have to be slaughtered if they cannot be reunited with their owners. However, an even more fundamental point is that the dogs of some individual owners cause problems. That is crucial in arguing the case for microchipping. For a long time, my view, based on constituency experience, has been that we need to be tough on dog problems and tough on the causes of dog problems. Frankly, in many ways, I do not think that we as a society are sufficiently tough at present. That is in no way a statement against dogs, because we all recognise that the problems that dogs cause are ultimately caused by certain dog owners. One of the most awful things that can happen to any person, but particularly to a child, is to be attacked by a dog. I live in absolute dread of that ever happening to one of my young grandchildren. It is already recognised that microchipping can have an effect on the problem because, under the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010—on which I congratulate Christine Grahame—any dog that has a dog control order imposed on it has to be microchipped. That association has already been made, but the problem with that act is that not nearly enough dog control orders are issued. We therefore have to look at the issue from the other point of view and ensure that all dogs are microchipped. In that way, any dog that causes a problem—the most serious kind is an attack, but as we all know dogs running around in various places can cause many other problems—can be identified and connected with its owner. Microchipping is therefore important in dealing with the problems that are caused by dogs. We all hear about such problems every week. As we know, the most common one is dog fouling, which we should never laugh at or write off, as it is a massive problem. I am not aware that microchipping can deal with it, although one of my constituents has suggested to me that, in the long run, DNA profiling combined with microchipping could solve the problem. I am not arguing for that, but we can all see that, theoretically and potentially, it could be done. Personally, I would just ask the Government to increase the fine for anyone who is caught with a dog fouling, because it is an enormous problem in streets and parks. Again, I particularly worry about the effect that dogs have on children’s lives through the impact on parks and play areas as well as the health risks of dog poo. My final example is from this very week, when one of my constituents was most distressed because he had been on a cycleway and, apart from experiencing the problems that dogs running around on cycleways cause for bicycles, he had seen a dog off the lead destroying a cat. Councils should make far more use of byelaws to prohibit dogs from being on cycleways and from being in some—although not all—parks, so that those parks can remain the province of children.

Will the cabinet secretary explain why, in the sections of his speech on economic recovery and support for business, he omitted to mention that the enterprise, energy and tourism budget will decline from £479 million this year to £444 million next year? Since our next debate is about enterprise bodies, will he tell us how the focus of those bodies will be affected for good or ill by the transfer of £41.8 million from resource to capital?

I will try to introduce a little balance to the debate, following the hyperbole of the previous speaker. In the interests of balance, I recognise and support many of the priorities and successes of the enterprise agencies. However, equally, I think that it is important to identify the problems and gaps that justify Jenny Marra’s call for a review. I welcome many of the enterprise agencies’ activities—for example, the focus on offshore renewables, which I hope will benefit my constituency in due course. I recognise that Scottish Enterprise is making a great contribution to that. I was also happy to recognise the successes in internationalisation when we had our debate on Scotland and China. Finally, and most important in the context of today’s debate, I and the Labour Party more generally welcome the focus on growing business and account management. One reason why we support that, of course, is that we started it; we instituted it through the smart, successful Scotland strategy of 2001, which was centred on the idea of growing businesses. We absolutely accept the principle of that. As the report that evaluated account management came out this week, it is right that we are focusing on it to a large extent in the debate. I hope that, in winding up, the minister will answer the question on the budget statement that John Swinney did not answer. I asked him what the effect of the transfer of £41.8 million from revenue to capital would be on the enterprise budgets next year. I do not necessarily say that that is a good or bad thing, because I do not know what the precise detail of that is, but I have a suspicion that account management must have a large resource budget and worry that that transfer may have an effect on account management. Perhaps the minister will explain that in winding up. The report that came out this week is quite a balanced document in its way. I point out to the minister that it says on page 114: “The common perception that SE actively account manages 2000+ companies is inaccurate”. I think that the minister will remember saying that in his speech, but that is a quibble and a detail, in a sense. The more basic point to make is that we have to think of the context of the report. The evaluators went out to talk to the people who get a great deal of help from Scottish Enterprise. It is as if someone did a survey of my constituents and identified the people to whom I have given the most help in the past year. I am sure that 90 per cent of them would say, “He’s great.” Far be it from me to say whether 90 per cent of all my constituents would say that, but members can get the distinction. That is part of the report’s methodology. People who got support were talked to. One of the concerns in the study from the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee two years ago, I think, was that companies with the potential to grow could be left out in the cold. I think that Murdo Fraser made that point in his intervention. That report was especially worried about the gap that might exist between the business gateway and account management. In a way, that was picked up in the evaluation report.

As ever, the minister is helpful. I thank him for that. The next word that I had written down was “review”. The report this week that we are focusing on talks about reviewing the business gateway pipeline “to consider whether pipeline companies have access to the level of support needed”. That is not the only place in the report in which the word “review” is used. Therefore, I do not think that people should be so surprised by what Jenny Marra proposes. She is not proposing it just because of this week’s report, which is, in general, as I have said, perhaps too favourable to Scottish Enterprise. However, it talks about reviewing several aspects of what currently happens. Ministers and Murdo Fraser should bear that in mind. This week’s report is worried about “the slow transition from the Business Gateway Growth Pipeline to account management” and about “The limited ‘churn’ in the account management portfolio.” It raises many issues and concerns while there are also positive reports. A majority of the improvements are generated by a small group of companies. I was surprised to read that 10 per cent of companies deliver half of the gross value added. That is great, but it reminds us that there are many other companies that are not making the same progress or, indeed, are not being helped at all.

I am in my final minute, so I cannot make all the other points that I wanted to make. However, I was struck by the report’s statement that Scottish Enterprise needs to “improve its internal data capture and monitoring systems.” In my mind, that connected with some of the equality issues, because there is a little paragraph in Scottish Enterprise’s business plan about how it is very much focused on equality, but there is very little indication of that in either its business plan or the evaluation report. Indeed, if we were to go by the pictures in its business plan, there would be few, if any, women-led businesses in Scotland, which is not the case. I think that Scottish Enterprise needs to focus on that to a greater extent and capture that data so that it focuses on equality issues as well as the issues of growing companies and the economy.

I congratulate Graeme Pearson on introducing this important debate and recognise his interest in and knowledge of China. That knowledge is certainly shared by Gil Paterson, but unfortunately not by me, which I regret and hope to do something about before too long. I recognise China’s central importance in the world economy. It is now the second most powerful economic nation in the world and it will soon be the first. Its rise in terms of a revolutionary upheaval in global economic power is comparable only with that of the United States at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century. Our global economy is highly interconnected now, of course, and it is therefore in our interests to develop economic ties with China and to take a great interest in the development of the Chinese economy, as it has had and will have a profound effect on economies in the west. Leading contemporary economists, such as Martin Wolf in his book “Fixing Global Finance”, and Will Hutton in his book “The Writing on the Wall”, have emphasised China’s central importance for the world economy and our economy. It is clearly in our interest as well as China’s to develop economic ties. In that regard, I welcome the £800 million of trade that we had with China in 2012—I am told that that was a 14 per cent increase on the previous year—and acknowledge the work of, for example, Scottish Development International, which I am told increased the number of companies that it supports to access Chinese markets from 77 to 208 in five years. It is clear that that work is important, but there is more to do, as Graeme Pearson has emphasised, on issues such as more direct air links, dealing with visa problems and the other issues that he mentioned, which are clearly important in building on the good progress that has been made in the past few years. It is not just a matter of fostering economic connections, of course; there is also the issue of education and cultural links, which I think is recognised in the Scottish Government’s working with China strategy. Again, I welcome the fact that there are 7,000 Chinese students in Scottish universities and the fact that 18 Scottish higher education institutions have academic and research links with China. It is clear that that is very important, as is encouraging more of our students in schools to study Chinese languages. To me, the situation is reminiscent of the 1960s, when there was, for understandable reasons, a fashion for learning Russian, given Russia’s global significance then. China is now the country that might be comparable to it, and the more people who can learn Chinese languages, the better. Other links are also important. In my constituency we have the botanic gardens, the most important international focus of which is China. That has been so for some time and is on-going. The gardens, which are not far from here, have the largest collection of Chinese plants outside China in the whole world. There are also, of course, cultural links. I was pleased to see the outstanding Chinese production of “Coriolanus” during the Edinburgh festival and to see a Chinese film called “Three Sisters” at the film festival. It highlighted the poverty in much of rural China. Notwithstanding China’s overall high gross domestic product, it has a GDP per head that is a tenth of ours, of course. That highlights the issue of poverty. The last point that I want to make is that at the book festival I heard a man called Ma Jian talk about his book, “The Dark Road”, which leads me to human rights issues, which it is right to acknowledge in this debate. The issue that he was writing about—and rebelling against—was the one-child policy. A wholly different attitude to individual freedom underlies some of the human rights issues in China. We must highlight abuses of human rights, but that should not detract from building positive relationships with China on economic and other issues.

I join the rest of the chamber in welcoming the report, which gives a valuable insight into the real lives of the Travelling community in Scotland as well as making several important recommendations. The traditional culture of the Travelling community has been present throughout the UK for centuries, but it has only recently been given the status of an ethnic group with its rights and responsibilities covered by the Race Relations Act 1976. It is our responsibility to ensure that the lifestyle choices that, as a minority group, those people make are respected and that their human rights and living standards are matters of concern to us all. The accounts of impoverished conditions that are highlighted in the report paint a shocking picture of neglect. In one example, babies are found to be bathing in freezing water. In another, the absence of any lighting makes an area unsafe and impossible to navigate after dark, and there are overflowing septic tanks and a lack of any infrastructure to enable children to play. Decent living conditions are the basic human right of every person, regardless of their background, but at present there is a real shortage of approved sites for the current population. As the report highlights, there is a lack of information available on the current number of Gypsy Travellers, with the most recent estimate taken in 2009. Local authorities and public agencies must seek to include the community in their service planning processes. As Amnesty International points out, the absence of figures on population size should not negate that planning requirement. The report’s recommendations rightly commend the work of Planning Aid for Scotland in helping Gypsy Travellers to engage with the process. It has been maintained at £237,000 per annum, and I hope that the Government will continue to provide the same level of support to Planning Aid for Scotland for that work. The problems that the Gypsy Traveller community faces go far beyond poor housing conditions, but many of the issues that they face throughout their lives have their roots in those conditions. The report cites the north-east of Scotland as facing particular problems, and I agree that any work to develop the necessary new sites should have a special focus on that area. National policy, however, must reflect the urgent need for a greater number of safe sites throughout Scotland. At present, there is no obligation on local authorities to provide sites; therefore, I believe that a statutory duty such as exists in England and Wales should be seriously considered. The report highlights an absence of evidence that local authorities have taken adequate steps to address need, and COSLA must fulfil its role in supporting communities to do that. I also support the recommendation about the development and implementation of a standard Gypsy Traveller site tenancy agreement. In their working lives, Gypsy Travellers face discrimination constantly and are often turned away from job opportunities as a result of their home addresses being recognised as Traveller sites. Much of the discrimination is based on negative preconceptions of the characteristics of travelling life that are based to a great extent on representations in mainstream and social media commentary. We can encourage a change in attitudes only when we tackle those negative stereotypes and emphasise that antisocial behaviour at a small number of sites does not represent the population as a whole. In view of that, the EHRC’s illustrative guide for media outlets is profoundly welcome. Interaction with the community is vital if we are to make the right kind of progress. The committee’s report outlines some of the work that has been carried out thus far in consultation, and I was heartened to read that a great deal of work has been done with the Minority Ethnic Carers of People Project—MECOPP—which works closely with carers in difficult living situations and knows the challenges that they face. In its written submission to the inquiry into Gypsy Traveller accommodation, the group quoted a statement that was made in a previous submission 10 years ago: “many of the difficulties Gypsy/Travellers encounter, and society’s acceptance of prejudice towards this ethnic group, are effectively legitimised by State policies which are at best out-dated and paternalistic, at worst restrictive and discriminatory”. MECOPP’s submission went on to highlight that that statement still holds true, notwithstanding the efforts that have been made. MECOPP also pointed out that previous inquiries have failed to engage properly with the community. So few Travellers were aware of the committee’s inquiry that MECOPP made the laudable decision that it would gather responses itself, and I commend it for doing so. What came through in its snapshot of life in the Gypsy Traveller community is a general feeling that the Government has thus far failed to disseminate relevant information effectively and, as a result, has failed to engage and to receive feedback. Many in the community felt that their way of life is not understood and their basic needs are not met. Many desire to be able to continue the tradition of travelling, but legal spaces for camping and parking are increasingly being closed down. When they travel, they face harassment from the settled community. Therefore, for the security of their families, they are often forced to remain in sites that are poorly managed and have very low living standards. Life on the edge of poverty, with little security, has led to life expectancy for Gypsy Travellers—men and women—being 10 years lower than the national average. All of that is completely unacceptable. The common values that join the settled and Travelling communities together are far more important than the cultural differences that divide them. It is important that, in developing policy, we do not see people in one group as “other”. Instead, we should recognise their value as members of Scottish society who have a distinct story to tell.

I find this rather a difficult speech to make: I had thought that I would be able to say something about a wide range of bills, but I find that there is not a great deal to say. I think that Alex Salmond, the First Minister, found exactly the same difficulty in his speech, because in 14 years I have never heard a legislative programme speech by a First Minister that devoted so little time to the bills. I am sure that somebody will go away and analyse all 15 of those speeches, but I would be prepared to guess—and even to put on a bet—that his speech today had the lowest proportion of any of those speeches of time spent actually dealing with the bills themselves. Of course, the reason for that is absolutely simple: it was a speech about the referendum and a legislative programme about the referendum, from a Government that has transformed itself into a campaign. The programme has been driven by two principles. First, do not rock the boat—if you want to win as many votes as possible in the referendum, you clearly want to annoy as few people as possible in the next 12 months. Secondly, the whole underlying theme of the First Minister’s speech was an attempt to demonstrate what Scotland cannot do rather than what it can. It certainly was not one of Nicola Sturgeon’s finer moments when she said on the radio this morning that the programme was radical and that it was a programme for economic growth. Being a fair-minded person, I will comment briefly on some bills that are interesting and potentially good. I think that everyone who has spoken has mentioned as a first choice the community empowerment and renewal bill, so let us hope that we can make something radical of that. I am not sure whether it is radical in its current form. We debated the consultation paper in Parliament one year ago this month, and people can look up the issues that were raised then. The proposed bill builds, belatedly, on our own historic community right to buy. I hope that that will be extended to urban areas and will become meaningful, because at the moment councils often say that they cannot take an interest in a community group that wants land because that would be against European state aid rules. That issue must be confronted head on. I also rather like the revenue Scotland and tax powers bill, but I gently remind the Administration that it springs directly from the Scotland Act 2012. It is important to me because I want to build on the fiscal powers that we already have to create enhanced devolution, so I think that that is a significant bill. The housing bill is interesting and I have no objection to the abolition of the right to buy. However, if the First Minister really thinks that that will make housing available to all, as he seemed to suggest, I must tell him that the bill is really marginal in that regard. It is investment in new housing that is crucial. Finally, of course I welcome the mental health and adults with incapacity amendment bill, which springs from the McManus review of four years ago and builds on our own historic Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, which is another jewel in the crown of devolution. Near the beginning of his speech, the First Minister emphasised how the Scottish Parliament had demonstrated concern for the most vulnerable in society, although I do not think that free personal care is necessarily the best example of that. The question for us today is: what have we got for the most vulnerable in society in this programme? Where is the serious drive against health inequalities? Where is the action on payday loans or the living wage? What about legislation on human trafficking? We should thank Jenny Marra for filling that gap with her bill. Where are the further measures against the continuing scourge of domestic abuse, which, for understandable reasons, is very much to the forefront of the Parliament’s and the public’s mind today? We all know what we think in Parliament about one particular individual, but let us not forget the progress that has been made and the further action that is required. There is a courts reform bill that will come before the Parliament, to address other issues to do with the Court of Session and so on, but we all saw the story in The Herald last week about the way in which the great domestic abuse court in Glasgow is now running into difficulties, so let us address that problem. Although I welcome the setting up of a domestic abuse court in Edinburgh, I was discussing with Alison Johnstone a moment ago the fact that that court serves only sections of Edinburgh and not the whole of Edinburgh. Why do not we address those issues, which relate to the protection of victims of domestic abuse? We also need to look at some of the provisions in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. Scottish Women’s Aid has put in a long submission that highlights concerns about some of the effects of that legislation on victims. As well as taking action on the member who should not be a member of this Parliament, let us drive forward at the same time and build on the great work that we have done on the issue over the past 14 years. Finally, where is there anything about the bedroom tax, except rhetoric against laws from London? It is the classic example—the best example of all—that emphasises what we cannot do and forgets what we can do.

That was a very nice try to deflect us from the issue of the bedroom tax, but the simple fact of the matter is that it is the Scottish Government and the SNP who relentlessly use the bedroom tax as, I would say, almost the number one piece of ammunition against the UK Government. They forget what they could do, as a Scottish Government, to mitigate the effects of that tax. Fortunately, Labour has not forgotten, as Iain Gray made clear yesterday, and I hope that we will hear more about that in due course.

I hear what the minister is saying about significant reductions since 1990. However, is not it the case that there have been no reductions in transport emissions over that period, that in the draft RPP2 there was not a single policy to reduce transport emissions, and that the UK Committee on Climate Change has said that it is necessary for the Scottish Government urgently to translate proposals into policies? The minister made general remarks about transport in response to Alison Johnstone and Claire Baker. Can he name proposals in the draft RPP2 that are now policies? In particular, are there demand-reduction measures, to bring about modal shift?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his interesting explanation, but how does that fit in with the commitment that the tax will be revenue neutral? I am struggling to see how that is consistent with the idea that the setting of tax rates and bands might change with the general public expenditure situation.

I thank Patrick Harvie for lodging his amendments. I think that he has listened very carefully to the debate that took place in committee and has realised that the Government strongly objected to his proposal. That is why he has modified his proposal by changing “must” to “may”, which is a highly significant change, because it means that amendment 74 is a permissive amendment and one to which no time limit is attached. Therefore, in a sense, the Government can be unconvinced at this stage but still think that the provision is worth putting in the bill, because—who knows?—in a few years’ time, other factors and considerations might be at play. Amendment 74 means that it would be possible to introduce such regulations at that point. John Mason asked whether Patrick Harvie’s method was the best way of doing things. I think that that is the wrong way of thinking about this crucial matter. There is not one way of dealing with the problem of energy inefficiency in homes; there are many ways, and Patrick Harvie’s proposed measure could be part of the suite of measures to address it. We should remember that the two biggest challenges for us when it comes to climate change are transport, which we are not discussing today, and existing homes, which we are discussing. Basically, the measure in question is an attempt to help to deal with the energy inefficiency of existing homes. John Mason also said that there would be a cost. In fact, there would not be. The amendment is designed in such a way as to be revenue neutral. At this stage, I do not think that I would be allowed to make a speech that was long enough to explain how it would operate, although John Mason might well be going to ask me that very question.

It is clear that some people in energy-inefficient homes would be affected but, as Patrick Harvie said, people in homes of modest value would not be affected, because of the commitments that the cabinet secretary has given on the starting point for the tax. Another argument that was used in committee that may well be used again is that energy efficiency is not uppermost in people’s minds when they buy a house. That is an argument in favour of amendment 74, because it will put the issue in people’s minds when they buy a house. That is what we need. We should all think about energy efficiency when we buy houses and, indeed, when we heat them, which seems to be every day of the year—at least, that is how it seems at present. It seems to me that the measure would be to the advantage of sellers and buyers. Some people ask how it would be to the advantage of sellers. They would be in a better position to sell their house, they would have the advantage of being able to sell it more quickly and they might be likely to get slightly more money for it than they would otherwise get. From the buyer’s point of view, the advantage is obvious, in that they would pay less of the new tax. I know that the Government is very sceptical about the proposal. I was very sceptical when it was first put to me, but the more I have thought about it, the more I have become convinced that it is one—and only one—of several measures that are needed to deal with the urgent issue of the energy inefficiency of all homes, but particularly of existing homes.

I very much welcome the bill, which will soon become the first tax act in Scotland since the tax on alcohol in Glasgow act of 1705—I thank the cabinet secretary for that interesting information. The cabinet secretary said that he hoped that the bill would be the first step in strengthening the Parliament’s tax powers. I certainly agree with that—I would like a few more taxes to be devolved to the Parliament. In committee, he said that he wanted all taxes to be devolved to the Parliament. I pointed out to him that that was devo max, but he assured me that he still supported independence. Unless or until we raise all the revenue that we spend, the key issue of the block grant adjustment will remain. It is not in the bill but, clearly, it will be one of the major issues in the next year or two. We wish the cabinet secretary all the best in his negotiations with the UK Government. I am sure that we would all urge him to strike the best possible deal. There are many things in the bill that I welcome, including the process. There was a good process in the committee and with the stakeholders, so I welcome the changes that have been made in relation to charities, for example, and the additions, such as the provisions on non-residential leases. I also welcome the general emphasis on tackling tax avoidance. Part of that involves dealing with reliefs that encourage it, such as sub-sale relief. I also welcome the bill’s progressive nature. The first controversy that came up today concerned when the rates will be announced. In a sense, that is still a live issue, since nothing in the bill says when that should be done. The distinction between the setting of residential rates and the setting of non-residential, commercial, rates is important. Gavin Brown in particular emphasised the range of bodies that think that commercial rates should be set earlier, and I was persuaded by that argument. I was not persuaded by the cabinet secretary’s argument against that, which was that the rates must be set in September because of the budget bill. There is a commitment to revenue neutrality, so I do not see why the decision on the rates should depend on the overall levels of public expenditure at the time. Obviously, I was disappointed in relation to energy efficiency, but there is no time to say anything else about that. I was also disappointed by the partnership sections, which were lifted straight from what is generally agreed to be a bad part of Westminster legislation. However, the cabinet secretary has agreed to consider that before 2015, and I am sure that that will be done. Kenneth Gibson mentioned “Grasping the thistle”, which is quite an interesting document. A lot of the discussion on the bill has been about business, but that publication says that there is a lack of awareness in the business community and calls for a concerted programme of communication to boost awareness of the switch. I am sure that it is not just the business community that needs that, so communication will be important over the next couple of years. The other big issue is the practical issues that have to be sorted out. I am glad that Registers of Scotland and revenue Scotland are making good progress but, clearly, there are issues that concerned the committee, such as who will give advice on the tax. The committee will keep a watching eye on progress on that as well.

Given that the Leith festival benefits not just regeneration areas in Leith but the whole of Leith and Edinburgh and further afield, is it not time that the Leith festival received some funding from the national fund that is available for national festivals? Would the Leith festival at the beginning of June each year not be the ideal curtain-raiser for the great summer of festivals, which continues tonight with the launch of the film festival?

Is the cabinet secretary saying that the existing law is not compatible with the ECHR? What does he have to say to Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People and, I believe, others, who say that there is no ECHR issue with regard to children, for example?

I agree with the principles and much else in the bill, but I will concentrate on areas in which it could have gone further. The standards that section 2 mentions are a case in point. They need to be consulted on with victims organisations and others, they need to be in regulations and they should be reported on. More than that, however, the standards and other aspects of the bill raise, for me, a fundamental question. How will they be policed? Who will ensure that they are enforced? In some countries, victims can go to court if they feel that their rights have been abused, but what recourse will there be for victims in Scotland? That fundamental question led to the proposal from the Labour Party for a victims commissioner. Now, we can argue about that commissioner’s remit. I agree with what Jenny Marra said about a commissioner achieving effective performance monitoring. I would like the commissioner to take on some of an ombudsman’s role so that, if somebody had an example of where they had not been treated properly by the system, they could go to the commissioner to get recourse. It is up to those who oppose having a commissioner to say how they would answer the fundamental question about how the legislation will be policed and who will ensure that it is enforced.

I object to such a long intervention. I would not have given way had I known how long it would be. Christine Grahame makes a procedural point; it is not a substantive point. I will give one small example and waste more of the time for my speech. I did not vote at the Finance Committee against the recommendation in that committee’s report that there should not be energy efficiency measures in the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill, but I took a different position when I lodged an amendment to that bill. It is perfectly possible for a member to take at a subsequent stage a position that they have not pushed to a vote in committee. I have now wasted a minute of my speech, which I bitterly regret. I agree with the proposal that there should be more information for victims and witnesses, but I note that section 3 does not mention information about bail and bail conditions, which is often complained about. The best way to provide that information is through a single point of contact, which would provide continuity of support as far as possible. That will not always be possible, but the principle of a case companion is absolutely right.

I will not give way again. I am sorry, but I have already lost a minute because of the previous intervention. More information for victims and witnesses is good for them, but publicly available information about victims and witnesses is not good. I note what Victim Support Scotland said about having some control over how the media report on victims and witnesses—that is hard to have. I should mention something that I mentioned in a debate last June—the case of my constituent whose personal details were all published on the Scottish Court Service website following a divorce case. That problem is on-going. I have had two meetings with the Information Commissioner’s Office assistant information commissioner—the Scottish data protection commissioner—about it and I am still awaiting a further reply from the SCS. It has emerged that the judiciary is not subject to the Data Protection Act 1998. The sheriff allowed intimate details to go on the website, including bank details. It seems that, although the principle of judicial independence is good in practice, it sometimes goes too far. The publication of a court judgment on the website made my constituent a victim; apart from anything else, she was stalked as a result of it. I have to be very quick now, because I have only two minutes left. I welcome the extension of special measures for victims of sexual offences and domestic abuse, but I note that Victim Support Scotland said that its greatest concern about the bill was about the right of parties to object to the use of special measures. That right is not in place now, which led to my intervention about whether the ECHR was being invoked against the existing legislation. The children’s commissioner clearly says that the existing legislation is not against the ECHR, and Scottish Women’s Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland say the same. Scottish Women’s Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland have made many points about the bill. I do not have time to go over them all, but they are certainly issues on which I would like questions to be asked at stages 2 and 3. They include the complainer’s right to access legal advice when the defence requests records that relate to sexual history, character or medical history; the right to request a review if there is no prosecution proceeding—remember that only 25 per cent of rape complaints are carried forward; the extension of special measures to civil cases, which is often where domestic abuse and other sexual offences are addressed; the right to choose the gender of a forensic examiner; and the amendment of section 20 to make it clear that there should not be a compensation order when that is contrary to the victim’s wishes. I support all those concerns from Scottish Women’s Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland. Now I have 40 seconds for the national confidential forum. I note and agree with what Duncan McNeil said. There are many positive features of the forum, but it should include those who have been in foster care. Many of the witnesses said that. It should also have a wider mandate and remit. I noticed that paragraph 95 of the Health and Sport Committee’s report said that the Scottish Human Rights Commission “could not identify another initiative in the world that dealt only with acknowledgement and no other elements of remedy, whether inquiry-related, civil-law focused or reparation-based.” I note the Health and Sport Committee’s concern about the extent of knowledge and expertise of mental health professionals in this area. That reminds me of a report by Sarah Nelson, which I launched probably 12 years ago, that said exactly the same thing. At that point, it was psychiatrists who had no awareness of sexual abuse issues. I hope that that has changed in the interim, but the Health and Sport Committee’s report suggests that perhaps it has not changed as much as we would like it to.

I have been a member of this Parliament for 14 years and of another Parliament for seven years before that. I did exactly what Jenny Marra did on the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill—I let something go through on energy efficiency and then I moved an amendment. There are perfectly good reasons for doing that, and I think that it is totally unacceptable that there has been a concerted attempt by SNP members to attack Jenny Marra on the issue.

Today we celebrate the achievements of the pioneers of the 1940s who saw the potential of Scottish water and harnessed it in a way that changed energy production in Scotland for ever. The Hydro-Electric Development (Scotland) Act 1943—the brainchild of that great Secretary of State for Scotland, Tom Johnston—heralded a new dawn in the use of renewable energy for large-scale generation, and created thousands of jobs as well as an entirely new way of thinking about our greatest natural resource. That was a momentous achievement, so it is right in this anniversary year that we recognise the achievements of so many people in the 1940s and thereafter, which demonstrate what can be achieved through a shared agenda for positive change. There are currently 120 installed hydro generating stations across Scotland, which vary in generation capacity from more than 100MW to a few kilowatts, and which total more than 1,800MW of capacity and make an important contribution. Of course, capacity varies, depending on rainfall in any given season. As the Government highlighted in the context of the ROC banding review of 2011-12, a dip in renewable energy generation was attributed to “a fall in hydro generation due to much lower rainfall in 2010.” That should not act as a disincentive to providing subsidies through ROCs, given that new technologies can mitigate loss through preparation for periods of drought. The motion points in particular to the potential of pumped-storage hydro projects. Pumped-storage schemes involve two bodies of water, at different heights. During periods of low demand for power, electricity from other renewable sources can be used to pump water from the lower loch to the upper reservoir. The water is released later to create energy when demand is high. At present, there are four pumped-storage schemes in the UK, but as they were designed mainly to cope with brief imbalances in the grid, none has sufficient storage volume to generate at full capacity for an extended period. To ensure that hydro power continues to be seen as a valuable and innovative source of clean energy, pumped-storage plants must move towards longer running cycles. One example of a power station that is currently in planning that would be able to fulfil such a remit is SSE’s Coire Glas proposal. As the company has highlighted, there is a significant elevation of around 500m between the upper and lower reservoir sites over a relatively short distance, which makes the area ideal for development of pumped-storage system. If the plans come to fruition and consent is granted, Coire Glas will have an installed capacity of 600MW, will be capable of storing up to 30GW and at times of energy shortage will have a running time of up to 50 hours. It is predicted that building the scheme, with its higher-than-average elevation and deep lower underground cavern, will cost as much as £800 million. The decision rests with ministers but, as the Scottish Renewables briefing highlights, it is still unclear how pumped-storage hydro will be supported in the future. That makes investment decisions difficult and it is therefore important that the Department of Energy and Climate Change clarify whether support for pumped-storage hydro will be part of the electricity market reform process, and that it work closely with developers to ensure that support is suitable for unlocking the necessary investment. More generally, the Scottish Renewables briefing points out that hydro power currently receives higher levels of support under the renewables obligation in Scotland, where it receives 1 ROC, than it does in England and Wales, where it receives 0.7 ROC. However, it is still unclear how that higher level of support will be transposed into the UK-wide system that is proposed under electricity market reform. For development to continue, it is crucial that existing support levels for hydro power be retained within the feed-in tariff with contracts for difference. That point reminds me of the more general question that I raised in the recent electricity market reform debate on how current devolved ROC powers would operate under contracts for difference. Turning to micro-hydro power and community ownership, I note that one route to that is through the Forestry Commission Scotland, which is currently working with a number of energy developers to build wind and hydro projects on national forest land. An integral part of the project has been to ensure that communities benefit from such developments and are also able to pursue renewables projects of their own. Under the national forest land scheme, community organisations that submitted expression of interest forms by the deadline of 30 June 2012 may pursue a site if it is not already committed to a development partner, and communities can apply to purchase or lease land to develop renewable energy projects such as micro-hydro power systems that make the most of natural resources in the area. Community projects that receive planning permission could play an important role in providing a carbon-neutral, sustainable energy source that is efficient from day 1. As we move towards achievement of a low-carbon energy sector, we must develop a vision that not only promotes climate change objectives but harnesses the potential of communities that stand to benefit most. Micro-hydro power is a reliable and highly efficient way of generating electricity that functions as a small and clean electricity source in a decentralised energy system. In an 2008 article, Greenpeace highlighted the pressing need for decentralisation, and stated that the UK centralised energy sector was designed to meet the needs of a society that had not even heard of climate change. It also pointed out that the typical UK power plant was only 38 per cent efficient. We now know better and the capacity for change through subsidising and encouraging development of our hydro power stations is more apparent than ever. Hydroelectricity was the first form of electricity generation to bring the power of nature closer to the people. What could be more fitting than to use the technologies that have developed since 1943 to take it even closer by decentralising provision and creating a more diverse and reliable system? I am happy to join members in celebrating the progress that has been made to date, and in promoting our shared vision of a clean and sustainable energy future.

I congratulate James Kelly on introducing this important debate, and I welcome the Parkinson’s campaigners who are in the gallery today, some of whom I was pleased to speak to an hour or so ago. It is important for politicians and health professionals to listen to and learn from patients. The clearest message that came from the campaigners today was that Parkinson’s nurses are absolutely central to their care. To an extent, I was not surprised by that, because, in relation to many diseases, I have come across patients who say that the clinical nurse specialist is the person who really matters to them. For example, at last week’s meeting of the cross-party group on cancer, which was about brain tumours, people said that, with all of the problems that they suffered, the rock upon whom they depend is the clinical nurse specialist. Of course, a Parkinson’s clinical nurse specialist has specific functions, and I heard about those today. The campaigners impressed upon me the importance of ready access to the nurse specialist when there are any problems. In general, they said that the nurse would ensure that plenty of time was made available to discuss the issue that concerned them. The specific issue that I was asked to raise with the minister is funding for nurse specialists. We must pay tribute to Parkinson’s UK, which put a lot of pump-prime funding into new posts. The assurance that the campaigners and, indeed, MSPs, seek today is that the Government will ensure that health boards will pick up the funding in due course. That is the nature of the arrangement that Parkinson’s UK has come to with the various health boards. Clearly, it would be good to know about future funding. That issue is related to the number of nurses. We are told that the NICE guidelines suggest that there should be one nurse for every 300 patients with Parkinson’s. I know that, in Lothian, there are three nurses for 1,700 people with Parkinson’s, which suggests that there should be more. That said, the service in Lothian, as elsewhere, was highly praised by the people who spoke to me. We know how important clinical nurse specialists are in helping to join up care. People often talk about fragmented care, but the nurse specialist can liaise with all of the various health professionals and social care workers who might be involved, and can help to join up care for the patient.

I thank Margo MacDonald for making that important point. It is not unrelated to one of the many other roles of the clinical nurse specialist, which is to train and educate other health professionals. Part of that role may involve carers as well. I pay tribute to all the nurses, who are so highly valued by people with Parkinson’s disease. The motion encapsulates much important health policy. I congratulate James Kelly on formulating it and on managing to include issues such as patient-centred care, self-management and avoiding unnecessary hospital admissions. Those have all been great and important objectives of health policy for many years, although they have not always been successfully realised. The motion also mentions the neurological standards, and I am sure that the minister will address those in his winding-up speech. They have been important in driving up standards of care. I note—as others will, I am sure—that three of those standards are about Parkinson’s nurses and how all boards should have them as key members of the multidisciplinary team. I am glad that my own health board, NHS Lothian, does. However, as Margo MacDonald has said, there is always room for more. I hope that it will be possible for the minister to give us some positive messages about future funding for that vital role.

I am very pleased to be taking part in this debate, although the subject of separated young people seeking asylum is particularly emotive, and the accounts that many provide of their ordeal are both upsetting and disturbing. They are vulnerable young people who come to our country without the adult support that they require, and who often come here through necessity and sometimes by force. They desperately need structured help, and for that reason I am happy to be able to congratulate the guardianship pilot on its successes and achievements. The process of moving to a new country and adapting to a different culture is intimidating at the best of times, even for adults. Can members imagine how daunting it must be to people under 18 who may recently have been through the most traumatic experiences of their lives? The value of a friendly face who understands the situation and is readily available for advice and emotional support cannot be overstated. In the first independent evaluation of the service, which was published in December 2011, 36 per cent of the young people interviewed were noted as having mental health difficulties ranging from anxiety, through psychosomatic symptoms to post-traumatic stress. When there is such a diverse range of physical and mental health issues to be addressed, it is essential that guardians are present to help the young person make sense of the situation and deal with both immigration and welfare processes. Neil Berry mentioned evidence that we have received that about a third of the young people in question have been trafficked. In its submission for the Public Petitions Committee’s investigation into child sexual exploitation in Scotland, the Scottish guardianship service highlighted that young migrants are also exceptionally vulnerable to child sexual exploitation when they are here. Such youngsters face a wider range of barriers to accessing advocacy and support than would otherwise be the case. For any victim, articulating the harrowing experience of trafficking or of past trauma is at best a difficult and emotional experience, but when English is not their first language, it is an even greater problem. If left unaided, the young person may also be open to exploitation through isolation and loneliness. As the guardianship service emphasises, the young person may feel drawn to adults who are from a similar cultural background, even when the subsequent relationship becomes exploitative. People can perhaps relate to that if they put themselves in the position of those individuals, who often have no experience of the world outside their home countries. The majority who meet guardianship services are only 15 to 17 years old and come from 7 countries, including Afghanistan, Vietnam, Nigeria and Iran. We know that up to five separated young people arrive on Scottish shores each month and claim asylum. Tragically, as others have mentioned, a significant proportion of those youngsters have experience of being trafficked. It is vital that the best interests of those children are put at the forefront of future policy decisions, which can happen only if services are developed with and for the young people themselves. The difficult decisions in the process of asylum, as well as welfare issues in respect of housing, education and health, can be shared with the guardian, who will help to shoulder some of the burden. As a result, young people can focus on what life should really be about, and can find their own sense of place and a social circle, as well as building up their skills. Of course, it is not just the guardians who matter. Neil Bibby mentioned the evidence from Barnardo’s, which emphasises that many trafficked children in Scotland are not receiving the specialised support services that they need in order to recover and integrate into the local community. Obviously, a range of services need to respond to those service gaps. Neil Bibby also asked questions about the police and trafficking, which is clearly a central issue both in terms of identifying young people who have been trafficked and in terms of tracking down and charging the people who are guilty of trafficking. I believe that in that, training for the police is crucial. I understand that a report has come out today that highlights the importance of training for not just the police but other professionals, which will, I believe, be the subject of debate at the parliamentary cross-party group on human trafficking meeting at 5.30 today. The first annual independent evaluation of the guardianship service highlighted that the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child specifically recommends that separated children be provided with a guardian as standard, and called for the UK Government to introduce a statutory guardianship scheme for all young people who go through the asylum process alone. The pilot service in Scotland is the first of its kind in the UK; I hope that it will be replicated across the whole UK in the very near future. The evaluation was essential because it provided an opportunity to review the experiences of the young people and to come up with suggestions about how the process may be taken forward even more successfully in the future. It is welcome news that the Scottish Government will continue to fund the service for a further three years. I hope that, over that period, it will go from strength to strength. The service evaluation highlights the case of Ali, who became separated from his family in the immigration process. On attempting to enter the UK in Glasgow, he was refused asylum and told that he had no grounds to appeal. At just 15 years old, he was offered the help of the guardianship service, which then sought a second legal opinion. That led to his appeal being accepted, and Ali now has the chance to rebuild his life with the support network that has been built up through interaction with his guardian. Without that help, he would perhaps have been forced to return to the situation from which he had fled. That graphic example sums up the success of the Scottish guardianship service. I congratulate it on its achievements so far and wish it all the best for the future.

I should first confess that, over the past seven years, I have probably done less on planning than on any other policy area, apart from rural affairs, but I enjoyed reading the national planning framework 3, the Scottish planning policy consultation document and the Official Report of the minister’s appearance before the Local Government and Regeneration Committee. I certainly welcome much in the documents. I think that it is generally admitted that the most significant change in Scottish planning policy relates to onshore wind and that everybody welcomes what is proposed. I also welcome what the national planning framework says about the need to develop infrastructure for the expansion of offshore wind. I particularly thank the minister for giving Leith a mention on page 25, and certainly look forward to offshore wind manufacturers starting in Leith—I hope before too long. In general, the new national developments should be welcomed, because nearly all of them seem to be related to renewable energy and climate change. That does not take away from some of the wider concerns about climate change that Patrick Harvie and Sarah Boyack have raised. The issue of housing has been raised. The more generous allocation of land that is recommended for housing is another important part of Scottish planning policy. Although in general I welcome the documents, it is one thing to have a policy and another thing to implement it. When the minister gave evidence, he said that the “interpretation of planning policy across the country is too variable.”—[Official Report, Local Government and Regeneration Committee, 22 May 2013; c 2163.] That raises the issue that always runs through planning debates of the tensions between different players in the planning system, which featured strongly in debates around the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006. There are tensions between the community, local authorities, the Government—and, in 2006, there were also the relative powers of the Government and Parliament. I should tell the minister that, at the time, his back benchers, including Bruce Crawford, argued that the Parliament should have the final say on the national planning framework—I am not sure whether Bruce Crawford would say that today. I suppose that my own prejudice would be to give communities a bit more power and influence. There was progress on early involvement in the 2006 act, with the participation statement in the NPF and a lot of engagement, but communities would probably like a bigger say. Perhaps it will surprise the minister and others if I say that—possibly—a bit more power should sometimes be given to the Government. I was concerned when the current Government weakened the requirements on local government to notify the Government, which were quite strong in 2006. Such requirements keep a check on what can sometimes be an arbitrary local government power. Perhaps Sarah Boyack will forgive me for reminding members—I suppose that I am telling a lot of people who were not here at the time—that in 2006 she supported a community right of notification. Indeed, she voted against me and the Government of the day on that very matter—something that I know would never happen with SNP back benchers these days. However, she had a point, because we need checks and balances in the system, and it worries me that nobody can really stop local government doing something that it wants to do. The other tensions are around land use. I have only time to mention tensions around economic development, housing and green space. Patrick Harvie and Sarah Boyack made good points about the way in which “sustainable economic growth” has replaced “sustainable development”, which is the term that is used in the 2006 act. Economic growth is also a stronger material consideration in Scottish planning policy. Obviously, economic growth is important—I am not altogether with Patrick Harvie on that one—but there is a fear about economic growth crowding out other interests. I am slightly nervous about that, along with Sarah Boyack and Patrick Harvie. I am not quite sure why we had to change the language. I very much welcome the strong statement about green space on page 39 of the Scottish planning policy document. However, interestingly, there is sometimes a tension between housing and green space. I have an example of that in my constituency, at city park, which used to be the football ground of the Spartans Football Club. It is hard for me to oppose a housing application, because we need more housing. However, although there is all the land at the waterfront in my constituency that could be used for housing, it looks as if a very highly valued piece of green space might disappear. I think that the words on page 39 are important—it is really a presumption against developing open space. However, how do we make sure that local government follows Scottish planning policy? That leads back to the point that if there are no notification requirements and there is no community right of notification, how do we enforce Scottish planning policy? I have only one minute left, but I want to mention Margaret Mitchell’s amendment. Enforcement is very important: it is key to maintaining public confidence. I have another issue in my constituency—this time on enforcement. Recently, one of the tram contractors used Shrub Place, which is part of Leith Walk, to dump all sorts of materials, which caused local residents great distress. It had no planning permission for that activity so, as is routine, it was asked to put in a planning application. In the meantime, the work continued. That concerns me. The public would feel much better if work had to stop when someone did something without planning permission. I seem to remember from the 2006 act that a stop notice can be put on, but that never seems to happen. Enforcement is very important. I am glad that the minister has accepted Margaret Mitchell’s amendment. I was going to say something about unconventional gas extraction, but I see that my six minutes are up. I tend to agree with what Patrick Harvie said about that.

I have apologised to the minister, but I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, and to Hanzala Malik, because I have to leave to chair the parliamentary cross-party group on cancer, which starts soon. I congratulate Hanzala Malik on lodging an important motion, and I congratulate Amina—the Muslim Women’s Resource Centre on all the great work that it has done over several years. However, in the context of this debate, I congratulate it particularly on its I speak for myself campaign. I have no doubt that other members have looked into that and have seen the film that is available online. I certainly hope that as many people as possible will watch that film and promote it so that other people become aware of it. Amina’s campaign has always been important for the reasons that Hanzala Malik gave, but I think that we would agree that it is especially timely, given the appalling crime in Woolwich. As we all know, people of all religions and none commit crimes, but a particular crime can never be an excuse for turning on an innocent community that happens to share the criminal’s religion. Unfortunately, that is what has happened over the past few weeks. I was at a community workshop in my constituency two weeks ago. It is a great group, which is working to promote race equality and integration in north Edinburgh, but it was very sad to hear one of the Muslim women at that recent meeting say that she had lived in her community in north Edinburgh for six years and had never, until the week before, been harassed. She described a terrifying incident that happened to her when she was on her bicycle. We have to face facts: there has been a recent rise in racism and Islamophobia, and the prejudice and stereotyping that we know exist have been exacerbated. We have to address that problem, and Amina’s great campaign can help us to do that. We need to listen to individual Muslim women and men, and we need to relate to them as much as possible. That is what the message of integration is about, so that we can live together in harmony and break down the barriers, prejudices and stereotypes that get in the way of our living in harmony. In a way, I have been reminded of what happened in 2005 in the wake of the London bombings, when there was the same kind of increase in racism and Islamophobia. In the wake of that, a group in my constituency, the Pakeeza women’s group—I hope that Hanzala Malik will not mind my mentioning this—produced a booklet, “Pride and Prejudice: Beyond the Veil”. I was reminded of that because the women in Pakeeza were trying to do the kind of thing that the women at Amina are trying to do. They were trying to say, “This is the kind of person I am. See beyond the fact that I might or might not wear a veil. See beyond the stereotyping and the prejudices that are so common in society and in the media. I am a human being. I have interests and am just like you in many ways.” They were also saying in the booklet, just as the Amina campaign is saying, “I do have a particular religion and I want you to know about it”, because, of course, a lot of the prejudice and stereotyping is to do with the Islamic faith. The faith is misrepresented and is associated with violence and so on, which is totally inappropriate. Let us listen to those women. I hope that the media will also listen, because much responsibility rests with the media for reporting in unhelpful, prejudiced and derogatory ways. We should all work together to challenge myths and stereotypes and to bring about a society in which we can live in harmony. I hope that we can do that more and more at community level, as I am pleased to say is happening in my constituency.

I am very pleased to speak in the first land reform debate in the Parliament for 10 years. As Christian Allard said, land reform is a process, not an event. He was, of course, quoting my former ministerial colleague John Sewel, who in 1997 threw himself into leading the process of developing radical proposals on land reform. It was those proposals that we enacted in the exciting first four years of the Scottish Parliament in what was some of the most exciting legislation that we had at the time. I think that the process stalled in 2007, and it has really only started up again with the land reform review group’s report, which is the occasion for the debate. I note the Government amendment, which says that it is an independent report, but when he winds up the debate the minister must answer the point that Alex Fergusson made. He was quoting Jim Hunter, who said that the Scottish Government was involved in the work. We need some explanation of that. The central problem with the report is that it is focused—and, in my opinion, too narrowly focused—on “communities rather than relationships between individuals.” Of course communities are important—although, too often, it is just the influence of communities that is referred to in the report—but relationships are absolutely crucial. I am talking about relationships between individuals and the land in general and among individuals on the land in particular. Dealing with those relationships must mean addressing tenure and other related issues. The problems are well known and have been cited by more than one speaker: 10 per cent of the land is owned by 16 individuals and 432 individuals own half of Scotland. I repeat the much-quoted words of Jim Hunter, who described Scotland as having the “most concentrated, most inequitable ... and most undemocratic land ownership system in the entire developed world.” That completely contradicts the idea that we like to have of Scotland being a more egalitarian country. Despite that, the report backs off important measures such as tenant farmers having the right to buy their own land. That is why “diversification” is the most important word in the Labour motion. There are many other issues that I do not have time to deal with, but I briefly mention that the Scottish Affairs Committee at Westminster is looking into the issue of who owns the land in Scotland, because we do not seem to have very full knowledge of that. I noted that the Prime Minister said that he was going to help in that process, which led to another Twitter headline about the Tories doing more for land reform than the SNP, but I will not comment on that. It is clear that community ownership is a very important part of the agenda, notwithstanding what I have said. I welcome the comments that my leader, Johann Lamont, made about that at the Labour conference. Under part 3 of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003, an extension is allowed when the landowner is not a willing buyer. All that she was saying was that we should use that legislation to the full, if it is in the public interest. Part of the issue is about extending the provisions to urban areas, which is a particular interest of mine. I have come across a few issues to do with public land in urban areas and the difficulties of acquiring it. I think that the report is absolutely right to say that the state aid rules must be addressed. My understanding is that they apply only when there is a commercial competitor and that there are also general block exemption regulations in Europe. All that needs to be clarified so that it is much easier to access the large areas of public land that could be put to community use in urban areas. I have half a minute left. If I can be indulged, I will say something that nobody else will say in this debate. The City of Edinburgh Council quotes the 2003 act in order to prevent signs in parks from saying “No dogs allowed”. I have looked into the issue and there is no express right of access for dogs under that act. I hope that the Government can somehow clarify the situation so that we can have some parks in Edinburgh and indeed in Leith where dogs are not allowed without the City of Edinburgh Council quoting land reform legislation.

I congratulate Patrick Harvie on lodging an important motion on protection of tenants’ deposits. It has become an increasingly important issue over the past 10 years as the number of people in the private rented sector has doubled, and it will become even more important in the next 10 years, as many more people will use the private rented sector, either from choice or from necessity. Of course, many of those people are living on the edge of poverty, if not in poverty, so security about their deposit is important for them. We have heard many examples of malpractice; briefings for the debate give more examples, and the one from Citizens Advice Scotland is particularly good in that regard. We should pay tribute to CAS for the great work that it does in this area. However, I notice that, in a recent report, it highlighted that a substantial number of cases have come to it—especially from younger tenants—in which there have been distressing accounts of landlords who have made unreasonable requests for payment relating to general wear and tear. Often, those cases involve entire deposits going unrepaid due to on-going disputes. It was that kind of case and misuse of the system that led to the legislation on tenancy deposit schemes in the Housing (Scotland), Act 2006, which was—if I may be permitted to mention the fact—piloted through Parliament by Johann Lamont and me. Of course, the scheme was implemented only in 2012. There is no doubt that the scheme can work well. In principle, it is an excellent system that protects the rights of tenants and avoids the sometimes complex legal cases that have, on occasion, resulted from disputes over deposits. However, the fact of the matter is that many thousands of landlords have not registered. In a sense, that is the main reason for this debate. What can be done about that? First, tenants must be aware of their rights—in particular, the right to report their landlord’s not having enrolled in one of the three schemes. Safe Deposits Scotland tells us that 55 per cent of tenants are not aware that money from deposits must, by law, be placed in a tenancy deposit scheme. It seems that there are some problems around practical implementation. It is not even clear—perhaps the minister can tell us in her closing speech—to whom, precisely, tenants are supposed to report their landlord. It also concerns me that tenants cannot find out whether their landlord is registered in a tenancy deposit scheme before they take on a tenancy. That would be useful information for a prospective tenant and might well influence their decision whether to take on a tenancy. We clearly have to focus on landlords, as well. I assume that they are all aware of the law, but some may plead ignorance. Perhaps a short high-profile campaign by the Scottish Government would remove any doubts about that. I imagine, however, that landlords are all aware of the law—the key issue seems to be enforcement. What is to happen if a tenant has reported their landlord to whomever they should report the landlord? There should be strict sanctions on the landlord. I suggest that landlords’ registration could be removed if they fail to register with a scheme, or registration with a landlord scheme could be dependent on registration with a tenancy deposit scheme. I would like the landlord registration scheme to be linked better to the tenancy deposit arrangements. Of course, other issues are mentioned in the motion, including regulation of letting agents. Illegal fees are being charged. Two weeks ago, we heard about another issue in the private rented sector in relation to electrical safety. On all those issues, we must take a hard line against rogue agencies and private landlords who abuse the system and their tenants. We would do an immense disservice to many families and individuals—who might rent privately through necessity or choice—if we do not take a tough line. Tenants’ rights must be protected, which is why I am happy to support the motion in Patrick Harvie’s name.

Does the minister agree that the small number of extra diplomats—which would be matched by the expense of Scotland having to pay for diplomats abroad—would be far outweighed by the threat to financial services, among other jobs in Edinburgh, as a result of independence?

I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on lodging this important motion and I look forward to the rest of the debate, including the minister’s speech, because the last statement of the Scottish Government’s position on the matter that I can see is in the “Better Heart Disease and Stroke Care Action Plan” from 2009, which said that boards have to follow the advice of cardiac managed clinical networks on defibrillators. I do not know what advice was given to different boards, so I look forward to an update. The action plan was interesting in presenting the evidence that existed on the matter. It referred to an evaluation of the scheme in England, which was really ahead of us at that time. That evidence suggested that AEDs were very effective in busy public places, and it looked as if there were also promising results for community first responders. That was clearly very important for Scotland, because many areas of Scotland rely on community first responders. I hope that AEDs are available to them. Another dimension to all this in Scotland is the rural issue, which the motion refers to. I was interested to read about the AEDs in Scotland campaign, which is based in Fort William. Other campaigns are mentioned in the motion, and I will refer to them in a moment, but that campaign has argued for AEDs to be readily available in public places in communities where ambulances cannot reach someone with a cardiac arrest within five minutes of the 999 call, and for AEDs to be carried in all police and fire service vehicles. A map of availability, to which Margaret Mitchell referred in general terms, is shown on the AEDs in Scotland website and the online AED locator. It indicates that the majority of the devices are already kept in more remote locations. However, as members will realise, the reaction time of the emergency services might not be delayed simply as a result of geography; towns with a high population density or compromised road networks might also have slower responses. That is why further investment in urban areas is also essential. The motion draws attention to the issue of young people who become victims of SADS—I say “SADS” for the sake of speed; everyone knows what it means because of Margaret Mitchell’s speech. As the AEDs in Scotland campaign highlights, the majority of the people affected by the condition are between the ages of 12 and 35, but children as young as six years old have been victims of it. We need to examine the case for having defibrillators for use in the education environment. The motion rightly points to the great work done by individuals such as Samantha Clinton and to her involvement with the big shock campaign in raising awareness of cardiac arrest in young people among young people and their parents. The recent news that North Lanarkshire Council will install a defibrillator in every secondary school is indeed welcome. The initiative is part of the British Heart Foundation’s heartstart schools programme, which aims to teach all students in Scotland basic life-saving skills by 2015. As we have heard, all 24 secondary schools in North Lanarkshire will be fitted with the machines before the end of March 2014, to ensure that any incident in which a schoolchild or employee suffers from cardiac failure will be met with a timely response until medical help is sought. The heartstart programme is particularly useful as it allows young people to recognise the early signs of an oncoming cardiac arrest, such as dizziness and chest pains, and teaches them to respond in a calm and responsible manner or take appropriate action if they require help. It is important to widen the debate to that more general campaign, because clearly it is a matter of not just AEDs but emergency life support more generally, which the British Heart Foundation campaign highlights. I believe that the Government has awarded £110,000 for a fund to develop sustainable models to create increased provision of emergency life-support training in secondary schools more generally by working with designated local authorities. I would welcome more information about that, because I have not read any more about it, apart from the generality.

I ought to add that part of the training is about CPR, which might also be required. That wider education of young people is crucial, but having the devices in schools is clearly an important part of that.

Dennis Robertson was right to say that we have the best homelessness legislation in Europe; Alex Johnstone was also right to say that building houses is not enough, vitally important though it is. That is why the prevention agenda has been very important for the past 10 years, since the homelessness legislation was passed. It was also important in relation to the recommendations of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, which, by chance, was doing a study on homelessness at the same time as the Equal Opportunities Committee was doing its inquiry. I will not go on about the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee recommendations, but one of them interested me. It said: “the Scottish Government should consider the development of a measurement tool for homelessness prevention work.” That is an interesting recommendation. The intention is to drive up standards and ensure more consistency across Scotland. I would be interested to know whether the Government has taken the suggestion on board, as it is quite an important one. Let us concentrate on the Equal Opportunities Committee’s report. As other members have said, the report emphasises mediation, respite and education, among other things. The emphasis on mediation was particularly strong, as others have said. Edinburgh Cyrenians said in a recent report, referring to young people: “thousands of them could be saved from the trauma of homelessness” if there was adequate investment in mediation services. Suzanne Fitzpatrick not only emphasised to the Equal Opportunities Committee the importance of mediation but, perhaps more interesting, pointed out that that was a key feature of youth homelessness services in England. It was perhaps surprising that she also said that we could learn a lot from those services in England, as we are generally leading the field in Europe on homelessness. However, there are things that we could learn from elsewhere. She said that the bespoke youth homelessness service in England is something that we can learn from, so we should look at it in more detail. Along with others, such as Quarriers, Suzanne Fitzpatrick also emphasised the importance of respite. She also said that we should concentrate on developing parenting skills in relation to teenagers. Perhaps the Government could take up that idea in its parenting strategy. Education features strongly in the report. One of the recommendations is that we should find out why schools are not doing prevention work and remove the obstacles. That is an important recommendation. I was particularly struck by what Michaela Smith, from my local authority, said about that. She said that we must start the work long before the young people are 16 but that that is difficult for people who work in the homelessness service. A lot of the responsibility therefore lies with the schools. Michaela Smith also said that peer education is important. That reminded me of an excellent peer education project that I saw in Edinburgh at the Rock Trust, which used to be in my constituency but is now in Marco Biagi’s constituency. A year or two ago, the trust was working with third and fourth-year students at secondary schools. I do not know whether that work is still going on, but the approach was very effective at the time and could be copied by others. There is quite a lot in the report about care leavers, who are a key group in relation to this agenda. The recommendation is for effective care leaver protocols and not discharging care leavers through the homeless route, as some local authorities do. There is also the issue of whether people should leave care at 16, which the children’s commissioner raised in his report “Sweet 16? The Age of Leaving Care in Scotland”. That is another matter, although it is relevant. The minister referred to the housing support regulations and said that we must meet the housing support needs of certain homeless applicants. If she has time in her winding-up speech, I would be interested to hear what the criteria are for who should get housing support. Everyone who is unintentionally homeless must be assessed, but which of those thousands of people are entitled to the housing support service? It would be interesting to hear that, as it is not clear to me. The minister also referred to the supported accommodation implementation group, whose recommendations were interesting. I will pick out two of them. First, the group—like many others—emphasised the importance of consistency of approach across Scotland, which is a recurring theme in this and other agendas. Secondly, the group recommended moving-in grants. The committee agreed that grants should be paid on the day that somebody moves in. That is an important practical issue that I hope the Government is addressing. That reminds me of the importance that Margaret McDougall attached to voluntary organisations. In West Pilton, in my constituency, Fresh Start helps people with a new tenancy to get the equipment and furniture that they need. There are other organisations that help, too—we should remember all of them as well. Central to the prevention agenda are the housing options approach, which many members have spoken about, and the hubs. I do not think that I have much time left, so I will not add anything about them.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I refer—for the last time, I promise—to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s report, which said that we should ensure that the housing options service is consistent throughout Scotland. That is becoming a bit of a recurring theme for me, as it is for lots of people who have written about this agenda. There is loads of good practice in Scotland, but we must ensure that it is taken up throughout the country. Although Alex Johnstone was right to say that building houses is not enough, it is an indispensable part of the agenda. I ask the Scottish Government to look at the grant per house for housing associations, as the number of social rented houses is dropping off and is likely to fall off a cliff in two or three years’ time if the grant level is not restored. It is not me saying that, but housing associations in my constituency. To the UK Government I would say, “Scrap the bedroom tax,” because that makes the whole agenda particularly difficult when it comes to allocations. Many homeless people, if not most of them, are single people to whom two-bedroom properties cannot be allocated, and councils such as City of Edinburgh Council have hardly any one-bedroom properties. The report raises the issue of shared tenancies, partly in the context of dealing with isolation. If people want a shared tenancy, that should certainly be an option, but crucially—the committee is right about this—that should happen only when the tenants give their consent.

If we are to have shared tenancies, we need to change the tenancy arrangements, because it is not possible to have a shared tenancy under a Scottish secure tenancy. That is an area in which the Scottish Government requires to take some more action. I end by thanking and congratulating the Equal Opportunities Committee.

I congratulate Clare Adamson on securing this important debate. Like her, I commend the work of the Electrical Safety Council, including its submission to the recent consultation on the private rented sector to which I will refer in a moment. A general point to make at the beginning of the debate is that the Scottish housing quality standard has done great work for the social rented sector. We need to have, as soon as possible, a similar standard for the private rented sector. Clearly, issues to do with electricity should be an important part of that standard. A number of striking facts come through in the Electrical Safety Council’s response to the Government consultation that I just referred to. Although praise is given for the work of the PRS strategy group thus far, the council is keen to highlight that stronger emphasis is needed on improving safety conditions within the sector and encouraging landlords and tenants to access information. As the ESC points out in its response: “a Populus study in February 2012 found that 29% of landlords and 40% of tenants do not know who is responsible for electrical safety within their properties.” When there is so much scope for wear and tear, particularly in properties with a high turnover of residents, there is also scope for poor maintenance and serious injury, therefore standards must be more explicit and enforcement must be more effective. One way to ensure that standards are properly enforced is to provide a mechanism through which tenants may access support when the landlord fails to meet their pre-stated obligations. That could be done by strengthening the private rented housing panel, which was set up in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006—with which I had a little to do. That measure is supported by the Electrical Safety Council and would go some way towards enforcing standards. The private rented housing panel already provides a vital mechanism for tenants to seek redress if their landlord fails to meet the repairing standard, but it could go much further in ensuring that the standards are more explicit and detailed. That would give out a clear message to landlords that compliance will be strictly enforced when the safety and wellbeing of tenants are put in jeopardy. The council goes further in suggesting that it might be advisable to allow third-party referrals for tenants who might not have the confidence to come forward to the panel with a case. I am inclined to back that suggestion, as it means that the issues of those who might not complain—for whatever reason—will be acknowledged and addressed. It is important that a new strengthened private rented housing panel has the ability to process cases efficiently and quickly, ensuring that any failure to meet the repairing standard is challenged with the threat of removal from the register for landlords. The tenant information pack could also be an important part of the way forward. The new tenant information pack, which was introduced as part of the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Act 2011, requires that landlords provide a standard document when each lease is initiated. It was a welcome improvement. The TIP not only reinforces the responsibility of the landlord to provide clear and fair information at the commencement of a tenancy but gives residents a reference throughout their occupancy that helps them to hold landlords to account. Clear guidance such as that is essential in providing reassurance to residents, particularly if they feel that they have a case to refer to the private rented housing panel. In the TIP, there is reference to electrical safety and to the ESC recommendations. However, little detail is given on the frequency of inspections and electrical tests. In its response to the TIP, the ESC suggested that a rule of five-yearly inspections be set, but that is not reflected in the body of the TIP as finalised by the Government. The council, in its response, suggested that the pack should include questions around that as well as specific information about portable appliance testing and residual current devices. The Scottish Government would do well to heed the advice of the Electrical Safety Council. I support all the council’s recommendations and I hope that they can be included in the minimum standards for private rented housing that we hope to see soon.

I congratulate Clare Adamson on securing this important debate. Like her, I commend the work of the Electrical Safety Council, including its submission to the recent consultation on the private rented sector to which I will refer in a moment. A general point to make at the beginning of the debate is that the Scottish housing quality standard has done great work for the social rented sector. We need to have, as soon as possible, a similar standard for the private rented sector. Clearly, issues to do with electricity should be an important part of that standard. A number of striking facts come through in the Electrical Safety Council’s response to the Government consultation that I just referred to. Although praise is given for the work of the PRS strategy group thus far, the council is keen to highlight that stronger emphasis is needed on improving safety conditions within the sector and encouraging landlords and tenants to access information. As the ESC points out in its response: “a Populus study in February 2012 found that 29% of landlords and 40% of tenants do not know who is responsible for electrical safety within their properties.” When there is so much scope for wear and tear, particularly in properties with a high turnover of residents, there is also scope for poor maintenance and serious injury, therefore standards must be more explicit and enforcement must be more effective. One way to ensure that standards are properly enforced is to provide a mechanism through which tenants may access support when the landlord fails to meet their pre-stated obligations. That could be done by strengthening the private rented housing panel, which was set up in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006—with which I had a little to do. That measure is supported by the Electrical Safety Council and would go some way towards enforcing standards. The private rented housing panel already provides a vital mechanism for tenants to seek redress if their landlord fails to meet the repairing standard, but it could go much further in ensuring that the standards are more explicit and detailed. That would give out a clear message to landlords that compliance will be strictly enforced when the safety and wellbeing of tenants are put in jeopardy. The council goes further in suggesting that it might be advisable to allow third-party referrals for tenants who might not have the confidence to come forward to the panel with a case. I am inclined to back that suggestion, as it means that the issues of those who might not complain—for whatever reason—will be acknowledged and addressed. It is important that a new strengthened private rented housing panel has the ability to process cases efficiently and quickly, ensuring that any failure to meet the repairing standard is challenged with the threat of removal from the register for landlords. The tenant information pack could also be an important part of the way forward. The new tenant information pack, which was introduced as part of the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Act 2011, requires that landlords provide a standard document when each lease is initiated. It was a welcome improvement. The TIP not only reinforces the responsibility of the landlord to provide clear and fair information at the commencement of a tenancy but gives residents a reference throughout their occupancy that helps them to hold landlords to account. Clear guidance such as that is essential in providing reassurance to residents, particularly if they feel that they have a case to refer to the private rented housing panel. In the TIP, there is reference to electrical safety and to the ESC recommendations. However, little detail is given on the frequency of inspections and electrical tests. In its response to the TIP, the ESC suggested that a rule of five-yearly inspections be set, but that is not reflected in the body of the TIP as finalised by the Government. The council, in its response, suggested that the pack should include questions around that as well as specific information about portable appliance testing and residual current devices. The Scottish Government would do well to heed the advice of the Electrical Safety Council. I support all the council’s recommendations and I hope that they can be included in the minimum standards for private rented housing that we hope to see soon.

I was pleased to see the minister working constructively with the UK Government, although I was slightly surprised by his rather uncritical motion. To be fair, in his speech, he went on to criticise the lack of detail and the time that it is all taking. The Labour amendment is more critical and broadens out the debate to deal with the issues that many of our constituents are concerned about. Labour at Westminster has certainly been emphasising those, which is why it has introduced proposals on energy bills and fuel poverty, which to a significant extent flows from high energy bills. Our amendment is also critical of the lack of “measures to reduce ... demand” and the failure to “facilitate the growth of community ownership of renewables”, which we think is important. We could have added the UK Government’s failure to set a target for decarbonising the electricity sector by 2030, which is something that Ed Miliband championed a long time ago; to be fair, the Scottish Government has supported that, too. It is important to set the issue in the wider context of UK policies, because the area is substantially reserved. Two other Labour Party proposals in London are significant for the agenda. The first is the proposal to ensure that energy companies pool the power that they generate in order to deal with the opaque and complex way in which energy is sold; and the second is a proposal to toughen the regulatory regime to ensure that energy companies pass on savings when wholesale prices fall. There is a difficult interface between reserved and devolved areas; at the end of my speech I will try to ask some questions about that. One area that is clearly devolved is the emissions performance standard, but as we all know, through a legislative consent motion we handed that over to the UK Parliament—at least for the time being. Again, there seems to be no criticism of that from the Scottish Government, but I know that my colleagues in London have been expressing concern about the level at which it is being set by the UK Government. Many people have said that it may well facilitate a dash for gas. It is important to contrast gas and renewables because we all know the people who question renewables, saying that at a UK level they are unaffordable. Indeed, that includes some colleagues of the Conservative members in this chamber—although, to be fair, the Conservative group in Scotland does not have that hostility to renewable energy. Two points should be made about gas and renewables. First, the UK Committee on Climate Change has said that if we go for the dash for gas and have a gas-dominated market, consumers’ bills will be £600 more expensive than if we go for renewables. We should keep repeating that to all those who are sceptical about renewables. Secondly, we should also read the report by Cambridge Econometrics, which says that if we go for offshore wind as distinct from gas, 100,000 jobs will be created across the UK and there will be a growth in gross domestic product of 0.8 per cent. Those are important points, and I hope that Conservative colleagues here will make them to their colleagues at Westminster. There are two pillars of reform, of course: doing something about energy security through capacity markets—I will not say anything about that, partly because I do not really understand it; and contracts for difference, which we have heard a lot more about. They are lacking in detail, as the minister said, but I think that they are right in principle although I note the point that has been made elsewhere that they are partly designed to help the UK support nuclear power without falling foul of state aid rules. Be that as it may, their primary function is to incentivise investment—particularly in renewables, of course, but to an extent also in nuclear in the rest of the UK. We are told that we need £110 billion of investment this decade. That is why it is important that we get on with this quickly and find out what the strike prices are. I agree entirely with what the minister said about carbon capture and storage. Clearly, that is a key area where that information is needed to give investors certainty, but we want it in all the renewables areas as well. As in the past, I give credit to the Scottish Government for all that it has done in relation to renewable energy. However, I want to try to understand the situation a bit better. I have taken an interest in ROCs for renewable energy, and my general understanding is that ROCs for new investment will end in 2017. I noticed a point in a House of Commons research paper, albeit one that was written a few months ago. I do not have time to quote it all, but it basically said that the Scottish Government was expressing some uncertainty about contracts for difference. It quoted the Scottish Government as saying that it is “not yet in a position to make a decision on whether, and to what extent, the RO Scotland should be closed to new generation from 2017”. Perhaps the minister can deal with that issue in his closing speech, because it is not clear to me whether ROCs may continue after 2017. Given that there is a strong devolved element to ROCs, which I have noted in relation to biomass as well as some other energy sources, will there also be a devolved element to contracts for difference? Those are areas about which I have a certain amount of uncertainty. I think that I have half a minute left so I have time to mention a point from the UK Government’s electricity market reform policy overview. In the section on devolved nations, it says: “Scottish Ministers have agreed to a statutory consultation role in the transition in 2027 to the operation of a certificate purchase scheme (also known as a fixed ROC scheme) in Scotland.” To me, that is totally incomprehensible, so if the minister has time to explain that in his closing speech, I would be grateful.

I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing the debate and, of course, Citizens Advice Scotland on its “Voices from the frontline” reports. CAS has produced several such reports, but the one that is highlighted in the motion is “Voices from the frontline ... Digital by default” so I will concentrate on that, plus the one that has, by chance, come out today, which is called “Offline and left behind: Digital exclusion amongst Scotland’s CAB clients”. Both reports deal with the same theme. I agree with most of what Christina McKelvie said about welfare reform, apart from the constitutional context in which she placed what she said. Today’s debate is particularly about the digital issue. In the report that was published today, “Offline and left behind”, we are reminded that a total of 76 per cent of CAB clients said that they would struggle to apply for a benefit online, and that almost three quarters of CAB clients said that they would struggle to apply for a job online. Those are the basic facts that underlie today’s debate. Some of that is about training and skills, but there is also a fundamental issue around access. Today’s report also tells us that only 54 per cent of CAB clients have an internet connection at home. That should not really surprise us, because those of us who were working on that issue quite recently will remember that the Office of Communications “Communications Market Report” highlighted that only 50 per cent of the whole adult population of Glasgow has fixed broadband. There are clearly issues of training and access: although the aim of getting more people online is a good one, the UK Government’s target of moving 80 per cent of benefit applications online in a short time is worrying and—to be frank—misguided and wrong. It is not just the accessibility to benefit claims that is at stake; it is the way in which unemployed people apply for new positions. We are, in effect, seeing penalisation of people who have not been given the ability to navigate a relatively complex online system, and it is being done in a way that undermines their efforts and reinforces the notion that they have been left out of society altogether. Where is the justice or fairness in that? The extent of the penalisation of employment prospects through the shift towards digital is underlined in the “Digital by default” report that is highlighted in the motion. CAS cites a body of evidence that “showed instances of people being penalised at the Jobcentre for not applying for jobs online. This was even found to have happened when people had applied for jobs in writing or by phone due to their inability to use a computer.” Organisations that provide information and advice for concerned claimants will undoubtedly have a great deal more to deal with during the coming period of transition to the new online system. It is therefore essential that bodies such as Citizens Advice Scotland be supported and properly equipped to cope with the change. The Department for Work and Pensions has stated that it will provide face-to-face contact with claimants completing a form in exceptional circumstances, but it still needs to be made absolutely clear to the public what those circumstances will be, and they must be defined realistically and sensitively. As Christina McKelvie did, I pay tribute to the work of all the citizens advice bureaux in Edinburgh and Leith. I know that several people who work in them have been involved in the reports and I pay particular tribute to them. Libraries are often cited as a place where people can go, but there are issues about availability of libraries, with 200 public libraries closing across the UK last year—although I am not sure how many of those were in Scotland. We must ensure that changes are implemented with respect to individual circumstances and we must argue for a framework of provision that is digital by design rather than by digital by default, and we must work to tackle issues of accessibility rather than simply ignoring the immense challenges that are faced by those who lack computer skills, who do not have access to a computer, or both. In conclusion, we should consider the case of the 60-year-old client who was sanctioned for two weeks on the basis that he had left no digital trace of his job search, but who had been applying in person and over the phone. When he asked how he would eat for two weeks, the adviser told him that that was not the jobcentre’s problem. That cannot become standard practice when budgets and human resources are increasingly stretched. We have a duty to make sure that all those who are experiencing difficulty are treated with consideration and respect.

I congratulate the Government on the detect cancer early programme, which is an excellent initiative. However, people are approaching me—I suppose that they are approaching the cabinet secretary, too—about whether other cancers will be brought into the programme and, if so, when. In particular, people have recently asked me about cervical cancer and prostate cancer. Will those be brought into the programme in due course?

I am pleased that the debate has not been excessively party political—at least not compared to the next one, I am sure—and that there is much that we can agree on and work together on. Actually, the most important thing that we can agree on is that childcare is a massive issue. In the history of politics in Scotland and the UK, that has not often been the case. I was lucky, because before I was elected as a member of Parliament in 1992, I met a group of women in Pilton in my constituency who were in a childcare action group. They had a massive effect on my thinking at the time. In fact, because of that, childcare was the main subject of my maiden speech in 1992, when I said that it was important as an anti-poverty strategy, crucial for gender equality and a key part of economic policy. All that is still true today, although I was remiss not to mention that childcare is also absolutely essential for child development. I am glad that Liam McArthur mentioned James Heckman, who has done a lot of work on the issue and shown how investment in the early years pays many times over in future years. A lot of progress has been made in the past 20 or so years. The Labour Government’s actions on nursery education for three and four-year-olds and the development of childcare tax credits have been acknowledged. Marco Biagi made an interesting point about tax credits. There is a choice between demand-side subsidies and supply-side subsidies, and I have a lot of sympathy with those who would prefer to have supply-side subsidies, but we should acknowledge that the Labour Government’s childcare tax credits benefited a large number of parents. It is regrettable that the current Government has reduced that support from 80 to 70 per cent, which has made the problem worse. When I talk to parents now about childcare, the big issues are affordability—which is key—and, of course, availability. Parents talk to me about childcare just as much as they did all those years ago. We can all agree that we are making progress. I certainly welcome the 600 hours provision and the commitment to more flexibility. Everybody will acknowledge that that is an important step forward. When I talk to people in my area of Edinburgh who are involved, I see a lot of interesting developments, such as different models of flexibility in early years and expansion in the number of nursery schools—though the latter may be a particular issue in Edinburgh. I said to someone last week that I would ask the minister why we have to consult when we open a new nursery school. I understand why we consult when we close one, but not why we consult when we open one. That is happening soon in my constituency. That is one important aspect. Clearly, after-school care is crucial, too; for working parents, that is mentioned to me probably more often than anything else. I welcome the grant of more money for out-of-school care. Edinburgh is doing quite a lot on that. The Labour manifesto—if I may be partisan for a moment—had an idea about childcare co-operatives. The main thrust of childcare co-ops will be to help and support the development of after-school care, and I applaud the City of Edinburgh Council for doing that. The development of after-school care, together with support from the supply side, is a crucial area that we must put more emphasis on. That will be necessary, because tax credits do not cover care for everyone. Another area concerns provision for two-year-olds—there is a whole debate about the best way on that, and again the Scottish Government has taken an important step. Should further targeting be developed so that it includes more people, or should we perhaps offer a small number of hours to everyone? That is another important debate. The Scottish Government is taking important steps, particularly in relation to the 600 hours provision. However, I am sure that we can all agree that there are many more steps to take.

I congratulate Gordon MacDonald on introducing this debate and welcome the representatives of Dads Rock to the gallery. As Gordon MacDonald has already told us, Dads Rock is the brainchild of Thomas Lynch and David Marshall, who are fathers. While bringing up their young children in Sighthill, they noticed how little there was by way of resources that were tailored specifically towards fathers. Their first playgroup, which was started just over a year ago, in 2012, sought to rectify that situation. Over the past year, they have opened a second playgroup for fathers in Granton, and planning is under way for a third facility in Fife to be run in conjunction with Fife Gingerbread. I was pleased to mention that in the recent debate on Fife Gingerbread; the minister talked about it then as well, of course. I should remind people that Granton is in my constituency. I regret that Dads Rock meets on Saturday mornings, because that coincides exactly with my weekly surgeries. I have therefore been unable to attend its meetings. However, who knows? If it met at another time, I might even bring along one of my grandchildren, if that was allowed. After a little research into the relatively short history of Dads Rock, it is very easy to find positive testimonies from mothers as well as fathers. I want to quote two mothers. One said: “my partner and daughter just returned from Dad’s rock—and had a ball. I think my daughter was a bit overwhelmed at first being her first time with daddy in a new place, but he said she got right into it in the end, and everyone had fun. Thanks so much dad’s rock!” The other mother said: “My son absolutely loves this group especially playing the drums and rocking out with his friends on the guitars! And its great that he gets some 1-2-1 time with his Dad while I get 2 hours to myself!” It is clear that the main advantage is to the children and fathers, but it is also a great advantage to mothers. It is in the interests of mothers and, indeed, women in general that fathers get more involved in childcare. I am sure that we all support that objective, which is exactly the objective that Dads Rock is trying to promote. The ambition of the two enterprising fathers has not slowed over the past year. The children enjoy regular visits into the community—for example, a trip was recently organised to the national museum of Scotland, where a group of 30 children and 25 fathers enjoyed making masks, telling stories and taking part in a raucous song time. As Gordon MacDonald told us, music and creativity feature highly in the priorities of Dads Rock. Music is one way of improving emotional development and the intellect. The organisation has indicated that it will launch a scheme in October this year that will ensure free tuition for children and fathers through a new Dads Rock academy that is to be based at the Edinburgh College Sighthill campus. Many children go through their school years without access to one-to-one tuition, so such a facility could help to spark their interest in taking up an instrument and gaining a lifelong skill. As Thomas and David stated in their recent blog post: “The benefits of Kids learning music are well known, it improves social skills, increases confidence, helps them to focus, helps the brain to develop”. What better way to do that than in an encouraging academic environment, with the children’s fathers on hand to take part and cheer on their successes? The academy will offer free weekly music tuition to local children aged five to 16 years, and it will be open to kids and dads from Edinburgh and the surrounding area. It will offer places to roughly 10 to 15 children and their fathers, and will offer a free musical instrument as well as weekly tuition. The college will provide the facilities and the tutors will come from its student body, which will benefit then students who are studying music in further education. Participation in the academy will become part of the curriculum and will add another dimension to the students’ CVs. Best of all, at the end of term in June, the students will stage a show for families and friends, which will allow them to showcase the skills that they have learned and provide an opportunity for them to receive the praise and encouragement that they need to keep going. My time is now up. The amazing amount that the two fathers and the wider group have achieved in less than two years is clear to everyone. I wish them well in all the ventures that they undertake, congratulate them on what they have done, and repeat my congratulations to Gordon MacDonald.

The debate’s timing is rather unfortunate. The consultation principle has always been central to the Parliament, and it would have been better to wait until all the written responses were available to members. It is particularly unfortunate for someone such as me, as I have no background or experience in the area and I would have much preferred to read the views of those who do. I was a minister when the community justice authorities were set up, but it is the nature of being a minister to plough one’s own field. I remember that there were debates at that time—similar to those that we are having now—about the tension and the choice between a central system and more local variation. In a way, we are repeating some of the debates that we had then. I recognise the importance of the policy area. Dealing with the rehabilitation of offenders and stopping reoffending are critical to justice policy. Although I am in no way an expert, I have been inspired by some of the people who work in the area. Margaret Mitchell mentioned Circle, which is an organisation that is based in my constituency. It has remarkable success rates in stopping reoffending, and I will want to listen to what it has to say about that. I have also spoken a couple of times in recent months to the violence reduction unit, which is prioritising such work with offenders, particularly on employability, as a way of cutting down reoffending. There are leaders in the field to whom we will want to listen. Although there is no agreement about the solutions, there is unanimity about the nature of the problems, and most people agree with what Margaret Mitchell said about the cluttered and fragmented landscape, which was a key theme of the Christie report. Everybody also seems to agree that structures are not the be-all and end-all—that is absolutely right. Equally, some changes to the structures are required, which is why three options are before us. What are the problems? They have been well described in the Audit Scotland report and the Angiolini report, which both refer to a lack of leadership and accountability and to problems with funding. Some of those problems relate to the short-term nature of the funding, which Margaret Mitchell referred to, but both reports also say that funding is based on activity rather than outcomes. A lot of the funding is based on the historical allocation of funding, and there is the issue that councillors sometimes—understandably—favour their own local authority. Perhaps the strongest problem is the inconsistency of service. I was particularly struck by the observation in the Audit Scotland report that, because some services in prisons are funded by local authorities, some prisoners get a service while others do not. That is a stark example of localism going too far. Audit Scotland also emphasises the importance of employability and the great variations in the availability of employability services. Another issue is poor access to purposeful activities in prison, which our amendment highlights. On where we go from here, I agree with the principles that are set out on pages 15 and 16 of the Government’s consultation document. They include the need for strategic direction and leadership; the emphasis on prevention and early intervention; the desirability of having effective local partnerships; the need for strategic commissioning; and, of course, an approach that involves evidence-based policies that are based on an analysis of need. We all agree with those, but where does that lead us to on the options? All the options have their attractions and disadvantages. Option A would at least avoid structural upheaval, which is often a good principle to follow, as there is an advantage in having a degree of continuity. Option A suggests that, if we have more strategic leadership, give the CJAs strategic commissioning powers and ensure that partners have a statutory duty to be involved, that will improve the present system. Option A should certainly be looked at seriously. Option C is championed by the Angiolini report. In itself, that is quite a strong recommendation, given that most of the recommendations of that excellent report have been accepted without controversy. Clearly, in championing a single community justice service, option C is a lot more controversial, but the advantages that are highlighted are that the combination of strategic and operational responsibility would provide clearer lines of accountability, more consistency and potentially a greater quality of service. There would also be the potential to roll out models of good practice. There is a lot to recommend that option. However, we should not forget option B or the good work that is being done at local council level. We also need to look at the arguments for that. It is attractive in principle to have local authorities in the driving seat, although it can be problematic in practice. In my final minute, I will give an example of good practice that is being carried out by criminal justice services in Edinburgh. Launched in May last year, the break the cycle project takes old and unwanted bikes and renovates them. The bikes are then donated for free to community organisations, youth groups, other interested organisations and children. Crucially, the project works with offenders who are on community payback orders as a direct alternative to going to prison. As the City of Edinburgh Council highlights, “Experience shows that if an offender is carrying out work that they have an interest in, they are more likely to successfully complete the order. Most of the people on these orders are young men under 25, many of whom have an interest in bikes and cycling.” The council’s criminal justice workers, who have been trained to help in cycle maintenance, are on hand to monitor and help in the process. I highlight that as an example of the good practice and good work that local councils are doing on the ground. That example also highlights the central importance of job readiness, job opportunities and the employability agenda. Whatever solution we come up with, I hope that employability will be at the centre. For example, for what will be a really good event that will take place over three days at the end of this month, the violence reduction unit is bringing over from America people who work with offenders on helping them to get ready for the jobs market. That should be right at the centre of our agenda, and I certainly hope that I will be able to attend one of those events.

10. To ask the Scottish Government how many men were convicted of kerb crawling under the Prostitution (Public Places) (Scotland) Act 2007 in the last year for which information is available. (S4O-02064)

I thank the Solicitor General for that answer and for the detailed letter that she sent me on this and other matters. She will be aware of the concerns of some of my constituents that men who are clearly kerb crawlers are not being charged and convicted because of a lack of what is regarded as sufficiency of evidence. Is the Solicitor General satisfied with the criteria for sufficiency of evidence in regard to kerb crawling? Can she tell us whether the new guidelines will be helpful in that regard, or whether anything else can be done to ensure that the intentions of the 2007 act are realised in practice?

I congratulate George Adam on introducing a very important debate in an informative and humorous way. It is important that people should learn more about the condition. An earlier report by the MS Society, “Fighting Back: Ordinary people battling the everyday effects of MS” highlighted that a lot of the problems that people with MS have spring from the attitude of others, which is often based on a lack of knowledge. It is important that we find out more. Today’s report, “A lottery of treatment and care—MS services across Scotland and the UK”, which George Adam highlighted, tells us about some disparities in the level of service. We recognise that it is a balanced report that contains some good news—for example, in what it says about self-management, which George Adam emphasised. The levels of self-management in Scotland are much higher than in England, and credit should be given to the Scottish Government for investing resources in that and ensuring that more than half of people with MS have the opportunity to be on a self-management course. However, it would be remiss of us not to highlight some of the more disturbing figures in the report. The general issue that the report raises is the perennial tension between local decision making and national standards, which gives rise to what is often called postcode care. Again, however, we should give credit to the Scottish Government for having national neurological standards—that was a really important development in the previous session of Parliament. Some of those standards are generic, but some—three of them, I think—are specifically about MS. Not only do we have the standards, but a peer-reviewed report came out last year. I cannot pretend to have read it all, but I looked at the Lothian report. Although some of the generic standards were not met, the specific MS standard on access to a multidisciplinary team was met. I was pleased about that, although the people on the MS stall outside said that that did not always reflect the experience of individuals with MS. George Adam cited the fact that only 75 per cent of respondents said that they were able to see a neurologist when they needed one. We must recognise that there is more to be done on access to the multidisciplinary team, which is vital. I hope that the minister will tell us when he sums up what the follow-up is to the neurological standards. I believe that a neurological advisory group is overseeing the implementation of those standards, but I am not entirely clear about its role or powers. Having standards is only the first part of the process, and ensuring that there is progress in implementing them is clearly the necessary follow-up. I would be particularly interested to hear from the minister about access to drugs. That issue is very much featured in the report, and George Adam referred to the worrying figure that only 36 per cent of people have access to the drugs that might benefit them. That is a matter of concern. I certainly remember from my days as health minister that in 2002 a risk-sharing scheme was set up for beta interferon in particular, which was supposed to improve access to that range of drugs for MS. I have lost track of what has happened to that over the past 11 years but, as part of the minister’s summing up, I would be interested to hear about drugs in general and about what happened to that scheme. As I indicated, the report says that we are good on self-management. There are also loads of examples within and outwith the NHS of excellent services. On Friday, I will visit the MS Therapy Centre based in Leith, which has outstanding person-centred holistic care for people with MS, and provides services such as oxygen therapy, neuro physiotherapy, reflexology, aromatherapy and massage. As I am nearly out of time, I will close by quoting from today’s report: “The Clinical Standards and upcoming changes to health and social care put Scotland in pole position to improve services for people with MS.” While recognising that there is still a lot to do, I think that there are grounds for optimism and that we can expect further progress.

I am pleased to take part in this landmark debate, in which we are considering a tax bill for the first time in the history of the Scottish Parliament. I hope that it will be the first of many debates on devolved tax bills, in which we will grapple with the pros and cons and the trade-offs of different rates, reliefs and incentives. Central to any devolved tax bill is something that is not in the bill at all—namely, the block grant adjustment. We should briefly consider that; it is probably the most important of all the things that we will discuss today, because if we do not get it right it will not be worth our while going down this route at all. As the cabinet secretary and others are, I am concerned that if we rely only on OBR estimates of what might have been or would be raised post-2015, we might have an overestimate from the OBR—that is what it usually does—and then we will have too much money taken off our grant. I am therefore minded to support the cabinet secretary’s proposal in committee that we use how much was raised in the five years up to 2015 as a basis for those negotiations. Some people who made written submissions regretted that the bill is not more radical, but my understanding is that the tax was devolved subject to its being a tax on land transactions, so obviously the Government had to follow that. However, the decision to raise the same amount of money was, I think, the Government’s decision. I am not quibbling with that decision, but if we think about it, more restricted reliefs are being proposed in the interest of simplification and in order to target avoidance, which means that, if the same amount of money is to be raised, there will probably be a slightly more generous banding system when the detailed bands and rates are announced. I do not quibble with that either. Like others, I support the progressive system that is envisaged instead of the slab system. I would like it to be very progressive, as it were, and in that sense—I seem to be agreeing with the cabinet secretary an awful lot today—I am quite pleased by his suggestion about helping first-time buyers and ensuring that people with pretty expensive houses that are worth more than £325,000 pay more. I certainly view that sympathetically. Different views were expressed about when the cabinet secretary should announce the bands and rates. It was quite a difficult issue for the committee but, on balance, it was the people who are concerned with commercial property who wanted an announcement well in advance, whereas the Edinburgh Solicitors Property Centre in my neck of the woods did not want them to be announced many days before the start of the tax. One conclusion from that might be that we should have different dates for the announcement of the commercial and the residential bands and rates.

That is a fair point and I would not disagree. Ensuring that there is no tax avoidance is an important aspect of the bill. The general provision, which will be included in the forthcoming tax management bill, has been mentioned. Specific measures in the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill include those on sub-sale relief. A lot of the debate has been about that. As Ken Macintosh said, we on this side of the chamber generally support what the cabinet secretary is saying on sub-sale relief, while seeking to ensure that forward funding arrangements to enable site development are protected. We should consider Gavin Brown’s suggestion, if there is any territory between tax avoidance and forward funding, but I am not particularly persuaded of that at the moment. Charities relief took up quite a lot of our time in committee because it is intrinsically interesting, although it is not going to be an enormous issue in terms of the number of charities from outwith Scotland. I note that David Robb, who heads up OSCR, suggested that there are easier ways to identify bona fide charities than registration with OSCR, so perhaps we should follow his advice. Like the cabinet secretary, the committee was not persuaded about the reliefs for energy efficiency, although I was probably a bit more sympathetic to them than others were. The paper that we received from the UK Green Building Council, which Ken Macintosh mentioned, is worth looking at during our stage 2 consideration, not least because the proposal is revenue neutral. It does not claim to deal with all the issues around incentivising energy efficiency, but it is certainly worth looking at. I will not go into its detail now, but we should keep the paper for consideration. In my last minute I will briefly discuss administration issues. Mary Scanlon mentioned her concerns about IT systems at Registers of Scotland, although we are assured that those have been sorted out—we certainly hope so. The main issue to be resolved is the respective roles of revenue Scotland and Registers of Scotland. A witness from Registers of Scotland said words to the effect that he did not know whether they would advise on just forms or aspects of the tax. Clearly, that has to be ironed out in the coming period. Another concern was that payment will have to be made prior to registration. The Council of Mortgage Lenders said that that would be all right if the system of advance notices under the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Act 2012 was introduced before LBTT. I must say that I do not have a clue as to what the system of advance notices is, but I am very happy to follow the advice of the Council of Mortgage Lenders Scotland advice in that regard.

We could have predicted that this would turn into a constitutional debate, although not in quite such a blatant way as we are seeing. However, that seems to be the way that the minister wants to have it. Did not the Institute for Fiscal Studies, in its December report, say that spending per head on social protection is more than £4,000 in Scotland whereas it is £3,700 in England? Is not the real thing to consider the ratio of the spending per head to the revenue per head? Since 1990, that has been higher in Scotland than in England.

I would like to start by repeating the condolences that I expressed last Monday to Margaret Thatcher’s family and to all who loved her. I always think that it is important in politics to oppose and attack ideas, policies and, if necessary, ideologies but not individuals. That is why I regret some of the responses to the death of Margaret Thatcher. Over the past few days, the article that has most impressed me was Tony Benn’s piece in last Tuesday’s edition of The Guardian. In that article, Tony Benn of course attacked quite a lot of what Mrs Thatcher did, but he finished by saying that it is important that we show respect. He told the story of how at Eric Heffer’s funeral—as members may recall, Eric Heffer had been a hard-left MP—Mrs Thatcher came up to him and, Tony Benn says, she was in tears. She was showing respect to someone whose views she profoundly disagreed with. People will take different views about the role of individuals and of social forces within history—over the past few days, many historians have tended to emphasise the latter—but, whichever way we look at it, 1979 was a decisive year in the history of the 20th century because it was the year in which the post-war consensus was broken. Viewed from the perspective of 2013, it is interesting that 1979 is now 34 years ago, and 34 years before that was the election of a Labour Government and of a Prime Minister whom, with all due respect to Conservative colleagues, I regard as the greatest peacetime Prime Minister of the 20th century. His Government established a post-war consensus that was broken in 1979. In a sense, that was what brought me into party politics. Although I had been interested in politics in the broad sense throughout the 1960s and 1970s, it was only after the election of Margaret Thatcher that I joined the Labour Party. With that divergence of views in 1979, there was a sense in which one had to take sides in that fundamental argument. The two issues that first brought me in were the state of the economy in the early years of the Thatcher Government and the issue of nuclear weapons. It is still worth looking at the economic record of the Thatcher Government. I thought at the time, and still think today, that the obsession with monetarist policy, particularly in the early years of her Government, was very odd. Younger members will not recall this, but there was an obsession with what was called M3. There was an attempt to target the money supply and, if that was wrong, the Government had to put up interest rates. Of course, if interest rates went up, the exchange rate went up and industry was slaughtered as a result. To me, it was strange that there was such an obsession with monetarism and with the public sector borrowing requirement, which resulted in big cuts to public expenditure. If we look at the economic record of the Conservatives for that whole decade, as the figures that have been quoted today show, we see that growth was 2.4 per cent per year, which—guess what—is exactly the same as the figure for what the Conservatives would describe as the disastrous 1970s. There were lots of problems in the 1970s and I accept that those had to be dealt with, but that is an important comparison.

I am sure that Mrs Thatcher tried to address that, but the growth figures went down further in the early 1990s as well. I do not think that the record justifies her policy, but I accept that she was trying to do that. No doubt, others would say that she was trying to increase the profits of those who owned industries as well. The other two great institutions that Margaret Thatcher attacked—they were not the only two, but my time is running out fast—were local government and the trade unions. Members will certainly say that something had to be done about the powers of the trade unions, but surely nobody can justify the behaviour of the Conservative Government of the time in relation to the miners. One of the worst things that Mrs Thatcher said at the time was that the miners were “the enemy within”. That contrasts significantly to what her predecessor, Harold Macmillan, then Lord Stockton, said in the House of Lords in 1984 at the age of 90. He said that the miners were “the best men in the world.” For me, that encapsulates the difference between Mrs Thatcher and the old one-nation Conservatives of the post-war consensus.

I have not got time to give way, I am afraid. I might have, but I do not think that I do. I also want to mention the attack on local government. It is ironic that, historically, Conservatives have often criticised the idea of a centralised state yet, through the controls on local government, culminating in the poll tax, they created the most centralised state in western Europe.

I do not think that I have time to take an intervention, because I want to finish—

I will take a very brief one.

I have no time to comment on that.

I will end with two ironies. Margaret Thatcher famously inspired a generation of Eurosceptics, which may be one of the main reasons why she fell, yet she was the Prime Minister who signed the Single European Act, which Conservatives now rail against, and who took the Conservatives into the exchange rate mechanism, the precursor of the euro. Ironically, it was leaving the exchange rate mechanism that destroyed the Conservatives’ reputation—such as it was—for economic competence and led to a Labour Government. The final irony, which has been mentioned by several members here as well as in the past few days, is that Margaret Thatcher was one of the principal architects of the Scottish Parliament. It is no wonder, therefore, that Andrew Rawnsley, writing in The Observer on Sunday, said that she was not just the “Iron Lady” but the “Ironic Lady”.

I congratulate Kezia Dugdale on lodging the motion. In bringing the debate to Parliament, she has brought to light the work of an incredible campaign, which we all applaud. The campaign has been successful and visible because it has used art and performance to demonstrate the level of support among women—and, I hope, an increasing number of men—around the world for the drive to eradicate domestic abuse and sexual violence against women and girls. Through an incredible series of events, the V-day campaign’s most ambitious project, one billion rising, sought to engage participants in 197 countries and territories in a global day of action to mark the organisation’s 15th anniversary. One billion women in the world will be impacted in their lives by male violence. The V-Day campaign asked that on 14 February this year—and throughout the year—we work to help to turn the eyes of the world to this gross subjugation of human dignity and equality. On 14 February it succeeded. The campaign brought together diverse groups by creating a body of campaign material and providing a starting point for sustained awareness raising. We should not be able to ignore gender-based violence because it is an uncomfortable truth; we should challenge it because it is a universal injustice. Eve Ensler, who set up the campaign, first came to the fore as a groundbreaking stage producer and writer, and is most famous for her work “The Vagina Monologues”. A passionate women’s rights campaigner, she saw that art has the power to reach, transform and motivate individuals to act with a shared purpose. Performance can put issues that affect us all on to a global stage and can highlight the hidden ugly aspects of humanity that may previously have been unseen. Violence against women must no longer be unseen and unchallenged. As long as fear and aggression are used as means to control women, and are excused and perpetrated on a global scale, we cannot achieve equality between women and men. As all the great campaigns and organisations that we know so well in Scotland have been telling us for many years, equally we cannot achieve the ending of violence against women without also challenging the wider inequalities in society. In her speech, Kezia Dugdale highlighted the dimension of the structural inequalities in society and the gender stereotyping that is such a crucial part of that. I endorse what Kezia Dugdale said in applauding the everyday sexism project, the campaign against page 3 and the “Hollaback!” movement—of which a branch was recently formed in Edinburgh, although the movement has been active elsewhere before that. Many great Scottish organisations and campaigns were mentioned by many people, including myself, in debates that we had in the chamber in December and January. In my last minute I want to mention one of those organisations—the Edinburgh Women’s Rape and Sexual Abuse Centre. In a debate—I think it was in the January one—I highlighted the very serious funding crisis that is faced by that organisation. It has made some progress over the past three months or so, but it still requires to raise £70,000 by the end of May or its services will be put under severe strain. I hasten to add that the Scottish Government did not withdraw its funding; a Big Lottery Fund grant has ended. The fact is that if that money is not raised—it has some applications in the pipeline—that vital organisation will need to restructure its services to prioritise front-line support and counselling posts, but that will mean a 50 per cent cut in front-line services and the redundancies of skilled and specialist counsellors and support workers. It already has a nine-month waiting list and referrals are increasing, so a 50 per cent cut to front-line services would significantly reduce the capacity of the organisation to meet the tragically increasing need. It is very sad to have to end on this note—we have emphasised the campaigning and the awareness-raising campaigns—but until we have made progress, we desperately need such services, and the centre is one of the many organisations that are desperately needed, so it must fill the funding gap.

I listened to the cabinet secretary with genuine interest—as I always do—because I wanted to know what the debate was really all about. However, we have heard much of what we heard today from the cabinet secretary many times over in previous budget debates. My initial view was that the title of the debate, “Universal Services”, might give a clue as to the reason for having the debate, but the Scottish Government seems to be trying to use the issue of universal services as a key weapon in the referendum battle. Not to put too fine a point on it, the Government is using universal services as a simple political football. That is regrettable because we need a proper debate about universal services, which Christie and the independent budget review urged us to have. The cabinet secretary was pleased to quote from those reports when it suited his purposes, but he has conveniently forgotten that aspect of their recommendations. I agreed with a great deal of what the cabinet secretary said. I also agreed with a great deal of what Christina McKelvie said, as I often do. However, I gently point out to her that the bulk of the problems that are being caused by the UK Government in increasing poverty are not to do with the withdrawal of universal benefits—many of which, particularly for pensioners, are being maintained—but relate to the withdrawal of targeted benefits. We should think of the reductions in tax credits or the housing benefit changes. It is regrettable that the cabinet secretary did not see fit even to mention in his speech the bedroom tax, for example, as that is obviously one of the key issues in Scotland currently. Perhaps the Scottish Government could turn its attention to a targeted approach to that in terms of support for councils and housing associations that are losing money as a result of that tax. The reality is that the debate is not about universal versus targeted benefits; it is about both. We have always used both. The Scottish Government knows that, and a lot of the debate is about where we draw the line between the two. The childcare example that Willie Rennie gave was very interesting. If we think about it, we will see that he was adopting a far more universal approach, although not a totally universal approach, to childcare than is the Scottish Government, which is taking a very targeted approach to the under-threes. I am not criticising that approach by the Scottish Government, because that may well be the most effective way to deal with the early years in the current financial circumstances; I am merely pointing out that the Scottish Government adopts a targeted approach in many policies, and we must accept that it is totally simplistic and misleading to say that the debate is about universal services that the Scottish Government supports and other, non-universal, targeted services that, by implication, other parties support. Throughout my life in Parliament, I have tended to support a more universal approach to childcare services on the Scandinavian model, but I thought that it was really interesting that Alex Salmond came out with that particular view at the SNP conference a few weeks ago. His speech then suggested something that was quite interesting to me. He said, “Well, we could have those universal services if we had independence.” That view provides a lot of the mood music to and sub-plot of the debate. Indeed, I seem to recall that, at an earlier SNP conference, Alex Salmond said that the only way to protect universal services is to vote for independence. I think that that is the real reason why we are having this debate again. We have debated the matter on more than one occasion recently.

It is absolutely right that the Scottish Labour Party should take time to look at those issues and their complexities, and relate them to the financial situation. It is unreal to pretend that somehow we can have this debate without considering the financial situation. That is the whole problem with the SNP’s approach, of course. It can present a distorted, simplistic and rosy picture of the economics of independence, and it is very easy for it to say that universal childcare and, indeed, any other universal service that it cares to mention will be possible under independence. It is very difficult, as those are complex arguments—

I will do so, if I have time, but I have only one more minute. Actually, I had better give way now, or I will not be allowed to do so.

My understanding is that it will report long before that. We must have a serious debate. It is perfectly reasonable to ask whether a universal service such as concessionary travel should be modified. I am not aware of anybody who says that concessionary travel should be abolished. If even Age Scotland says that it should start at 65, surely the SNP can at least look at that view and not dismiss it as somehow a targeted betrayal. It is also right to acknowledge that there has always been a difference between never-to-be-questioned universal services such as the NHS and some more recent additions. I have some personal responsibility for one of those additions—free personal care—so I am obviously attached to it, but I do not take the view that whether it should be modified in a particular way should not be looked at. It is absolutely imperative that we have a serious debate, take universal services out of the referendum battle, and give the matter the proper and undivided attention that it deserves.

I congratulate Sandra White on lodging this motion and think that we should also congratulate the Scottish bowel screening campaign, particularly its leader Professor Bob Steele, who has led it from the beginning. I remember meeting him about 10 years ago when he was piloting the programme in Tayside and we were very pleased that he attended last night’s meeting of the cross-party group on cancer to talk about cancer surgery. Although bowel cancer is the second most common cancer in men and the third most common in women, a very welcome fact is that deaths from the group that accepts screening have fallen by 30 per cent over the programme’s very short life. There is a very good reason for that. Of those who go to the doctor with symptoms, only 8 per cent are diagnosed with stage A, the first of the four stages of bowel cancer, whereas 49 per cent of those who are diagnosed through screening have stage A. That is very important, because more than 90 per cent of those diagnosed at the early stage—stage A—go on to survive for five years whereas only 7 per cent of those diagnosed at the fourth stage survive. That emphasises the importance of the detect cancer early initiative. I congratulate the Scottish Government on that great initiative, which is particularly necessary for bowel cancer, for which the uptake of screening is about 55 per cent, which is much less than the uptake of screening for breast cancer, for example. We all know that there are particular challenges with certain sections of the population and, as a result, specific initiatives are important. In its briefing for the debate, Bowel Cancer UK talks about a project that it has been running and which has been successful in increasing uptake among those with learning disabilities, and I am sure that the Government will want to look at that and any other good examples. Of course, screening is not a panacea; other messages about bowel cancer have to be sent. For a start, as people can get what are called interval cancers, they still have to watch out for symptoms between screenings. There are also the key messages about prevention, which are mainly about diet and exercise. I will be interested to hear from the minister whether there are any plans to build on the screening programme, because I think that it might be possible to improve what is already a very good programme. In its briefing, Cancer Research UK mentions an alternative called the faecal immunochemical test, which, I am told, is more accurate and less complicated. I have to say, though, that I have never found the test to be particularly complicated, having taken it several times since I turned 50—which is unfortunately quite a long time ago. The other possible development is the flexible sigmoidoscopy procedure. It is regarded as an even better test because polyps, which are always the precursor to cancers, can be removed. I am told that there might well be a pilot in that respect in Scotland—I believe that it might be in Tayside, which is once again leading the way—and the minister might wish to mention that. Of course, that raises the whole question of capacity not just for sigmoidoscopy but for colonoscopy, which is required for those who get a positive result in a faecal occult blood test. The news has highlighted controversies about capacity in that respect, including here in Lothian. However, this is not a debate about complaining; instead, it is about celebrating the success of the screening programme and the possibility of building on it to make it even more successful. I have already mentioned Bowel Cancer UK, which I think is a great campaigning organisation. Indeed, I was pleased to sponsor a recent event that it had in the Parliament. The chief executive, Deborah Alsina, whom I recommend people follow on Twitter as her tweets contain an awful lot of useful information about bowel cancer, gave a very inspiring speech in which she emphasised the importance of taking account of patient experience; of improving access to various bowel cancer treatments, including some of the drugs that we have heard about in other contexts; and, crucially, of early diagnosis, which of course is the subject that we are discussing and whose successes we are celebrating.

I congratulate the Scottish Government on its great progress on renewable energy and some other areas, but the two sectors with the biggest emissions are housing and transport, and those are the two sectors that unfortunately are letting us down. Emissions from the residential sector were 3 per cent greater in 2010 than they were in 1990. There are some very good initiatives—including the national retrofit programme, which starts next week—but they are not of sufficient scale to meet the UK Climate Change Committee’s recommendations. For example, the committee said that all lofts and cavities should be filled by 2015. Notwithstanding what the minister said about that, only half of lofts currently have good insulation. The committee also recommended that 230,000 solid walls should be treated by 2020. For some reason, work on that seems to be at a virtual standstill. Perhaps the minister could comment on that. The biggest problem is in existing homes in the private sector. There is provision for that in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009; section 64 provides a regulatory power to establish minimum standards for not just the private rented sector, but the whole private sector. The draft report that we are considering today has a proposal for minimum standards for 2018, but I support the call of WWF and other bodies that have made submissions that that should be turned into a policy for 2015. As well as helping us meet our commitments, it would drive uptake of, for example, the new national retrofit programme, the green deal and the energy company obligation, which are excellent new initiatives. WWF recommends that the standard should kick in at the point of sale or rental and it recommends that it should be at point E on the performance certificate scale for 2015 and point C by 2020. Those proposals should be seriously considered. Transport emissions were also higher in 2010 than in 1990. Vehicle kilometres inexorably rise, which leads me and many others to the conclusion that demand simply must be reduced. In a 2009 study, the Scottish Government said that measures to reduce demand had greater impact, but I can see none in RPP2 and there are virtually no policies, either. In that and other ways, RPP2 is weaker than RPP1, which called for some demand management measures, as well as, for example, a 5 per cent budget for active travel, which we are nowhere near. More of the proposals in the transport section need to be turned into policies, whether they are to do with cycling, car clubs, travel planning or the sustainable communities proposals. We also have a problem with the vague statements beyond 2020. The report talks about additional technical abatement beyond 2020. In particular, for the last three years—from 2025 to 2027—there are massive transport reductions for which there is no explanation whatever. In general, we need more of a focus on behaviour change, as Maureen Watt said. As Kevin Stewart said, it is regrettable that that is in a separate framework, rather than its being integral to RPP2. RPP2 suggests that we should aim for “Almost complete decarbonisation of road transport by 2050, with significant progress by 2030 through wholesale adoption of electric cars and vans”. However, concerns have been voiced in the consultation process that too much faith is being placed in the capacity of low-carbon vehicles to contribute to that reduction. Perhaps it would be advisable to focus more on modal shift towards public transport and active travel in the immediate future. The benefits that would be achieved through that change are far more certain and are more likely to contribute to our meeting our ambitious targets. Finally, the clarity and transparency of the broader proposals in RPP2 have come in for some criticism, with the report clearly lacking in key detail in comparison with RPP1. Specifically, the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee has been urged in submissions from Transform Scotland and Sustrans to push for a disaggregation of data in the same format as RPP1 to allow for proper scrutiny. Increased transparencies will also facilitate proper monitoring and evaluation, which would, preferably, be helped by more milestones for both 2015 and 2020. I hope that the minister will take on board many of the suggestions that have been made in the debate. Many of those suggestions have, of course, come from outside bodies, whose help with the proposals that I have put forward I acknowledge.

I hope that the minister can do something to top up discretionary housing benefit, but an issue that I raised in last week’s early years debate was the case of an absent parent who looks after children at, say, the weekend. They, too, will be caught by the bedroom tax. Will it be possible to take some action, in the interests of family policy, to deal with that situation?

I accept that everyone on the opposite benches—many of whom I like and respect—is hoping and dreaming that everything will begin to be significantly better for Scotland from 2016 onwards, but I think that it is our duty to take a hard-headed view of the economic and financial circumstances that we will face in 2016 and thereafter. A lot of the debate today has concentrated on revenues, particularly from oil, but we really need to look at that within the wider perspective of what the economy will be like. We ought to look at issues to do with debt and monetary and fiscal policy more generally as part of the debate. Let us start with the revenues, given that that is what is dominating the debate today. Let us strip out oil just for 30 seconds or so. The first thing that we have to acknowledge is that expenditure per head is higher in Scotland than in the rest of the UK. On the latest figures, it is slightly over £12,000 per head in Scotland and slightly less than £10,000 per head elsewhere in the UK. So, we would clearly have to have significantly more per head in revenues on an on-going basis in order even to keep things in their present state. Secondly—again, stripping out oil—Scotland has for some years collected slightly less per head in taxation. Logically, as oil and gas eventually run out and the revenues fall, which I accept will be over a considerable period, the fiscal challenge facing Scotland will be greater than that facing the rest of the UK. SNP members will say, “That’s unrealistic. We have oil for several years.” Looking at oil historically, we accept that last year—which has been much quoted—and in several recent years, Scotland was in a stronger financial position than the rest of the UK. However, that was not the case in the 1990s when I started as a parliamentarian. In 1991-92, oil accounted for only 3 per cent of Scottish revenue. In general, throughout the 1990s, Scotland was in a weaker financial position than the rest of the UK. The point, of course, is that it is the future that matters now. A lot of the debate therefore centres, understandably, on the price of oil in the next few years. This has been well aired in the debate already, but as the centre for public policy for regions said recently, the Scottish Government is working on the most optimistic predictions for the next few years. That is against the advice of the fiscal commission, as Willie Rennie reminded us. He also reminded us that the Norwegian central bank—and the IMF, although I cannot remember whether he mentioned the IMF—said that oil would be less than $100 a barrel. We have to be—let us just say—slightly cautious about the kind of figures that the Scottish Government is putting out for oil over the next few years. As I said at the beginning, this should not just be a debate about revenues and oil. We have to tell people what the situation will be in 2016. The cabinet secretary started with a very stark contrast between two futures. I ought to remind him that the UK faces two futures in the 2015 election, but I will leave that aside. He suggested that if we stay with the UK we will have austerity, and if we go with Scotland we will have the end of austerity. I do not think that that serves the debate. He was being more straightforward when he presented his paper to the cabinet. I think that those on the SNP benches will still support independence, even if we have to take a gloomier economic view of it. We have to be absolutely honest with the people of Scotland. The reality is that in 2016 the UK will face something like £120 billion of debt. Scotland will have to take at least its population share of that, and servicing that debt will loom large in the early years of an independent Scotland, if it came to pass. As Gavin Brown alludes to in his amendment, there would be a credit risk deferential for Scotland and Scotland would have to pay higher interest on its debt than the rest of the UK would. Scotland would have to run a convincingly prudent fiscal position in the early years of independence, compared with the rest of the UK. We must face that fact and not pretend that everything would suddenly be a lot simpler.

The UK in is a weaker position than it was, but I am arguing—as many economists have argued recently—that Scotland would be in an even weaker position as a peripheral country in a currency union, which is the next point that I am coming to, and as a new country. That leads to the point that has been much aired on various occasions in the Parliament recently, about what our position would be in a monetary union with the rest of the UK. We must face up to the fiscal consequences of that. The SNP’s key argument for independence is that we will have more fiscal freedom. The reality is that we would not have untrammelled fiscal freedom as part of a monetary union with the rest of the UK. Indeed, Dr Andrew Goudie, who was the cabinet secretary’s chief economist until a few weeks ago, said recently in The Scotsman that there would be severe limitations on taxation policy in such a situation. We would not be free, untrammelled and without problems in the way that the SNP and even the cabinet secretary in his opening speech suggested. I suppose that part of my argument for staying in the UK is the question of why we would want to leave a country in which we can have significant influence through our elected representatives, in order still to be controlled in economic terms, to a large extent, by a country over which we would have no influence.

The minister knows that the issue of psychological therapies for older people was discussed at the last but one meeting of the cross-party group on mental health, but has he heard that, at the group’s most recent meeting, we were presented with quite a lot of evidence about the range of psychological therapies that could be beneficial for a variety of people of different ages across Scotland? In particular, does he understand the concern that was expressed that, for many NHS boards, psychological therapies are identified with cognitive behavioural therapy? Useful as that therapy is, can he do anything to extend the range of therapies that are available, because we were told that there is a sound evidence base for a wide range of humanistic psychotherapies and counselling?

Will the minister give way?

This is the first debate on Trident that has been called by the Government in the best part of six years. Does the minister not understand that people are genuinely angry that the debate comes this week, after the debate on Iraq and before the statement on the date of the referendum? The timing of the debate, the wording of the motion and the substance of the speeches have tied this subject, as far as the SNP is concerned, into the whole argument about independence. That is deeply regrettable and it is why nobody in this chamber will support Keith Brown’s motion, except those who support independence.

I congratulate Mark McDonald on bringing this important subject to the chamber, giving us the opportunity to recognise the great work that is done by the National Autistic Society Scotland and enhancing our understanding of the issue, of which he clearly has a great deal of experience because of family circumstances. The most crucial point of the “Count us in: it pays to listen” report is that the experience and advice of those who live with autism should be listened to and used to produce more effective services. Clearly, that applies in general to many other services. I suppose that it is what we used to call co-productionism. I do not know whether that term is still used, but I know that the Scottish Government is supporting that in various ways and I am pleased that it has today said that it will endorse the patient opinion website, which provides another way of listening to the views of those who use services. The report highlights the fact that the lifetime cost of providing support for people with autism ranges from £3.1 million to £4.6 million. Working closely with service users not only allows individual service users a greater degree of control but also saves costs in the long term. What is more, an overwhelming majority of respondents to the report’s survey desired the switch to greater control. First, the report emphasises sustained employment, which is fundamental to achieving structure and coherence in life. That is why the report suggests that an autism employment ambassador should be created to champion among employers the importance of employing people with autism. As we have heard, the statistics are shocking: 24 per cent of those questioned in the research said that they had never been in paid employment and 66 per cent rely on financial support from family members. That is in stark contrast to the clear desire for self-sufficiency that comes through in the report. Secondly, the report emphasises choice and control through developing the ability to self-advocate. As it is for some other groups, access to independent advocacy services must be a fundamental part of that. Access to clear information about support options, and the opportunity to communicate with advocates and, later, to self-advocate, allows the individual to make independent choices and feel empowered when those choices improve their lives. For any targeted approach to autism services to work, it is necessary to challenge the discrimination that many face in their daily lives. Thirdly, the report addresses the barriers faced in the workplace, in the process of accessing services and in the educational environment. Many believe that achieving a wider and more thorough understanding of autism in the general community is vital if those barriers are to be overcome. I certainly take that view. The report suggests that a nationwide campaign to raise awareness is essential if autistic people are to feel able to integrate into various social and work situations without being victimised or misunderstood. Finally, we must ensure that timely diagnosis is possible through increasing professional knowledge of the key signs of the condition. It is vital that autistic people feel able to trust and confide in service providers. Increasing understanding of symptoms is a key starting point for that. Correct diagnosis is the precondition of the appropriate post-diagnostic support that is advocated in the report. Mindroom, a wonderful charity based in my constituency, which I visited quite recently, highlights that there are at least five children with some form of learning disability in every classroom in Scotland and that the characteristics associated with autism are apparent most often before the age of three. Education of our professional community must not end with general practitioners and healthcare workers but must extend to our teachers and nursery staff. A confident and empowered adult stems from a self-assured and supported child. In recognising that, let us aim continually to improve support for people of all ages as we implement the national autism strategy. I am pleased to join Mark McDonald in commending the report and the work done to date, and I commend the motion.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what action it will take to improve the standard of care for adults with congenital heart disease. (S4O-01920)

I recognise that survival with congenital heart disease is a success story of modern medicine, and I welcome the establishment of the managed clinical network. However, does the cabinet secretary understand the serious concerns of those with congenital heart disease about the absence of national standards or the particular difficulties that they encounter frequently when attending accident and emergency departments? Will the cabinet secretary ensure that national standards are established and implemented as soon as possible, along with A and E protocols, including 24-hour phone access for A and E doctors to the specialist service at the Golden Jubilee hospital?

I congratulate Neil Findlay on securing the debate. I welcome the many miners to the gallery. Their action, dignity and struggle will never be forgotten. I have the highest regard for the police—I am sure that other members do, too. However, as Vera Baird QC rightly says in a “Huffington Post” article from October 2012, “most police officers behave blamelessly in their duties ... But we do them and society no favours if we flinch from honestly assessing controversial events.” That is why trust needs to be restored and justice delivered. I am afraid that events at Orgreave and Hillsborough tell a dismal tale. At Orgreave, the negative propaganda machine worked to portray a scene of chaos so that those who were arrested could be accused of engaging in a riot. The BBC documentary “Inside Out” detailed how, when the trial of the miners from Orgreave collapsed due to unreliable police evidence, it was found that many key phrases in officers’ statements were given verbatim by a number of different individuals, suggesting a far-reaching cover up of the real circumstances of the picket. When—five years later—the Hillsborough disaster took place, we witnessed similar conduct, which is now being addressed by the Independent Police Complaints Commission. In the light of what we have seen happening in Yorkshire, it is necessary to ensure that the Scottish strikers have their cases re-examined in a full and comprehensive review. Brian Docherty, who is chair of the Scottish Police Federation, has “accused the politicians” who are involved in the campaign “of jumping on a ‘bandwagon’, saying that re-opening historic investigations would impact on present-day policing.” I must say that it is entirely unclear to me how that would be the case. What is the case is that 1,424 miners and others were arrested in Scotland during the 1984-85 strike. As Neil Findlay highlighted, 202 of them were subsequently sacked and paid no redundancy. Those who were picketing legitimately and understandably in Scotland—people who had never committed an act of violence or aggression—passed through the prison system and emerged with convictions based, in all probability, on adulterated evidence. Those convictions have stayed with them. They are not a temporary affliction, because criminal convictions affect every part of life and have a palpable impact on families and communities when individuals struggle to gain access to employment. I also emphasise that the debate is about respect; it is about respect for the rights of individuals in a democracy to be given a fair trial regardless of how many years may have passed in the interim. It is not about “jumping on a ‘bandwagon’”, but about ensuring that justice is done for our constituents and citizens. It is also about respect and trust for our police force because, if justice is not seen to be done, the vast majority who serve our communities with diligence and integrity may be tarnished by indiscretions that are seen to go unpunished. I understand some of the concerns that have been expressed about the cost of a review in Scotland, but to suggest that the call for one is simply a case of backing a bandwagon does an immense disservice to the people who have had to suffer with a black spot against their names throughout most of their working lives. I also do not think that the expense would be a significant factor. It is certainly outweighed by the injustice that has been done to so many. I stand with Neil Findlay and the miners who are present with us in asking for renewed efforts from the Scottish Government to initiate a review so that those who acted within the law in rightful protest may have the opportunity to clear their names. I will finish with the statement of Alex Bennett, a former miner who was convicted of breach of the peace during the strike. He said: “The judge found me guilty, the next thing I got through the door was my P45 and I was blacklisted for three years. I was left with a criminal conviction when I had done nothing wrong. You don’t forget that. What they did to us was an outrage.” The miners will not forget it and neither should we. I support the motion.

I suggest to Jamie Hepburn that he follow LabourNoBedTax on Twitter. I welcome the fact that there are large areas of general consensus when it comes to the early years agenda. I also welcome the fact that the Government has taken such an inclusive approach, particularly through the early years task force, of which I have been privileged to be a member. Over the past three or four years—I think that I am going to have problems with my throat today, for which I apologise—I have noticed an increasing acceptance in the Parliament of the importance of the early years and particularly, but not exclusively, the very early years. I have also noticed an increasing acceptance that early intervention is a necessity. However, there are some issues that we must explore to do with the nature of that intervention and the balance between universal and targeted services. On the latter, I welcome the fact that the Government is to reinstate, very soon, the universal checks by health visitors of children when they reach the age of two and a half. That is a welcome reversal of the previous policy, which was brought in by the Administration of which I was a member. It was introduced with laudable intentions, but it went too far on targeted health visiting. The change of policy will mean that extra health visitors are required, and that issue must be addressed. As far as targeting is concerned, it might well be the case that the Government has gone slightly too far in the direction of targeted services in its proposal on two-year-olds in the consultation on the early years bill: instead of being defined more broadly, vulnerable two-year-olds are defined as including only looked-after two-year-olds. That issue might be explored when that bill comes before the Parliament. The nature of interventions is crucial. Evidence-based parenting programmes are extremely important, because they have a very good evidence base. When it comes to evidence and good practice, the creation of the collaborative that the minister described fully is an extremely important development, because collaboratives have been highly successful in the field of health policy, most recently in relation to the patient safety programme. I believe that a large number of practitioners coming together to ensure that good practice is disseminated will be crucial to achieving progress on the early years. On support for families more generally, I welcome the parenting strategy that was published a few months ago. We discussed aspects of that in quite a lot of detail a couple of weeks ago when, on successive days, we had a debate on lone parents and a debate on the role of fathers. As the issue of the bedroom tax has been raised, I would like to move beyond the party-political point with which I started my speech and say that one of the most worrying things about that tax is that, where the care of children is shared by two parents, one of those parents will be affected by it. A father who typically has his children at the weekends will not be allowed an extra room for them. If the Scottish Government can make interventions to alleviate the problem of the bedroom tax, I hope that it will consider looking at that.

I will not enter into any more party-political arguments, because I have made my position clear, and Labour’s position was clear at the beginning of the debate. Another way in which I and many others have become aware of the importance of support for families is through the excellent projects in our constituencies. In previous debates, I have mentioned Circle, Stepping Stones, Home-Start Leith, Dr Bell’s Family Centre and North Edinburgh Childcare. I will mention one other project today, which is LicketyLeap—I know that the minister is to launch a symposium by that project in the near future. It is a participative drama project that has worked in schools in the Granton and Pilton areas of my constituency. I took part in a session one morning, which was an amazing experience. I saw the transforming effect on the nursery school children who were involved. The evaluation has shown that 60 to 70 per cent of the children who have been involved—not just in my area but in other parts of Scotland—have shown improvement in various outcomes, such as confidence, social skills, resilience and emotional literacy. I hope that that project can be supported in the future. In my last minute, I must mention the other issue—apart from vulnerable two-year-olds—that the Labour amendment refers to, which is poverty. In Scotland, 21 per cent of children live in poverty. The figure has gone down by 100,000 since 1997, but it is now going up again. Responsibility for that is divided. Childcare is important, but the UK Government has made that much more difficult through reducing the childcare tax credit, and further negative changes are to come. The Scottish Government must do as much as it can to support childcare in our communities. As we all know, work is the best route out of poverty, but that must be work where childcare is provided and which is family friendly. That has been an increasing theme in various articles this week. It is most important that parents, who are key to the early years agenda and to children’s development, have time for their children as well as time for work.

I congratulate Christina McKelvie on drawing our attention to #Scotlandhour and the innovative use of social media that the initiative will continue to pioneer over the coming years. I would also like to congratulate those who established #Scotlandhour. In this year of natural Scotland, we at the Parliament should look to celebrate the beauty of the natural environment around us by using our technological resources to promote our assets, which keep bringing tourists to our shores and keep me holidaying in Scotland every summer. Spending by tourists in Scotland averages around £4 billion each year and supports around 200,000 jobs, so maintaining the interest of tourists is vital to Scotland’s economic success. That is true most of all for the rural communities who rely on a successful high season to sustain their economies through the low season of winter. Since mid-2011, the Scotlandhour website has advertised the new hashtag and encouraged users to engage in topical tweets at a set time each month, with topics that carry their own themed hashtag, such as #active, #walk, #food or #travel. The hosts then ask a series of questions on that theme. That sorts the discussion into categories and makes it easier for visitors to navigate between the tweets in the days and months after they have been fed on to the live stream. Essentially, what is created is a catalogue of tips and links that keeps tourists up to date with what is available, and it allows them to ask the questions that will help them to make the most of their stay. It is a truly innovative way of engaging travellers with instant, reciprocal information and is a chance to create a real online community of shared interest based around our new and existing tourist attractions. As the website reminds us: “no one else has used Twitter to promote tourism.” The facility has proved to be enormously popular, as the hashtag has featured in the Scottish trending categories in the past. We could, however, perhaps consider the merits of endorsing #Scotlandhour as a promoted trend in future over the assigned time each month. That might ensure that the promotion would gain maximum traffic and would make the most of the time available. The Scottish Government’s tourism framework for change highlights that such innovation will be necessary if the ambition to increase tourism revenues to Scotland by 50 per cent by 2015 is to be realised and if we are, indeed, to succeed in making the country one of “the world’s foremost tourism destinations.” #Scotlandhour could also benefit the tourism industry by helping to achieve some of the key changes highlighted in the framework for change. For example, the tweets that feed into each session could provide a valuable resource for managing the quality of the visitor experience. Recommendations, and indeed criticisms, could be used by businesses and other stakeholders to promote certain assets and improve others. They would also help to provide greater access to information throughout Scotland in a sustained and economically efficient manner. Twitter as a resource for promotion is free and accessible and, as most members who use it will be aware, opens up a whole new world of reciprocal information that, when managed properly, can provide a clear narrative and dialogue between thousands of people. In its report, “Growing Pains—can we achieve a 50% growth in tourist revenue by 2015?” the previous Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee highlighted one of the key issues in achieving the growth that the sector requires, which is the need to recognise properly “The role of technology, electronic communication and marketing.” When we look at the Government’s framework for change over the coming years, it is clear how well the innovative steps being taken by #Scotlandhour fit in with our broader aims and objectives. It has a clear remit of modernising the tourism industry and making our ancient monuments and historic landscapes accessible to all in the digital realm. The ability to upload links and photos serves as a route to even more effective advertising. As a regular tweeter and a massive fan of the Scottish countryside, I heartily endorse this great initiative and commend Christina McKelvie for bringing it to our attention today.

I joined the Finance Committee at the very end of its inquiry, when it was questioning the cabinet secretary, and I said then that I had a sense of déjà vu, because so many of the themes that we were dealing with in the report reminded me of the work that I had been involved in towards the end of the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration, when we developed the strategy, “All Our Futures: Planning for a Scotland with an Ageing Population”, which appeared just before the 2007 election. One of the driving forces behind that strategy was the desire to challenge the common perceptions and stereotypes about ageing and to emphasise and recognise the valuable contribution that older people make to society. In a debate in which we are talking mainly about the costs of an ageing population, it is important that we look at the enormously positive contribution that older people make. That point was made during the committee’s inquiry by Professor Charlie Jeffrey of the University of Edinburgh, who talked about releasing “the talents and energies of the over-65s.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 11 January 2013; c 477.] It is really important to emphasise that point at the outset. Of course, releasing those talents and energies will be possible if the extra years of life that people are getting are extra years of healthy life. As we know, that is not always the case and that is one of the main issues that we have to address. The fact is, however, that even if every extra year of life equates to an extra year of healthy life, we will still spend more on older people, as the table on page 11 of the committee’s report emphasises. That table is important, because it tells us that if we were to ensure that every extra year of life became an extra healthy year, we would spend £1 billion less in 2030 than we would in the worst-case scenario of people having more and more years of unhealthy life. The other side of what that table shows is that even in the best-case scenario, we will spend a whole lot more on older people by 2030—indeed, we will do so long before then, unless we change how we deliver services. The main change, which has already been highlighted, is the doubling of the over-85 population by 2030, with the inevitable increase in dementia and various other factors. The main conclusion that we should draw from all this has to be that we must change how we deliver services. The need to change was crystallised in the report—as it was in previous reports—by focusing on emergency admissions to hospital. I think that it was the cabinet secretary, in the evidence session to which I referred, who reminded us that £1.4 billion is spent on emergency admissions to hospital, which is more than the whole social care budget of £1.2 billion. The issue of emergency admissions has been a focus for the current Government, as it was for the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration. It was probably the main theme of a report by David Kerr, in particular the report by the action team on care of older people. I still see that team’s report, which formed part of the Kerr report, as one of the key documents for explaining the kind of changes to delivery of care for older people that are required. In summary, it said that we need a “change of focus from episodic to sustained co-ordinated care ... an anticipatory approach based on the identification of those older people with the most complex needs ... and sustained care at home and in local settings.” It said that “Increasing integration of health and social care” with services organised around the user, is a key part of that. We have been talking about the issue for 10 years at least. I am not particularly blaming the current Government, because we did not do any better, but it has to be said that we are not reducing the number of emergency admissions. It is an important recommendation from the committee that we should have research into why that is the case. However, the cabinet secretary referred to collaboratives, which are perhaps even more important than research. A lot of good practice is out there; there are lots of good examples of people making the changes that everybody knows are necessary, but they are not common or universal enough. Just as the early years collaborative is beginning to spread good practice, and just as we read in this morning’s Scotsman about the patient safety collaborative’ s excellent work, a collaborative that focused on how to shift care from the acute sector into the community would be incredibly worthwhile, because that is probably the most important issue that we face in health and social care. Housing is also a central part of the integration agenda. There were concerns about the fact that the original consultation on health and social care integration did not cover it, but I think that the situation has changed since then. I have no doubt that we will hear more about that on Thursday. Smart housing and electronic systems to monitor safety—often called telecare—are aspects of that and the more of it we have, the better. As the report emphasises, we also need more adaptations. My council—the City of Edinburgh Council—emphasised the limitations of adaptations, particularly in areas like Edinburgh that have much tenemental property, and it emphasised the need for new supply. The cabinet secretary will be pleased to hear that I will not do my standard housing speech, but I remind him that the council told the committee that the number of households in Edinburgh would grow by 43 per cent between 2010 and 2035. If that does not highlight the need for new supply, I am not sure what does. There is a housing strategy for older people, but our report notes a degree of concern about the absence of benchmarks and specific resources for that. Housing is crucial and more needs to be done on that. We now have a Deputy Presiding Officer in the chair, so I do not know whether I will get as much latitude as the Presiding Officer suggested was available.

I will conclude with just two points. I will stick with the theme of the City of Edinburgh Council. The report highlights and praises the long-term planning that the council has—unlike many other councils—undertaken. A 10-year financial plan was referred to, and the council is looking to 2035 at least in its scenario planning for housing and other issues. In that regard—and possibly in others, now that we have a new council—Edinburgh is a model for the rest of Scotland. The fundamental conclusion that we must draw from the report is that we need to deliver services differently. I will finish with a brief quotation. I do not know whether any members follow the blog of Audrey Birt, who was the director of Breakthrough Breast Cancer until a month ago. This week, she wrote a blog piece about the implications of the baby boomers for services. In a way, she encapsulated well what people have tried to say. She said: “Services that join and connect around people are efficient and empowering for all, but to be achieved people”— meaning the people who deliver the services— “will need to give up their pasts and work flexibly into their futures.”

I am a great fan of collaboratives because of my experience of them in health, so I welcome the creation of the early years collaborative. Who was invited to come? Who made up the 700 people who were involved? Will there be opportunities in due course for more people to be involved?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I am finding it slightly difficult to follow the cabinet secretary’s train of thought. RPP2 acknowledges the importance of peatlands in retaining and filtering water, but that particular aspect of Government policy seems to go against what the cabinet secretary is saying. I find it difficult to understand the strength of her objection to what is a very reasonable and modest proposal.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I am trying to understand Nicola Sturgeon’s argument. She will understand why stakeholders have found it puzzling that there is one definition of value in part 1 and another in part 3. I understand that she has tried to explain the reasons for that, but I still find it very difficult. It appears that part 3 will limit the factors that Scottish Water takes into account and that it will therefore, in effect, act against the laudable intentions of widening the scope of value in part 1.

I was pleased to be on the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee during stage 1, but I departed to pastures new in the Finance Committee before stage 2. I found this bill to be one of the most difficult ones that I have had to grasp—indeed, an image of trying to grasp water in my hand occurred to me several times when I was considering it. I have no doubt that that was due to deficiencies in my understanding. I have come to appreciate the bill a little more over time. Part of the problem is that, although the bill is modest and worthy, it does not live up to the expectations and rhetoric around the hydro nation that we heard before it was introduced. Having said that, I think that the bill is worth while and that the parliamentary process has been good. I was not present at stage 2, but I read the Official Report of proceedings and it is fair to say that the cabinet secretary listened and responded to many—although not all—of the concerns that had been expressed about the bill. Across the Parliament there is wide acceptance that water is more than a prized natural resource and is an essential that we cannot do without. Key industries, from agriculture and food and drink to manufacturing and energy, depend on Scotland’s natural water resources and have an interest in ensuring their sound management. Water is held particularly dear by people in Scotland, and Scottish Water’s status as a public company is highly valued, as members said. That goes back to the key privatisation debates that Elaine Murray and I remember so well—privatisation was an early issue that I was concerned with in the Westminster Parliament. The debates showed the strength of the people of Scotland’s feelings on the matter, and the Scottish Government was right to decide that there should be no change to the status of Scottish Water. A consequence of the current status, as the cabinet secretary reminded us, is that water bills in Scotland are significantly lower than water bills in England. The bill sits with the hydro nation agenda, which is all about realising the value of Scotland’s water for the benefit of the Scottish economy as a whole, as well as Scottish industry. However, we must be clear that the value of Scotland’s water cannot be measured simply in pounds and pence. Water is a valuable resource in the widest possible sense, so I am pleased that at stage 2 the Scottish Government agreed to the amendment that widened the concept of the value of Scotland’s water resources. It is about realising not just economic benefit but environmental and social benefits and it is right that that is explicit in the bill. There must be an all-Scotland response to our economic difficulties, but the development of our economic potential has to be consistent with important principles of sustainability, especially where Scotland’s water is concerned. I welcome today’s further developments in that regard. Jim Eadie talked about the need to attend to all three pillars of sustainability and his amendment 25 strengthened those pillars, as did the cabinet secretary’s amendment on the monetary and non-monetary value of Scottish Water. I welcome the duties on the Scottish ministers in part 1. I perhaps did not appreciate the issue at the beginning of the process. It is important that things that ministers could choose to do will now be requirements. I am pleased about that. However, as I said earlier, I still think that there is a bit of a contradiction between the duties of the Scottish ministers and the rather narrower duties of Scottish Water. I suppose that I should apologise to the cabinet secretary for asking her to explain her explanation—no doubt there was another failure of understanding on my part—but I was expressing concern that external stakeholders raised, and in relation to today’s amendment to section 22, I am concerned that Scottish Water may interpret its duties in a rather narrower sense as a result of the insertion of the word “commercial” before “value” in new section 50A(1) of the Water Industry (Scotland) Act 2002. It is important that Scottish Water meets its wider duties relating to the environment—meeting water framework directive obligations, minimising carbon emissions and so on. As the cabinet secretary indicated, co-operation is vital for Scottish Water. I would like that to have been stated in the bill in relation to all its statutory duties. Working in partnership with other bodies will be crucial for Scottish Water in achieving its objectives. The same applies to the whole issue of scrutiny. I am pleased that Jim Eadie’s amendment 26 on scrutiny was agreed to but, again, there must be scrutiny of all Scottish Water’s statutory duties. I think that we are getting a little bit of extra time, so I will briefly—

I have not commented on two of Elaine Murray’s amendments, so perhaps it is in order to express some disappointment that her amendment 2, asking for ministerial duties to apply to Scottish Water Business Stream and Scottish Water Horizons, was not accepted. It seems that Scottish Water describes those bodies as standalone businesses. It concerns me that Scottish Water will not view it as part of its duty to issue directions, and it would have been better if Scottish ministers were able to issue directions to those two companies, too. Like other members, I am puzzled about the provisions for fats, oils and greases not being changed with reference to schools and certain other public bodies. The reason seems to be to do with the possibility of financial burdens being imposed on the public purse. If there is time, perhaps the cabinet secretary could explain in her summing up what those burdens under the Sewerage (Scotland) Act 1968 are—those seem to be the main reason why she did not accept Elaine Murray’s amendment 5. I was also disappointed that the cabinet secretary did not accept Elaine Murray’s amendment 1 on peatlands, which are a vital part of Scotland’s water resource. Peatland restoration can improve raw water quality, as well as having other economic and environmental benefits. Having expressed some disappointment regarding those various amendments, I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary has accepted other amendments, both today and at stage 2, and the fact that we now have a better bill than we had at the start of the process.

I congratulate John Mason on bringing forward this important but complex debate. It is complex in practice, but not in respect of the principles that should underline what happens in the area. It is worth quoting again from the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which says: “Children whose parents do not live together have the right to stay in contact with both parents, unless this might hurt the child.” That is consistent with what is stated in our 2006 legislation. There are automatic parental rights and responsibilities for fathers whose name is included on the birth certificate, although again that is subject to the welfare of the child. As a father and now a besotted grandparent, I absolutely empathise with men who are separated from children whom they love. However, we must recognise, as the UN convention and our laws recognise, that there are circumstances in which it is not in the interests of the child to be in contact with the father. Obviously, domestic abuse is the most clear-cut example in that respect, but there may be other circumstances. That must be borne in mind. The other slight problem that I have in the debate is the name Families Need Fathers. I have met Ian Maxwell, who heads up the organisation in Scotland. I used to know him when he worked for One Parent Families Scotland, and I have a very high regard for him. I told him that I think that the organisation’s name is a problem, quite apart from the fact that some people confuse it with Fathers 4 Justice, which is certainly not a very desirable organisation. More fundamentally, the word “need” is wrong. Today’s debate comes very conveniently after yesterday’s debate, in which we all spoke about lone parents and the superb way in which many of them bring up their children. Indeed, we could talk about two women carrying out the same duties—as Anne McTaggart said, families comes in all shapes and sizes. It is therefore regrettable that the organisation is called Families Need Fathers, because that has unacceptable connotations around the nature of the family. That said, a lot of what Families Need Fathers is campaigning for is progressive and, it could be argued, even potentially feminist. Men having more to do with the upbringing of their children is an important part of the equalities revolution and the ending of traditional stereotyping. It is absolutely right for us to encourage men to have more to do with the upbringing of their children and, consistent with the welfare of the child, it is right that they should have the opportunity to do that, even when they are separated from the mother of their children. I apologise to Aileen Campbell because I mentioned dads rock yesterday and here I go mentioning it today, but it is an excellent example of an organisation that works with fathers in my constituency as well as elsewhere. I thank Aileen Campbell for visiting the organisation in West Granton. It is making a serious effort to make sure that fathers are encouraged and supported to be more involved in their children’s care. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government’s parenting strategy has the same objective. There has not been much discussion of the wider objectives of that strategy, which some have criticised. We have even heard from the usual suspects about the strategy being a feature of the nanny state, but I welcome it because parents need support. Parenting is possibly the most important thing that anyone does for the future of society, so it is important for us to have a strategy. I also welcome the money that is being put into family support. I do not know whether Aileen Campbell is able yet to say more about the details of how that is being spent, but it has been widely discussed and I welcome the Government’s financial commitment to that agenda as well as its wider commitments to the parenting and early years strategies.

Why does the cabinet secretary, along with the First Minister, keep saying that there is a parallel with the Wishaw situation, in which there was a few days’ gap between the first and second inspections? Surely it is totally unprecedented for there to be a gap of four months between inspections. Why did the minister and his colleagues not listen to the whistleblowers who approached him to tell him the truth about the matter, rather than the version from HIS, which, unfortunately, he is still giving to the Parliament today?

I congratulate David Torrance on securing this important debate and I welcome to the gallery the representatives of Fife Gingerbread. I am not a member of the Scottish Parliament for Fife, but I have been aware of Gingerbread as a national organisation for a long time and I have a long-standing interest in support for lone-parent families. Because of that, I was interested to read about the activities of Fife Gingerbread, and like other members I am extremely impressed by the range of its activities. I was pleased to hear Annabelle Ewing and Elizabeth Smith criticising the stereotyping of lone parents. I was particularly pleased to hear that from Elizabeth Smith, because I think that the first speech that I gave on lone parents was 20 years ago when, I am afraid to say, stereotyping of lone parents was raging in the party that she represents. I do not think that that is the case today, but we must recognise that the UK Government’s welfare reforms will have an adverse effect on lone-parent families in particular. Children in lone-parent families are already twice as likely as children in two-parent families to be poor, and that is set to get worse. An important part of the support for lone parents is the responsibility of Government. Jayne Baxter talked about the importance of affordable childcare; in general, financial support for lone parents should be top of the agenda. However, help for families with one parent goes beyond financial assistance. Emotional and practical support from groups that have an appropriate level of understanding and experience of the unique issues that lone parents and their children face is invaluable. Fife Gingerbread has provided such support for a quarter of a century and we cannot overstate the value of the service that it provides to hundreds of families, which highlights the importance of continued investment in a sustainable framework of support for all single-parent families. I was particularly impressed by the buddy project, which has been mentioned. The scheme enables parents who have experience of being the sole provider to feed back into the Gingerbread project and to support others who are going through similar experiences. The buddies who take part gain satisfaction from knowing that they can impart knowledge in an empathic way, and the system provides the opportunity for training and gaining new skills in a community-oriented setting. I am not sure whether buddies were involved in the surviving poverty project, but I know that peer researchers were used and that the importance of the research comes from the fact that people listened to the experiences of lone parents. I have also been impressed by the different ways in which Fife Gingerbread conveys information. There is the traditional newsletter, and the organisation also has a presence on social media; I was pleased to start following it on Twitter today. Of course, that approach enables it to reach a large number of interested people in a new way. However, all the online information in the world is no substitute for the emotional and physical benefits that are provided in establishing a regular system of face-to-face support, and Gingerbread excels in assuring families and provides free home visits and group events. My time is running out, but I am sure that Aileen Campbell will want to mention—I may be stealing her thunder—something that I saw on Twitter today. An advert has been placed for a new position with Fife Gingerbread that will link up with Edinburgh so, at last, there will be a connection with my constituency. It is looking to appoint a project worker to work with dads rock, which is an Edinburgh organisation. Unsurprisingly, that organisation will be called Fife rocks and will be based on the other side of the Firth of Forth. I know from my constituency experience of the great work by dads rock to provide one-to-one support to fathers and their children. I will stop on that convenient link to tomorrow’s debate, which will provide another interesting angle on a similar subject.

Does the Scottish Government, in discussions with local authorities and housing associations, take seriously the possibility that there is a loophole in terms of the definition of “bedroom”? Will the minister raise that issue with local authorities and housing associations as a possible way round the problem? Also, when the minister is talking to them, will she urge them not to evict any tenants solely because they have not paid that portion of their rent that has been withdrawn through the bedroom tax?

I join Jim Eadie in congratulating Lothiansound on its valuable and remarkable work. It is a newspaper, as Jim Eadie has told us, for the blind and partially sighted, and it was established in 1988. At present, the paper, which is run by a group of more than 60 dedicated volunteers, is distributed, at no cost to the listener, to 550 people throughout the region. Even the postage is free, thanks to the Post Office’s Articles for the Blind, although there are of course running costs that require funding from generous donors. Tapes giving news updates and features are distributed 50 weeks of the year, helping listeners to keep on top of current affairs. As politicians, we like to keep in the loop. We value the ability to remain connected with what is going on in the world around us, so none of us would underestimate the good that such a resource can do in keeping blind and partially sighted people in touch with the issues of their localities and further afield. I am sure that most of the population who have full sight would be quick to complain were their newspapers, magazines, periodicals and other sources of information that are so important for ordinary day-to-day living to be suddenly withdrawn. There cannot be any just reason why those who are partially sighted or blind should have to make do without material that is available to others in the era of digital communication and enhanced connectivity. What is so wonderful about the resource that is supplied by Lothiansound is that it is delivered direct to the individual. Many people live in properties that do not as yet have access to the internet, and although some listening papers and blind resources have rolled out online at United Kingdom level—for example, the National Talking Newspapers and Magazines charity—services are still required that bring the news on tape direct to people’s front doors. The benefit that such a vital link brings to individuals who would otherwise be cut off is immeasurable. After 25 years of building and strengthening its exceptional service, Lothiansound indeed has much to celebrate. In addition, Lothiansound regularly runs social events that bring together listeners, volunteers and professionals from the blind community who give informative talks. That is all part of the process of keeping blind and visually impaired citizens informed and linked in with others who have direct experience of issues that are of mutual concern. Above all, the inclusive process is not only enjoyable and sociable, but contributes to a greater sense of belonging and wellbeing. Being in the loop not only benefits the intellect; the added social element of what Lothiansound does increases mental wellbeing for those 550 listeners. Direct contact between the senders of the tapes and the listeners strengthens the relationship between both groups and reminds them why the work is so valuable. Anyone who wonders about the psychological benefits that speaking newspapers bring and the positive impact on individual wellbeing that results from regular listening need only glance at the feedback that has been given to the RNIB to understand how valuable such services are. When asked what they had gained through being included in mailing lists, people gave the following responses: “I love talking newspapers ... Now I can no longer read, they are my lifeline.” “Your service brings in to my living room, a local newsagent.” “It’s so accessible and totally portable; you sit on the bus and plug in your headphones and you’re reading your magazine like anybody else.” “A lot of those magazines I took in print form, I had to gradually give up. To have them back again is great! It re-opens a world I thought was closing.” Those quotations go to the heart of why we are celebrating Lothiansound today. For 25 years, Lothiansound has provided a lifeline to hundreds of residents in the region. Driven by the work of dedicated and inspirational volunteers, Lothiansound’s success over the years is reflected in its accolades: it has won the Scottish tape competition newspaper section in 1994, 1996, 2000, 2002 and 2006. Surely that is something that we all applaud. The charity and its volunteers should feel rightly proud of their accomplishments. In conclusion, blind and partially sighted people have the same rights and needs as fully sighted people as far as their ability to communicate with the wider world is concerned. We now know that 550 individuals have that ability, thanks to the work of this wonderful group. I am delighted to congratulate Lothiansound and I congratulate Jim Eadie on lodging the motion.

Given that plans for transport in Edinburgh are based on an integrated bus-tram network and that there is a need to move seamlessly from one to the other, how does it make any integrated transport sense for the Scottish Government to say that concessionary travel will apply to one and not to the other?

I congratulate Margaret McCulloch on lodging this important motion, commend the Scottish Retail Consortium for its report and recognise the important contribution of retail to local communities, training and employment, including flexible employment. The motion refers to women and young people in particular. I note that 62 per cent of jobs in retail throughout Scotland are taken by women and that almost a third are filled by young people aged between 16 and 24. As the consortium’s report points out, many young people’s first experience of the world of work takes place in customer service in the retail sector. It provides a great environment, where key skills can be developed. Being able to communicate clearly and concisely, understanding the value of courteous service and working as a responsible team member are all transferable skills that will benefit employees and future employers enormously. The popularity of the retail sector as chief area of employment in Scotland is reflected in the recent recognition given to employees through apprenticeship schemes, such as the John Lewis programme that is highlighted in the consortium’s report. Those apprenticeships go further, building on the experience learned through employment and allowing employees to progress and feel that they have a stake in the success of the company. A member of staff in Edinburgh named Sarah, aged 21, expresses the view in the report that it is “a career rather than just a job”. That shows how truly investing in the development of employees in the retail sector can change mindsets and increase the enjoyment, and indeed the stability, of their position. The content of retail apprenticeships has been developed following extensive discussions with a cross-section of retailers. The focus is on ensuring that young people gain the core knowledge that is needed to work effectively in the modern retail world. However, there is flexibility in the programme content. Choices are possible within retail apprenticeship programmes to ensure that the programme suits the apprentice’s work role and their working environment. We must also recognise the challenges faced in the retail sector at present and ensure that the policies that are enacted in this Parliament do as much as possible to strike a balance between protecting support for small businesses and encouraging investment from larger employers, many of which provide the apprenticeships that I have just discussed. I am very lucky to have a large number of excellent small businesses in my constituency, particularly in streets such as Leith Walk and Broughton Street. Notwithstanding the difficulties that the former has suffered as a result of the tram works, I hope that the reinstatement of Leith Walk that will take place over the next year will lead to those businesses flourishing once again. Nationally, though, it is not good news everywhere. This week, experts have warned that there could be as many as 40,000 empty shops in Scotland’s high streets in the near future, some of which would be small businesses and some larger. There has already been reference to the fact that long-established high street chains such as HMV, Jessops and Blockbuster have gone into administration in recent months. In 2006, the City of Edinburgh Council published a review of the key sectors of Edinburgh’s economy that noted that “retail is central to the revitalisation and renewal of communities in the city, providing a vital community service, a focus for physical regeneration, and sustained investment in people and places. The future success of this sector is therefore central to the future success of the city’s economy as a whole.” Now, with the council’s publication of “Edinburgh by Numbers 2012/13”, we can see just how crucial the sector is for the regeneration of infrastructure in the capital and as a source of employment and an economic driver. A table in the document registering the number of people in employment in Edinburgh by industrial sector for 2010 illustrates that the wholesale, retail and repair sector employs 36,300, or 12 per cent of the overall workforce. The figures also show that Tesco and Asda are the two retail employers in the top 15 of job creators in Edinburgh. Edinburgh is a city looking to compete on a global scale; it is home to the Parliament and a successful financial sector and, in the foreseeable future, it is set to benefit from a truly 21st century transport system. I believe that that transport system, in particular the tram, notwithstanding its controversies, will ultimately contribute to the development and success of retail in the city centre.

I thank the cabinet secretary for what he has said already, but I will just re-emphasise that the population of the NHS Lothian area is increasing faster than the population in any other part of Scotland. Does the cabinet secretary accept that that is creating particular pressures on the NHS in Lothian, in addition to the inherited problems that the new chief executive is making a very good attempt at trying to sort out?

Labour is taking a focused approach to the budget by concentrating on two areas: colleges and housing. We are doing that not only because the economy and social justice require it but because the cuts to the college budget have been much bigger than the average cuts to the resource budget and the cuts to the housing budget have been much bigger than the average cuts to the capital budget. That was pointed out by, for example, the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee in its budget report. It said that, over the spending review period as a whole, the average cut to the capital budget is 33 per cent but the cut to the housing budget is 45 per cent. Of course, we should acknowledge that some improvements have been made. The total budget for housing over the spending review period, as announced by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, is £859 million compared with £1.39 billion in the previous spending review period. That amounts, roughly speaking, to a 40 per cent cut. Some of the gap between the 45 per cent and the 33 per cent has been closed following the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s recommendation. However, it would be much better to follow the Labour proposal because that would close the gap completely and a little bit more. I accept that it is a little bit unusual to say that all the consequentials could go to one area, housing, although that is not so strange for me because I have been arguing for several years in budget debates that housing should be the number 1 priority for capital expenditure. That is a proportionate and sensible response to the scale of the housing crisis. Shelter has already been quoted as saying that we are “heading for a cliff edge with regard to new completions”.—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 24 October 2012; c 973.] The Government recognises that, because it has made five separate additions to the housing budget over the past year, while changing the original target only marginally today, by 350. Although the Government recognises the problem, it is not dealing with the heart of the matter, because it will not address the fundamental problem of the big reduction in the subsidy level for each social rented house, which is manifesting itself in 3,000 starts a year. The Government quotes the completion rate, but that is based on the old subsidy levels. We now have a problem of many housing associations building few, if any, new social rented housing. That was brought home to me very forcibly at a briefing by the City of Edinburgh Council on Monday, when I was told that its projections over the current spending review period and beyond are that it will not increase the number of social rented houses in Edinburgh. That is not to say that a few additions will not be made by particular housing associations, but they will be netted off by some demolitions. There will be no increase in the social rented stock in Edinburgh, even though the level of social rented stock there is already among the lowest levels in Scotland. I was told that the social housing model is broken.

We have to do both. We need a significant injection of new money into housing because so many different actions have to be taken in this area. I am arguing that if the Government does not grasp that nettle, it will not solve the housing crisis. I realise what a crisis we have in Edinburgh, where 3,000 people are in temporary accommodation at any one time. That represents a 15 per cent increase in five years, and that is before the 2012 commitment kicks in. As I have indicated, Edinburgh has one of the lowest levels of social rented housing in Scotland. In addition—not many people outside Edinburgh realise this—it has one of the lowest levels of owner-occupation in Scotland: the City of Edinburgh Council is fifth lowest out of the 32 authorities in Scotland for owner-occupation. People will be surprised to hear that. I have offered an Edinburgh angle, which it would not be appropriate to go into in more detail now. The college cuts have also been bigger than the average resource cut, although next year’s cut is now £25 million instead of £35 million. I congratulate the NUS on its splendid campaign. I am sure that some members might have felt that they got rather too many emails, but it was all in a very good cause. It was certainly an excellent campaign. However, I have to say that I do not think that the NUS and its thousands of members and supporters will be dancing in the streets tonight, because the college sector still faces significant cuts, which come on top of the 70,000 reduction in the number of students at colleges and the concerns that exist about provision for the over-24s.

It is not just the NUS that feels that way. In its written submission to the Education and Culture Committee, Edinburgh College—which gave oral evidence at yesterday’s meeting of the committee—said: “Colleges will have to reduce costs rapidly to remain financially sustainable and there is a risk that opportunities for our students and our communities will be compromised. We believe savings and efficiencies can be achieved but the current pace of financial cuts runs the risk of creating a funding crisis”. As far as the economy and social justice are concerned, colleges and housing are the right areas to focus on. Labour’s proposals for funding those areas have been criticised, but the Scottish Government supports the use of revenue for capital—that is exactly what the NPD model does. Labour’s proposals involve using a little bit more NPD, but they fall well within the 5 per cent cap for revenue-financed projects. The most recent answer to a parliamentary question that I saw on that from John Swinney said that the payments for revenue-financed projects would amount to 3.3 per cent this year. Therefore, Ken Macintosh’s funding proposals are perfectly feasible.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Since the cabinet secretary uses the term “universal benefits” to cover the devolved universal services, is she saying in the last two lines of her motion that it would be impossible, post independence, for a devolved Scottish National Party Government to protect what she calls “universal benefits”?

I always like to agree with the cabinet secretary whenever I can and I agreed with much of what she said, except of course the conclusion that she drew, as embodied in the last two lines of her motion, and her attacks on Scottish Labour’s position, to which I will return. Those attacks did not surprise me, but what did surprise me was the wording of the motion. The whole motion is about child benefit, but I—and I am sure all my colleagues on the Labour benches—have been concerned not just about the attack on child benefit but about the wider attack on tax credits and other changes in the Welfare Reform Act 2012. Jim Eadie raised a point about tax credits, which I think represent the integration of tax and benefits that he asked for. When we think of tax credits, we are reminded that the welfare state has always been a mixture of universal and targeted benefits. The SNP cannot admit that in its motion or its rhetoric, because that would undermine the whole basis of its attack on Labour in this Parliament.

Our position on tax credits is well known, because we have been leading a campaign across the UK to oppose the £4 billion being taken out of tax credits in the Welfare Reform Act 2012, on top of other changes such as the cut to the childcare tax credit, which have already made their way into the system. I am proud of Labour’s record on tax credits and other targeted benefits, but I am also proud of Labour’s record on child benefit. I am proud of what we are saying about it, because we want to keep child benefit as a universal benefit. We have said that we would pay for that by reversing the £3 billion tax cut from which the richest people in the UK have gained. I am proud of what we said about child benefit at the 2010 election—we said that we would uprate it beyond inflation—and, because I have a long political memory, I am also proud of what the Labour Government of the 1960s did. In 1967, the Labour Government made a significant increase in family allowance, paid for by taxation on the well-off in society. My colleagues and I do not need any lectures about defending the welfare state. The simple fact of the matter is that the best way to defend it is to elect a Labour Government in 2015. That is why the last two lines of the motion, which are the heart of the SNP’s case this afternoon, are simply untrue. However, they reveal how the SNP intends to frame the referendum debate and, crucially, how it intends to invent its enemies.

If Labour has made just one mistake since we invented the welfare state in 1945, that is not too much to complain about, considering all the other excellent things that we have done to create and defend it. Of course, the last two lines of the motion refer not only to reserved issues but to devolved issues. That was the point of my intervention on the cabinet secretary. The last two lines of the motion also repeat the First Minister’s surprising statement at the SNP conference that the only way to defend what the SNP called universal benefits in this Parliament was to vote for independence. Is the cabinet secretary seriously saying that, if there is a no vote in 2014, the SNP would be unable to campaign in the 2016 election to defend what it calls universal benefits in this Parliament, whether free personal care, free concessionary travel or free education? More importantly, universal benefits are currently being used as a stick with which to beat the Labour Party and—I repeat the phrase—to invent enemies. There have been some astonishing examples even this afternoon. Kevin Stewart said that the state pension would be abolished. SNP people on Twitter and elsewhere regularly say that we will abolish concessionary travel. From time to time, people even say that, because we question one or two universal services or the way that they are implemented, we are against the national health service. That is patent nonsense.

If Kevin Stewart was listening, he would know that I was talking about Labour policy. Those arguments are being used against what the Labour Party says in this Parliament and in the UK Parliament. The reality is that the Labour Party invented the NHS and that there is always a debate about how much will be within the universal scope. That is what the argument about free prescriptions, for example, is about. The same goes for free personal care, which I supported and extended into the universal principle. Let us be honest about this debate: the welfare state is always a mixture of the universal and targeted. It would help the debate if the SNP would recognise that. Nicola Sturgeon rose— I would give way if I was allowed to, but I do not think that the Presiding Officer will let me.

I and all my colleagues are working inexorably to have a Labour Government in the UK in 2015. We will strive to achieve that. We believe that it will happen and that it is the best way to defend the welfare state.

As I have said before, I totally support the review, but it is quite a different thing to say that we are going to abolish concessionary travel, when we may be looking at modifying it. As the member knows—the issue came up at the Finance Committee two weeks ago—Age Scotland, for example, wants to modify it. Does he reject its suggestion as well?

Does the minister accept that the previous RPP placed too great an emphasis on proposals, especially in the transport sector? What proportion of the total transport effort in the second RPP is focused on policies? Given that transport emissions are now greater than those in the baseline year of 1990, does he accept that those policies require to be radical demand-side policies to halt the inexorable rise in vehicle kilometres and vehicle emissions?

Clearly, £82 is a bit better than £68, but it is not much better. It is important to put that on the record in the context of this debate. We should remember what disposable income is; it is not for luxuries. It includes, for example, the money that people spend on food. If someone has a largish family, food can take up quite a lot, if not most, of that £82. Today, once again, the cabinet secretary is making a great deal of the parallel between civil legal aid and criminal legal aid. He wants to align everything. The fact is that he is doing the opposite with the next group of amendments, on contributions, but I will leave that until we discuss them. He wants to have the same treatment for civil legal aid and criminal legal aid, and he has repeatedly—although thankfully not today—used the example of domestic abuse. That has been a good debating point for him, but he cannot build an argument on one example. I do not think that any woman who is a victim of domestic abuse or violence should have to pay any contributions, so I do not think that that is a valid argument for saying that civil legal aid is exactly the same as criminal legal aid. The situation is different when the state is against the person, they have no choice and—crucially—they may well be innocent. In this argument, we are forgetting that many people who are accused end up being found to be innocent. That is relevant to Graeme Pearson’s amendment 23, which we will discuss later. The problem with the bill is that it has been entirely driven by finance. We all understand the financial difficulties that the Government faces, but the sums of money in question are not enormous sums and they cannot override the paramount interests of justice. The cabinet secretary has been forced to modify a very bad bill so that it ends up as simply a bad bill, but that does not alter the fact that it is still bad.

This is another area in which the cabinet secretary had to back down because he got things so badly wrong at the beginning. Part of the problem is that because the changes have been made so late, people do not yet know the detail of how the system will work in practice. That is why I support Lewis Macdonald’s amendment 7A. He is at least trying to provide some clarity and not leave things completely open ended. Once again, we must state the fundamental objection to what is happening. I know that some members were a bit puzzled about my reference to the analogy between civil legal aid and criminal legal aid, but when I first read what was proposed, I wondered why on earth, when the Scottish Legal Aid Board collects—highly successfully—all the contributions for civil legal aid and has all the systems to do so, it should be treated completely differently when it comes to criminal legal aid. I have had no proper explanation of that, apart from the financial one. Again, relatively small sums of money are involved, against which must be set the risks to the administration of justice. Some people might not be willing to pay for a lawyer, so they will not have one, and some lawyers might withdraw from the legal aid system because of the financial risk involved. Therefore, I think that there are still serious problems with the bill. It is clearly better than it was, but it is extremely important that we recognise that the alternative system that was proposed by the Opposition at the beginning of the process would have been a whole lot better.

One mark of a civilised society is how it treats people who are accused of crimes—particularly when we bear it in mind that many accused people are innocent. Amendments 23 and 25 focus on that point. The issue will be particularly important if the rest of the bill is agreed to, as earlier votes this afternoon suggest it will. It is important that innocent people who have had to contribute to legal aid have that contribution reimbursed. Graeme Pearson’s words, “in the interests of justice”, suggest that reimbursement would almost invariably be the case. It seems to be completely unfair that someone who has a modest or low income should have to go to that expense but still, if they are found innocent, be out of pocket because of what could in many instances be a mistake that the state has made. I know that the cabinet secretary will say that if contributions by people who have modest incomes are reimbursed, rich people who employ expensive advocates will also have to be reimbursed. That might be true in logic, but it is not true in practice. We all accept that, if people can afford to employ an expensive advocate, we will not be required to reimburse that cost. However, it is a perfectly reasonable proposition that contributions by people who receive legal aid should be reimbursed in most circumstances, if they are found innocent.

I am glad to follow the convener of the Justice Committee, although I have not heard her use that argument before—that the bill is not quite as bad as what is happening in England. It is certainly bad enough. Let me start with part 1, which we welcome in general terms, although I regret that the cabinet secretary did not accept any of the amendments that Jenny Marra so forcibly and eloquently put forward. Underlying Jenny Marra’s amendments was the desire to do two things. The first was to open up the Scottish civil justice council to ensure that it has proper lay representation, including gender balance, and to make the whole system more transparent. That was a really important set of proposals. The second principle that she was trying to enshrine was that the council must be accountable to the Parliament so its recommendations must go to ministers and thereby to the Parliament as well as to the Lord President. I was concerned when I heard the justice secretary say on one occasion today, “The Lord President has assured me”, because at stage 1, when I spoke on the subject at greater length, the cabinet secretary again and again just left things to the discretion of the Lord President. I am sure that the present Lord President is an eminently worthy person, but we do not know who future Lord Presidents will be. I welcome the principles, but I was disappointed that no amendments were accepted. On part 2, I suppose that I should be charitable to the cabinet secretary for listening, or being forced to listen, but his listening has not made a good bill better. It has merely made a bad bill slightly less bad. We are not saying that everybody should be entitled to have all their defence costs paid—of course not. There is already means testing in the system, and I do not know anybody who objects to that. What we object to is the scale of the changes that are proposed in the bill. As I said earlier, and as some SNP speakers have more or less admitted, the bill is driven by finance. I am very understanding of the Government’s financial difficulties, but it is not appropriate that something as important as the administration of justice should be driven solely by finance, particularly when the sums to be saved are not, in the scale of the Scottish budget, very significant. That is the underlying reason for the changes, but the argument that has been advanced is that we need an equation of criminal legal aid and civil legal aid. The cabinet secretary has gone as far as saying that he will amend the contribution limit for civil legal aid to enshrine that equality in law. I believe that that is a fundamentally flawed argument. Admittedly, the argument is a powerful and persuasive in relation to domestic abuse, and I have heard the cabinet secretary make that point on many occasions in the past few months. However, as I have already said, my view is that there should be no payment at all by women in domestic abuse cases. In addition, the more general point is that we cannot base a whole case on one example. As I said earlier, the general equation of the two situations is flawed, because when someone is accused they have the power of the state against them, they have no choice and, crucially, they may be innocent. That is why I think that the whole bill has been based on a fundamentally flawed premise. My colleagues and I have very serious concerns about the people on low incomes who will have to make a contribution. The position is made worse by the fact that, if they are found to be innocent, they will get no reimbursement. I merely restate my serious concerns about that. I regret that the modest amendment that Annabel Goldie moved to require a report on the impact of collection was not accepted, but we will have to look very carefully at how collection works in practice. Indeed, we will have to monitor the effect of the whole bill. As the Presiding Officer is indicating that I should wind up, I will say that I am glad that we are voting against the bill today.

When I read the strategy, the first thing that I noticed was the amazing contrast between the completed strategy and the draft that was issued a few months ago. I do not say that in a spirit of criticism, because it probably means that the Government was listening, which is not always the case when consultation documents are issued. On key change area 1, the draft contained little about the Scottish Government’s wider work on the early years and the focus was almost exclusively on the CAMHS specialist area. Almost the opposite is the case in the published strategy, to the extent that key CAMHS issues are ignored. One such issue is the need for an adolescent intensive psychiatric care unit, which the Royal College of Psychiatrists highlighted in its paper for members for this debate. I was more struck by the complete absence of reference to integrated care pathways for child and adolescent mental health, because the issue was mentioned in the draft and when I talked to a child psychiatrist, she said, “This is crucial; you must say that implementation support is essential for integrated care pathways.” However, integrated care pathways are not mentioned at all. I do not say that in a carping way, because I very much welcome the wider early years agenda that is highlighted and given prominent place in the strategy, in key change area 1. A preventative, population-based approach to mental health is particularly crucial in the early years, and I have to give credit to the Government more generally for having recognised that. The minister highlighted that, of course, in pointing to the importance of attachment and in his references to programmes such as triple P and incredible years, which are evidence-based parenting programmes that the Government is quite right to roll out. There are therefore many quite interesting and exciting things going on in the early years, the latest of which, of course, is today’s first meeting of the early years collaborative. I have seen such things in action in health and know that they can work. I believe that the early years collaborative will work, and I hope that Sir Harry Burns was right when he said today that it may have the butterfly effect. He is usually right, and I hope that he is right about that. Finally, on children and adolescents, I want to pick up on what Richard Simpson said. Let us not just do the early years to the age of three or five. Work in schools is important. I have seen the Place2be initiative in Forthview primary school in my constituency, so I certainly support what Richard Simpson said about that. On key change area 2, I like the focus on common mental health problems such as anxiety and depression, including in older people, and I welcome the fact that there is now a separate section for older people. I do not think that that was in the draft document. For those commonplace, or more commonplace, problems, people can of course benefit not only from access to psychological therapies, but from physical activity, as Aileen McLeod emphasised, and from social integration. I highlight the excellent community connecting project in Edinburgh, which has been run by Health in Mind, although it will be run in my area by the Pilmeny development project. Basically, it focuses on certain older people who have isolation and possibly depression issues and other mental health problems that are connected with that. The project pairs them up with a volunteer for four months, I think. The evidence is certainly that it has had a remarkable effect on quite a few older people in Edinburgh. That is a really good example of the wider mental health agenda for older people working. Richard Simpson said that I would say more about that, of course, but he said most of it. The matter was highlighted last week in the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on mental health. I will give one statistic that really surprised me—I think that I have got it right, as I checked it. Dr Gillian McLean, who is a consultant in the minister’s health board area, said that, in secondary care, 1 per cent of older people with depression are referred to a psychiatrist, whereas 50 per cent of adults—that seems to be a high figure, but I think that Dr Gillian McLean said that—would be referred to a psychiatrist. That is certainly an amazing gap. Many older people who should be referred are not. One issue that she highlighted, perhaps not with psychiatry, is that there is a lack of clinical psychologists who specialise in the care of older people. Therefore, there are some issues, but I give credit to the Government for having recognised that and for having a section in the document about it. Key change area 2 also deals with trauma and distress. Today and on Tuesday, Dennis Robertson highlighted the importance of eating disorders. We know that he can speak more from experience about that than anyone can, so I will not say more about it. On trauma, I recently visited the Edinburgh women’s rape and sexual abuse centre, which does really important work on counselling for women who have suffered the trauma of rape. I highlighted the funding problems there in a previous debate. We have to look at the wider support services for people who have gone through trauma. I have only one minute left to deal with key change areas 3 and 4, so I will start to talk a bit faster. Crisis services are really important. SAMH has said that they need to be rolled out across Scotland. I can certainly vouch for the fact that crisis services have been really important in Edinburgh. The crisis centre there is based in Leith. Users of mental health services campaigned for it for a long time, and it is a great model that we want to see more of. Prisons are covered in key change area 4. Mary Fee has dealt with them, but an issue that relates to prisons is the lack of advocacy. I am still concerned that I can find nothing in the document about advocacy. I think that I asked Nicola Sturgeon a question about that when the draft strategy came out, and my memory seems to tell me that advocacy would be included, but I cannot see it. It was, of course, an issue from the McManus review, so it is supposed to be carried forward from that. Perhaps, in winding up, the minister can tell us what will happen about the new further legislation on mental health. I have had six minutes, so this is a good point at which to end.

I, too, congratulate Alex Johnstone on bringing this important debate to the chamber. I pay tribute to Jamie Tosh and look forward to observing more closely the social networking experience that he has ensured for his children. The internet in general and social networking in particular are not intrinsically bad but, like anything else, they are potentially a force for good and potentially a force for evil, and we cannot uninvent them. Basically, the problem resides in the wider culture, so that is the fundamental issue that we must address. I will devote most of my speech to how we can educate young people and challenge some of their attitudes. Parental supervision is also important. Jamie Tosh clearly takes that view, and I commend him for it. I refer members to a really good article by Colette Douglas Home in The Herald today, in which she, too, says that, in the current circumstances, parental supervision will be necessary. We want more fundamental changes in the culture but, until those have happened, we must not hesitate to have parental supervision. I do not speak in particular as a parent, given that my children are all grown up. However, once we have worried about our children and a few years have passed, we start worrying about our grandchildren. That, quite apart from my wider concerns, is why I now feel particularly strongly about the forces in society that are leading to the abuses of the internet on which we are focusing. Like Dennis Robertson, I believe that we must challenge Facebook and other companies that are in charge of social networking sites, because they have a responsibility. I am sure that we were all deeply moved by what he said about sites that, in effect, promote eating disorders. We must challenge Facebook and others about such sites. In fact, that is precisely what the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust did in relation to a particular Facebook group. In the group, ex-boyfriends posted photos of girls with derogatory comments. Through the action and protests of Zero Tolerance, that group was closed down. We all need to follow such examples to ensure that people who are in charge of such sites take full responsibility for them. Educating and challenging must be fundamental. I commend the police in Leith, who, about a year ago, ran a campaign in primary schools in my constituency. It was based around a poster campaign about cyber-bullying. The police went into schools, talked to children and raised the profile of the issue. It is clear that cyber-bullying in primary schools—or indeed, secondary schools—is completely unacceptable. However, I must raise the issue of gender, because girls are often most adversely affected—perhaps increasingly so as they get into their teens, but in their pre-teen years as well. We ought to make reference to sexting. The National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children did a study about that and found that it was often coercive, with girls being most adversely affected. Sexting, of course, is sharing sexualised photos and images by mobile phone. The NSPCC said: “Sexting is not a gender-neutral practice; it is shaped by the gender dynamics of the peer group in which, primarily, boys harass girls, and it is exacerbated by the gendered norms of popular culture, family and school that fail to recognise the problem or to support girls.” We must look at the context for cyber-bullying, including sexting. That means that we must address the culture in which young people are growing up. We must examine the expectations about gender in that culture and what is regarded as normal and acceptable in relationships. Tragically, that is increasingly being poisoned by the influence of pornography. We must address that dimension of the topic as well. That is why, as I said in a debate two weeks ago, we must increasingly use in schools material such as the Zero Tolerance respect packs. Ultimately, we must challenge the attitudes that underlie cyber-bullying and the wider forms of gender stereotyping that are the underlying cause of the problem.

11. To ask the Scottish Government whether the transition between primary and secondary school can contribute to problems for secondary 1 and S2 pupils in English and maths. (S4O-01689)

Is the minister concerned that, while the number of secondary school teachers fell by 7.6 per cent in the last three years for which figures are available, the number of maths teachers fell by 9.1 per cent and the number of English teachers fell by 10.5 per cent, which resulted in larger classes, given that the general secondary population fell by only 2.3 per cent? Does he have any regrets at all about abandoning the previous Administration’s policy of having classes of 20 for English and maths in S1 and S2?

I am glad to hear that Nicola Sturgeon accepts the principle of amendment 7. If she is keen on the principle but not the detail, why did she not lodge an amendment of her own that could have embodied the substance of amendment 7 without some of the problems that she claims would arise from it?

How can we be sure that bodies will be added as a result of the amendments that the cabinet secretary made to the bill in relation to reporting to Parliament? Further, how can we be sure about what kind of bodies—for example, ALEOs—may or may not be included?

The bill is quite strange in a sense because, as introduced, it presented us with very little with which to disagree. I think that the only substantial point of disagreement on what was in the bill was to do with the royal exemption. The cabinet secretary gave way on that, so in a sense everybody agrees with everything that was in the original bill. On the whole, the substantive debate today and much of the debate previously has been about what is not in the bill. That debate will continue because, from Labour’s point of view, what should be there is still not there. The cabinet secretary made her headline announcement today, of course, and she presented it as the answer to all our questions and concerns. However, it is a fact that what she has announced today means that bringing new bodies under the freedom of information legislation will be entirely at the discretion of the Government of the day. That means that that will, at present, be at her discretion, given the SNP’s parliamentary majority, which is precisely what our amendments tried to avoid. The point that I made in an intervention on the cabinet secretary stands: everything that she has brought into the bill is about reports having to be published. There is no requirement whatsoever for any new bodies to be covered by freedom of information legislation. She has said that she will do that at her discretion—no doubt under the pressure that she has been under from the wider public and, indeed, her own back benchers, but that does not mean that any other minister in any future Administration would be under any obligation to introduce any new bodies. The second point that I made in my second intervention about the cabinet secretary’s objection to our specific amendments also stands, because there was nothing to stop her lodging other substantive amendments about ALEOs or any other bodies such as GHA, had she wished to do so, in order to correct our wording if she thought that it was technically wrong. The point about GHA that Iain Gray made was very interesting, because the cabinet secretary invoked the Scottish housing charter. In fact, good as that body is, there are still grounds for concern, because freedom of information means that the public decide what they will get and when they will get it. The charter means that it will remain entirely at the discretion of the housing authority to withhold or give information and to decide when it is released. The principle that I put forward in the stage 1 debate remains: if a body takes taxpayers’ money, it should follow FOI legislation. That is, of course, consistent with the long title of the bill that we debated all those years ago, which referred to “the disclosure of information held by Scottish public authorities or by persons providing services for them”. I believe that there is an issue in respect of article 10 of the European convention on human rights, which embodies the right to form an opinion. That involves getting information in order to be able to form an opinion. Quite a lot of European case law backs that up. I want to raise another point in the final minute of my speech. We are considering wider FOI issues. My point relates to how FOI is currently interpreted. The cabinet secretary should also address her attention to that. Before Christmas, I asked why a particular report from Healthcare Improvement Scotland on inspection of acute care at Ninewells hospital had not been released. The health minister said—among other things—that Healthcare Improvement Scotland “may” publish such reports. It seems to me that that is absolutely wrong. That body and other public authorities must publish such reports. My concern was increased when my colleague Jenny Marra received an email from Healthcare Improvement Scotland today that states that her FOI request about the report, which she placed in December, is not to be granted now but will be granted in March. However, the reality is that the inspection was in September, which was why she asked under FOI why the report had not been released. She is now told that it will be done in March. I commend the cabinet secretary for setting up the inspections of acute care for older people, but I think that, like Jenny Marra, she should ask why the report has not been released.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I will be charitable in the sense that I recognise and welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary will introduce a section 5 order. However, the point is that that is at her discretion. If she had accepted our amendments, that would no longer have been at the Government’s discretion, because legislation would have required certain bodies to be included.

Biomass is a bit like alcohol: it is not intrinsically bad; rather, it is harmful if used in the wrong way. The questions for debate and on which the Government must come to a conclusion are: where the line should be drawn, what the acceptable forms of biomass are, and what should be ruled out. I think that we would all accept that small-scale sustainable biomass, particularly with locally produced wood, is a desirable form of biomass that we see examples of throughout Scotland. We could probably go further and say that larger-scale use is also acceptable, as long as there is extensive use of heat because, obviously, the availability of heat is one of the potential attractions of using biomass. There are a number of factors to take into account that suggest to me and many others, particularly those in environmental groups, that any wider use of biomass is not best suited to achieving the Government’s climate change low-carbon objectives. An obvious example—which Angus MacDonald referred to—is the time taken between the sequestration and burning of the fuel stock and the resequester and subsequent absorption of carbon dioxide. That leads to a surplus of CO2 in the atmosphere that lasts for a long time, and that should be factored into considerations of what constitutes sustainable use of biomass. It appears that, in setting out to produce clear guidelines on sustainability, that carbon debt, along with problems concerning changes in land use and in the monitoring of crops, have been omitted from the equation. Like the campaign group Greener Leith in my constituency, which has done a great deal of work on this, I urge the Government to look again at those particular matters. I commend the Government for ruling out electricity-only biomass beyond 10MW, although I may prefer to have no renewables obligation certificates whatsoever for any form of electricity-only biomass, given that it involves efficiencies of only 20 to 30 per cent. One of the main concerns about the Government’s position relates to exceeding the 10MW ceiling for so-called combined heat and power biomass stations. I have praised biomass in so far as it genuinely uses and captures a great deal of the heat but, under UK-wide rules, as Claire Baker and Rhoda Grant emphasised, that could mean efficiencies as low as 35 per cent. If CHP is to receive subsidy, it must have efficiencies of at least 70 per cent. A further point is made by Greener Leith in its submission to the recent consultation in which it asked whether the Government is looking at capacity to provide heat or the actual provision of heat. An issue in Forth Energy’s application for the Leith biomass plant was the general talk about how it could potentially use the heat all over Leith and Edinburgh, but there were no definite plans and certainly no funding available as far as it was concerned to do so. That is an important issue, too. I have many other issues to mention and only one minute to go. Clearly, we must look at the importation of wood—if 90 per cent of wood is imported for large-scale biomass, that is not environmentally friendly. We also have to look at the replacement of forests in other countries because that is where the wood will come from. We have little or no control over that. Under current guidelines, biofuels sourced at the cost of forests is not considered sustainable. However, industrial plantations are at present categorised as forests and that leaves a potential loophole to be exploited, to the detriment of the indigenous peoples and environment of the region and to the detriment of the reduction of the carbon debt. We must consider the human rights of people in the countries where the wood has come from. The standards proposed cannot mitigate the serous climate, environmental and human rights impacts of large-scale biomass. I urge the Government to go a bit further, although I welcome the steps that it has taken so far.

I welcome yesterday’s announcement, but is it not the case that the IPTR referral criteria have proved extremely difficult to satisfy for orphan medicines? Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the independent appraisal will continue? Further, can he assure us that some changes will be made before 1 March in order that the fund’s money can be accessed?

It is a great privilege for me to pay tribute to Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust’s enormous contribution to the primary prevention of violence against women since its groundbreaking billboard campaign was launched in this city almost exactly 20 years ago. Zero Tolerance has always challenged male attitudes in relation to domestic abuse, rape and sexual abuse and is now extending that challenge to encompass what some people regard as being more acceptable forms of violence against women, including pornography, prostitution and commercial sexual exploitation more generally. I come first, however, to what seemed like a revolutionary moment in the winter of 1992-93, when I vividly recall graphic messages about the prevalence and causes of violence against women appearing all along Princes Street and in other locations such as Easter Road football stadium: “Male abuse of power is a crime.” “No man has the right.” “From 3 to 93—women are raped.” “End the male protection racket.” “She lives with a successful businessman, loving father and respected member of the community. Last week he hospitalised her.” The campaign shone a light on what had been in the dark for a very long time. It told us not just of the shocking prevalence of violence against women but of the way in which it affects all sections of society, contrary to some stereotypes of that time. Crucially, it related all that to gender inequality in society and saw violence against women as a profound societal and cultural problem that is rooted in unequal power relations between women and men. As far as I know, that campaign was also the first to target and challenge men. Before this evening’s debate, I re-read a speech about zero tolerance that I gave in the House of Commons 20 years ago, in which I referred to a current—at the time—Scottish Office campaign that targeted women and told them how to act so as to avoid suffering violence. The zero tolerance campaign was groundbreaking in many different ways. I pay tribute in particular to Evelyn Gillan and Franki Raffles, who so tragically died in 1994, because they were the two women who were the drivers of the campaign, although they incorporated the support of Margaret McGregor as chair of the City of Edinburgh Council’s women’s committee at the time, which was also important. Finally, I pay tribute to the Evening News, because it, particularly through the journalists Nicola Barry and Jean West, covered the campaign in a sustained, sympathetic and comprehensive way, which as well as the billboard campaign had a big effect on me. The campaign led to similar campaigns all over the country and, indeed, the world, but Zero Tolerance here in Edinburgh moved on to develop many more primary prevention materials and to engage in many more campaigns on violence against women. I do not have time to describe all that work, but I note the emphasis that Zero Tolerance has for some time been putting on early intervention. In that regard, the respect materials that Zero Tolerance developed for schools some time ago are particularly important, although the organisation is starting to plan action in the pre-school period. I was glad to hear that respect will be relaunched in a few weeks’ time and I hope that the materials will be taken up more widely by schools than they have been hitherto. I will mention one more campaign, because I attended its launch a year ago. The campaign is called the employers’ PACT—policy, action, communication, training—and it provides a package of materials for the workplace on violence against women. Zero Tolerance has run many campaigns and produced many materials, and is still doing so. I move swiftly on to the present, because zero tolerance has become more challenging than ever. We all know, I hope, that violence against women is a continuum on which there are various forms of violence. It is unfortunate that, for some people, some forms are more socially acceptable than others, such as pornography, prostitution, lap dancing and other forms of commercial sexual exploitation. Pornography is clearly about the abuse and exploitation of women and is a central part of the violence against women culture. I recently attended a lecture on rape-prone societies by Professor Miranda Horvath, from London, who is a well-known expert in the area. She gave the audience a little test. We were given a series of quotations, some of which were from men who had been convicted of rape and some of which were from lads’ magazines. We had to say which was which. I found that difficult, but the professor who was sitting next to me said that she found it totally impossible—and she is perhaps the number 1 academic expert on rape in Scotland. I am therefore pleased that Zero Tolerance has the porcupine campaign, which involves 16 to 19-year-old young men and women, who have targeted the porn industry through a Facebook campaign and in other ways. Prostitution and lap dancing will be discussed in Parliament this year. I pay tribute to Rhoda Grant and Sandra White for raising those issues, which are clearly also forms of abuse and exploitation. We should remember that nine out of 10 women in prostitution want to exit it, and that many—if not most—of them have suffered abuse. As well as remembering that prostitution is on the violence against women spectrum, I hope that over the course of the year we will look carefully at the evidence, particularly from Sweden, where the purchase of sex by men was criminalised in 1999, and from Norway, where that was done more recently, in 2009. I hope that members will look at the difference that criminalisation has made, because I think that the more we look at the evidence and understand the nature of prostitution, the more we will support Rhoda Grant’s proposals. This debate is about primary prevention, but I am sure that Zero Tolerance will not object if I use my final minute to highlight the funding crisis that faces the Edinburgh Women’s Rape and Sexual Abuse Centre. The centre faces a minimum loss of 50 per cent of its annual income as a result of the end of key funding streams. They are not Government funding streams, I hasten to add. The centre is one of the busiest rape crisis services in Scotland and the need for its services is significant. It has a nine-month waiting list and—tragically—demand continues to increase each year. Last year it cost the centre £330,000 to deliver support, and most of the money funds front-line staff. Currently, the centre has secure funding of £100,000 beyond May. If it is unable to raise sufficient funds, it faces losing 75 per cent of its specialist counsellors and support staff, and it is extremely concerned that that would leave women in Edinburgh and the Lothians who experience sexual violence and abuse without the support that they need and deserve. The figures that I have given highlight a continuing problem. Zero Tolerance would be the first to admit that, notwithstanding all the work that has gone into primary prevention, the problem is not going away. We have heard a lot about rape in India, which is absolutely appalling, but we should focus on rape in Scotland. We have a serious problem, so let us support organisations, such as Rape Crisis Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid, that provide services and continue to invest in the primary prevention work of Zero Tolerance and others, which is clearly needed more than ever.

For many years, the intention of policy has been to reduce the number of emergency admissions by developing services in the community. Has the Government carried out any assessment of why that has not happened? Are there are any plans to ensure that it will happen in the future?

I congratulate the Finance Committee on another excellent report, whose major theme is the support for those who are most disadvantaged and furthest from the labour market. The need for such support is not inconsistent with the policies of the existing or previous Government. Indeed, I was pleased to read “Working for Growth: A Refresh of the Employability Framework for Scotland” and the original 2006 document, with which I was associated, as a picture on the front page reminded me. In both documents, there is a strong focus on reaching out and engaging with those most distanced from the labour market as well as an emphasis on local partnership working, person-centred delivery and employer engagement. Over the years, the context for employability has perhaps changed more than the policy. At the time of the original document in 2006, we had a situation of serious recruitment difficulties. Indeed, employment academies sprang up in Edinburgh for the basic reason that vacancies could not be filled; by contrast, today we have a 146 per cent rise in long-term unemployment, which does not correspond—I say this with due respect to my Conservative colleagues—to a 146 per cent rise in laziness. While overcoming barriers to work remains at the heart of employability, the sad fact is that there are more external barriers now. Having said that, I must note that a Joseph Rowntree Foundation study tells us that, even before the full force of the recession, there was no evidence of any step change in support for those who were most disadvantaged in the labour market. The report also makes a more general point, which is echoed in the Finance Committee’s report, about the lack of evidence and evaluation of employability policies. I hope that, in summing up, the minister will take up that point and say what the Government will do about the issue, because it is clear that it is of fundamental importance to evaluate not just the short-term effects of policies but their long-term results. In spite of the good intentions of the policy documents of the current and previous Governments, why have we not succeeded in meeting the needs of the most disadvantaged group? I suppose that the first point is the endemic gap between policy and implementation. That is why I particularly welcome the formation of the employability and tackling poverty learning network. It is through such learning networks that good practice can be spread, and that is probably even more important than writing good policy documents. The second point is simply that both Government employability framework documents did not have a strong enough focus on the most disadvantaged. We owe a debt of gratitude to the Finance Committee for being focused in the report and for continually emphasising the needs of that particular group. As it happens, I have a good example of a project in my constituency that focuses effectively on those who are most disadvantaged and furthest from the labour market: Barnardo’s works at Granton, to which Kezia Dugdale referred in her opening speech. The national Barnardo’s works project provided evidence to the committee, which I think was generally welcomed, but having visited the site at Granton I know about the excellent work that is done there, based on partnership and joined-up working with referrers, support agencies and particularly employers, whose needs the project tries to meet. From reading about and visiting the project, I have found out about the one-to-one support that is offered and the focus on the most disadvantaged—most recently, the project has taken on a group of care leavers. The scheme gives time to the young individuals, and it is not restricted to the normal 13 to 26-week period. The focus is not just on 16 to 19-year-olds, but on those who are 19 plus and 19 to 24-year-olds in particular. That is a model project but, as Kezia Dugdale reminded us, it has enormous funding challenges, with many different funding streams and short-term funding provision that must be continually renewed. A second example, which will be well known to the minister as I think that she has presented certificates to it, is the Port of Leith Housing Association’s TOIL—training opportunities in Lothian—project in my constituency, which also focuses on those who leave school without qualifications and provides them with training and work opportunities. Those opportunities are not just in construction related work, as one might expect with a housing association, but in areas such as catering and hospitality. That is another excellent local example in my constituency. As I said, there are serious external barriers. I have mentioned some of them, but it would be remiss of me not to mention childcare, which is a serious barrier to entering the labour market for many people, particularly women. Notwithstanding yesterday’s announcement from the UK Government, which will help some better-off parents, low-income parents now find it more difficult to afford childcare because of changes to tax credits and other changes. The Scottish Government must do all that it can on childcare. I am reminded of the working for families initiative, with which I was associated in the past and which was a good example of how a devolved Government can do effective things to help those who are seeking work by providing childcare support. Another barrier was raised with me when I visited the violence reduction unit on Friday. I hope that all members know about the excellent work of the unit, which is based in Glasgow. During the conversation, the point came up that one of the many positive attributes of employability is that it is a powerful restrictor of violent behaviour. The concern that the unit’s co-directors raised with me was that many people with whom the unit works to get them into employment are ruled out for jobs because of protecting vulnerable groups—PVG—scheme checks and other ways in which employers look into people’s backgrounds. Of course, for some jobs, we need to know what offence has been committed, but I hope that the Government can examine that issue and ensure that the checks are applied only when they are absolutely essential, because it was put to me by those amazing individuals of whom I am sure members have heard—John Carnochan and Karyn McCluskey—that they are a serious barrier to ex-offenders in finding work. John Carnochan and Karyn McCluskey have now badged up the work as an initiative called redemption. That may have other connotations for some people, but for them it just means that we need to give people a chance. At the end of the day, that is what employability is all about.

I thank the Finance Committee for its excellent report. I am pleased to be back on the committee, although I was not a member while it was compiling its report. Mark McDonald said that Labour members who have spoken in the debate have argued for more money for everything, and I expect that the cabinet secretary will be looking to make a similar point when he winds up the debate. However, if SNP members and others had listened to the Labour speeches, they would know that we are concentrating on two areas for extra spending: colleges and housing. Those are absolutely the right choices, for the sake of the individuals involved and for the sake of economic growth in the wider economy. A focus on those areas would also enable us to address social injustice and inequality. I realise that it is difficult to realign revenue budgets, but I ask the cabinet secretary to concentrate, over the next two months, on the resource budget for colleges, in particular, and to reinstate that budget as far as possible.

I will give way later, if I have time. We all know that Audit Scotland pointed out the 24 per cent cut in college budgets between 2011-12 and 2014-15, which translates into the £34 million cut that is the focus of the current NUS campaign, which I support. That cut should be the focus of the cabinet secretary’s attention in relation to resource budgets in the next two months, and I hope that he can reinstate the budget as far as possible, not just for the individuals involved, 30 per cent of whom are from deprived areas, but in the interests of economic growth, as the Education and Culture Committee pointed out. We face the same combination of issues in relation to housing. We need to address housing for the sake of individuals and the wider economy. Kenneth Gibson reminded us that every £1 that is spent on construction translates into £5 for the wider economy. In the current financial circumstances, what I am asking the cabinet secretary to do is hard, but an opportunity was presented by the substantial amount of extra capital that he received from the UK Government, and he did not allocate enough to housing in his announcement yesterday.

In a minute. Even after the three in-year additions to the housing budget that were announced during the 12 months before yesterday’s announcement, there was a 45 per cent cut to the affordable housing budget over the spending review, compared with a 33 per cent general capital cut. That is the foundation of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s report, which all members of the committee accepted. I will give way to the member. Kenneth Gibson rose— Jamie Hepburn rose— I give way to someone.

People will make different choices on that. In previous budget rounds, I have tended to argue that housing should be the number 1 priority for capital expenditure. I have made my views known on other matters, including aspects of the road-building budget. People can make other choices; I am presenting the case for housing, which is pressing. The interesting point that I highlighted in a question to the cabinet secretary yesterday is that a year ago there were to be 6,000 new affordable homes per year and, after each of the three additions to the housing budget in the past year, the figure has still been 6,000. As far as I can see, after yesterday’s announcement of a further £50 million, the figure is still 6,000. I think that the reason is that we are struggling to achieve the target of 6,000 affordable homes per year, of which 4,000 are supposed to be in the social rented sector. The evidence for that is that in 2011-12 there were 3,000 social rented starts, as Elaine Murray said.

That is not the case. That was a good time for Jamie Hepburn to intervene, because I had just pointed out that there were 3,000 social rented starts in 2011-12, and it is obvious that it is the starts that will result in completions in future years. The good figures for completions that the Scottish Government had in 2011-12 were based on the much higher grant levels for housing associations that had pertained. Now, we have lower grant levels. Housing association after housing association told the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee that the £40,000 grant was unsustainable, and I have heard the same thing from housing associations in my constituency. That is the key reason why delivering 6,000 homes will be difficult. Of course, 6,000 will not be adequate to meet the need. The cabinet secretary needs to pay attention to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s recommendation that the £40,000 grant should be reviewed. I have only 40 seconds left. I speak regularly about climate change and I will not repeat what I said about it last week. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, which has an SNP majority, said that some change should occur between transport budget lines—it did not ask for extra money for transport—to provide more money for active travel. That is important not just for climate change but as a fundamental plank of health improvement. I hope that the cabinet secretary will look at that. In the budget debate, Labour is focusing on colleges and housing. I ask the cabinet secretary to do all that he can in the next two months to find more money for those aspects.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The three announcements that have been made during the past year of extra money for housing have not changed by one iota the Government’s previously announced objective of providing 6,000 affordable homes a year. How will today’s announcement of an extra £50 million change that target?

Why has the report into the acute care of older people at Ninewells hospital never been published? Why have more recent planned inspections been cancelled? Is the Scottish Government having second thoughts about a robust system of rigorous inspection and public reporting?

It is a great pleasure to follow Stewart Stevenson on the subject of climate change, as he clearly deserves a great deal of credit for steering our historic legislation through the Parliament, albeit with our collective support and, sometimes, amendment. His successor also deserves credit, in particular for his announcement about the climate justice fund two weeks or so ago. I am pleased that the Doha conference also agreed to establish an international mechanism on loss and damage. The details of that have still to be worked out, but it seemed to be one of the most significant achievements of the conference. The Scottish Government collectively also deserves a great deal of credit for many of its actions on climate change. I highlight its drive on renewable energy, of which I am always a strong supporter. I was pleased about the First Minister’s most recent announcement on marine energy, and I welcome all the developments in that regard. However, we cannot afford to have a debate in which we just pat ourselves on the back. Over the past couple of weeks, two Government statements and documents have given me cause for serious concern. The first was an official presentation that was posted online last week by the Scottish Government’s director of energy and climate change, David Wilson. The presentation exposes a large gap between Scotland’s planned and legally required carbon reductions. A graph shows a gap opening up between polluting business as usual and the statutory reduction target of about 18 million tonnes by 2027. The presentation has various scenarios, but even in the best-case scenarios, in which all the pollution-reduction policies are adopted, there is still a gap of 8 million tonnes. As Wilson himself says: “Some of the scenarios we have been developing just show quite how difficult it is … The longer you go out, the more and more challenging it gets.” The second document that recently gave me cause for concern was the Scottish Government’s carbon account for transport, which revealed that the net impact of all Scottish measures on transport was an increase of 71,000 kilotonnes of CO2 emissions. The report says: “This estimated increase in emissions is largely driven by a net increase in vehicle kilometres, which are anticipated to increase by 1.2% above a business as usual scenario in 2022 as a result of Scottish transport interventions.” In case anyone doubts what those interventions are, the report refers in particular to massive vehicle kilometre increases in Strathclyde and Aberdeen because of “large infrastructure projects”. In other words, the 40 per cent increase in the roads budget over the past five years is the key problem when it comes to transport emissions. We should compare that with the advice given to Stewart Stevenson by the chair of the UK Committee on Climate Change in a letter of 31 January this year, in which he said that it was “essential for the Scottish Government to ensure full roll-out of measures in devolved policy areas, such as demand-side transport”. Of course, demand-side transport measures were removed in the late stages of the last RPP, so I hope that action will be taken on transport in particular in the forthcoming RPP. Time is short, but I would like to mention briefly concerns about the change to the energy rating of new domestic and non-domestic buildings, which was announced this week. It is clear that the built environment and transport are the two biggest emitters in the areas of Scottish Government responsibility. Our amendment refers to duties on local authorities. It took rather a long time for local authority action plans to be produced. Perhaps the minister could say more about that. Fracking is very topical. Many experts say that it will increase climate change. We must take that into account, and I hope that there will be guidance on it, with a presumption against. Finally, I was very struck by advice from the UK Committee on Climate Change that said that household energy bills would be about £600 higher per year by 2050 if the UK relies increasingly on gas, and only £100 higher if the country concentrates on renewable power generation, including wind. I am glad that the Scottish Government is strong in those areas and am pleased to end on that positive note.

I congratulate Jamie Hepburn on lodging the motion, which commends the work of the people who are promoting awareness of violence against women and are campaigning for an end to it. It is quite right to mention White Ribbon Scotland in that context, because it is clear that men are the problem, in the sense that men cause the problem, and it is vital that men speak out on the issue. It goes without saying, however, that men must work with the leaders of the work, who are the women and women-led organisations who have been working in the area since the 1970s. During the 16 days of action, it is important to remember that work. In 1976, when Scottish Women’s Aid was founded, there was a lack of public awareness and understanding of domestic abuse and there was undoubtedly a failure by statutory agencies to respond appropriately. Much of the work that Scottish Women’s Aid did was around awareness raising and getting domestic abuse onto the political agenda. I wanted to say more about that, but I am conscious that I have only three minutes and I am already talking too fast, so I will briefly mention the Rape Crisis Scotland centres, which also started in the 1970s. Today, a network of centres across Scotland works to provide much-needed support to those who experience rape and sexual assault and to raise awareness and challenge myths. Activists and volunteers have driven much of the agenda around sexual violence. The third organisation that I want to mention is Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust, which had a profound influence on me when it started in Edinburgh 20 years ago, in 1992. I would like to say more, but I have lodged a motion that congratulates Zero Tolerance on its 20th anniversary, which has attracted 53 signatures and which I hope will be selected for debate soon, so I had better desist from saying more about the organisation. However, it is important to say that all the men who are involved in White Ribbon should work with the women’s organisations that have led and continue to lead the work. It is also important that White Ribbon asks men the hard questions on the subject. It should ask men not just to condemn domestic abuse—which I hope the vast majority of men would do—but to understand that male privilege and power are at the heart of the problem. Domestic abuse and violence against women more generally are rooted in gender inequality, which is reflected in the unequal power relations that continue to exist between men and women, the unequal pay structures and working conditions that exist and the value—or lack of value—that we place on women’s roles in every way in everyday life. In that sense, male violence against women is a profound societal and cultural problem that is rooted in social relations rather than just in the psychopathology of individual men. White Ribbon should learn that lesson from the women’s organisations that I mentioned. White Ribbon must also ask men to reject all forms of abuse and exploitation, including some activities that many people regard as being normal parts of masculinity, for example attending lap-dancing clubs. I could mention many other examples, but they will probably be mentioned in the Zero Tolerance debate, which we will have, I hope, soon, because such abuse and exploitation is the new frontier on which Zero Tolerance is focusing. In the 16 days of action, we should remember all the work that has been done and—most of all—the thousands and, indeed, millions of women throughout the world who have suffered and who continue to suffer the unacceptable scourge that is violence against women. I hope that members will come to the Zero Tolerance event in the Parliament on Thursday night. There are other events this week, such as the conference on Friday on rape and women’s inequality, which I will attend.

At the end of August I met a group of international students at what was then called Edinburgh’s Telford College, who, among their other concerns, were stunned to find that their fees had more or less doubled this year compared with last year. The fees have subsequently been reduced, but is it right that further education colleges should be able to charge whatever fees they like to non-EU international students?

I support Drew Smith’s amendment 1. Including in the bill a right of access to independent advocacy would not mean that everyone applying for self-directed support would be required to use independent advocacy services, but I believe that the decision to access such a service should be made by service users and not by professionals, as the minister suggested. That principle would genuinely build on the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. The minister claims to be building on the 2003 act, but the problem is availability, as Nanette Milne and Drew Smith have indicated. We know that in 50 per cent of local authorities, only those who have a statutory right under the 2003 act can access advocacy. What will that 50 per cent of local authorities say? They have an obligation to give information, but what information will they give? Will they say that, because their advocacy service is for mental health users, others cannot access that service? That does not seem to me to take us much further forward.

I thank the Health and Sport Committee for its useful report and the interesting discussions at stage 2. Most of all, I pay tribute to the many organisations that gave written or oral evidence and that also sent us very helpful briefings. As the minister said, independent living is at the heart of the bill, and the principles of freedom, choice, dignity and control underlie that. I therefore particularly welcome the minister’s additional amendment to section 1A to facilitate the principle of the person’s right to participate in the life of the community. Many organisations already aim to do that. I pay particular tribute to the Lothian Centre for Inclusive Living, which I visited recently and which has supported people to take control of their lives and live independently. I saw LCIL’s living and work choices course in action, and took part in it. LCIL illustrates in practical terms the principle that underlies the bill. I am pleased that local authorities are being obliged to facilitate that principle. Although the bill is absolutely right at the highest level, there are still concerns. In particular, there are concerns that the policy could be used as a cost-cutting exercise. That was the reason for some of Richard Simpson’s amendments this afternoon. There were, of course, disappointments around some of the amendments that failed this afternoon. I spoke in the advocacy debate, so I will not repeat the points that I made then, except to say that I believe that the minister’s amendment is particularly weak, given that 50 per cent of local authorities provide a service only to those statutorily entitled to it under the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. I hope that some action will be taken to ensure that local authorities expand that provision. I will not rerun the debate on charging carers, although I was struck by the way in which the minister gave detailed explanations that were not produced at stage 2. I have some concerns about that, because it is difficult for members, at the very last stage of a bill, to judge what a minister is saying in such technical detail. I urge the minister and his colleagues to ensure that that level of technical information is presented at stage 2 in future, so that members can consult the details of the 1968 act—or whatever else it is—and see whether what the minister is saying is convincing. In the stage 2 debate the minister said: “Section 16 is largely a technical provision”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 30 October 2012; c 2943.] That is certainly not what he said today, so I was quite unprepared for the information that he provided, and in that sense was forced to vote blind, although obviously I was guided by my able front-bench colleagues, who were very persuasive in their contributions. The issue of regulation was quite contentious. What struck me was the common ground between proposals from the Scottish Social Services Council—which I was attracted to for most of the time that I was looking at the bill—and what organisations representing disabled people in particular are saying, such as, “Let’s have training of personal assistants,” and, “Let’s support personal assistant employers to recruit safely.” There is a lot of common ground on the issue of training. I hope that a great deal of emphasis will be put on that because it is quite important, and is central to making the legislation work well. I welcome the legislation and will follow closely how it works out in practice.

The minister was looking at me throughout that contribution. My point was that that should have been explained at stage 2, because it was all new to us today and we could not judge whether the minister was talking sense or not. [Laughter.]

It is probably my fault that the debate has been extended, because I did not intend to speak in it, but I have found several of the speeches to be inspiring and the debate has raised many significant issues. Much of the debate might be couched in terms of what can be directed from central Government and what local government decides. It also leads us to the debate that we have been having about what should be free and what should be charged for. I do not want to prejudge the minister’s speech, but I suspect that some in Government will say that we cannot tell local authorities what to do and we cannot have any more free services, because of the financial difficulties. That would be a wrong approach, which is why we have suggested that we should open up the debate about the basic principles of free entitlements. From this debate, I have concluded two things. The first is that music education is extremely important. Iain Gray, in a powerful speech, indicated the many reasons why it is so important. The motion refers to the evidence about the general effects on people’s development, but we also know about the great pleasure that people get from music and the way in which it contributes to their happiness and wellbeing. The second issue that I started thinking about during the debate was the main theme of Jenny Marra’s speech, which was about the inequalities that exist on the issue. We all know that, in many areas, young people do not have equal opportunities. However, it behoves us in this Parliament to do all that we can to redress those inequalities. Traditionally, some aspects of culture have been very class based. Those with money have been able to develop their talents in many areas, whereas others have not. Music is one such area. The figures that Jenny Marra gave on schools in different areas of Dundee illustrated that powerfully. We have an obligation to address that problem and to regard it as a national priority. It is scandalous that people in some more disadvantaged areas should lack the opportunities that their neighbours in wealthier areas have to develop their musical talents. We must regard the issue as one on which the Parliament needs to take action. We cannot just leave it up to local authorities to make up their minds. That is why, as Patricia Ferguson reminded us, a previous Government took some initiatives in the area, through the youth music initiative and the creation of cultural co-ordinators, to try to democratise culture and give opportunities to as wide a range of people as possible to develop their talents in what are generally regarded as cultural areas. We were right to do that when we were in government, and the current Government should rise to that challenge and realise the importance of music. It does that, for example, through the money that it gave to Sistema Scotland to set up a big noise orchestra in Glasgow a week or so ago, which illustrates that it recognises the value of instrumental music tuition. However, it is not good enough to give that opportunity to just a small number of people; we must give that opportunity to the widest range of people possible, because that seems to be what justice and equity require. In general, the Government deserves credit for shifting some of the balance of policy discussion to the early years. Music tuition is an important aspect of giving people opportunities in the early years to develop their talents, personalities and their abilities more generally. I strongly support Iain Gray’s motion, and I commend Scotland on Sunday for taking up the music campaign. That illustrates that it should not get caught up in the general argument about what is free and what is not. Scotland on Sunday would perhaps not support universal entitlements in quite a few of the areas that the Government may support, but it has recognised that music is a key area in which charges should not be imposed. It is incumbent on us to act on that principle and address the problem.

The debate can be divided into two parts. The first issue is whether air passenger duty should be devolved and the second issue is what we should do with such a tax when it is devolved. On the first point, I am clear that—along with all my Labour colleagues—I support the devolution of air passenger duty. I welcomed the Calman commission’s proposal of that, and I regret that the UK Labour Government did not take it on board. To be fair to that Government, it had concerns about state aid rules. However, with the devolution of air passenger duty to Northern Ireland, it is clear that there are no European issues and there is no obstacle to devolving the tax. I think that the current UK Government supports that, and I hope that it will do the right thing as soon as possible. I look forward to the day when we have debates in this Parliament about taxation as well as spending. I hope that many taxes will be devolved to the Parliament as part of enhanced devolution. We should start the debate on air passenger duty today. As it happens, I started the debate in 1994 because I was lucky enough—if that is the right word—to be involved in scrutinising the Finance Bill that introduced air passenger duty. In preparation for today’s debate, I read the speech that I made back then; we had to make rather long speeches in Westminster committees in those days. In summary, we were totally opposed to the introduction of the tax. At that time, we felt that it was one of many tax increases that the Government of the day was proposing, and we also predicted—correctly—that, although the duty was starting at a low level, it would increase significantly over time, which is what has happened. The main thing that struck me when I looked back at my speech and the speeches of others in the debate was that there was no discussion whatsoever about the environment in relation to the tax. That is perhaps not surprising, because we were not very well educated about climate change in those days. Now, however, we really have to face up to the environmental dimension of the debate. The reality is that we must reduce our emissions by 80 per cent, but at the same time there is a massive growth in demand for air transport. Air travel is currently responsible for 5.5 per cent of CO2 emissions. That figure is predicted to be 15 per cent in 2030, and the Department for Transport in London says that it will be 21 per cent in 2050. Aircraft are also responsible for high-altitude emissions of nitrogen oxides and the formation of cirrus clouds and contrails, so the total climate change effect of all aviation emissions is estimated to be at least two to four times greater than the effect of just the CO2 emissions. That is a massive contribution to the climate change problem. Aviation is the most polluting form of transport. It seems that we have a fundamental problem with transport policy as a whole, as we always let the economic considerations trample on the environmental considerations. In any sensible debate on air passenger duty, we must look at both elements. I accept that the environmental arguments are complex. Air passenger duty is not an ideal tax from an environmental point of view. The Liberal Democrat proposal for taxing planes rather than passengers seems to be a good one, although it ran into some European problems. We would have to discuss what the best form of environmental taxation would be. However, when we have more tax-raising powers in this Parliament we will surely recognise that there must be a shift towards environmental taxation. Air passenger duty may not be an ideal tax, but we must consider the consequences of reducing it greatly with regard to the effect that that would have not just on public revenues but on the environment. I accept many of the minister’s economic arguments, although we must always look at economic evidence with some scepticism, as the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee discovered last year when it was examining the economic arguments for roads expenditure. Willie Rennie said that he read the York Aviation report with a degree of scepticism, and I share some of his feelings. He dealt with some of those issues in his contribution. I was struck by the fact that, while the York Aviation report said that the amount of revenue from air passenger duty in Scotland would be £320 million this year, I was given a figure of £183 million by the Scottish Parliament information centre. Admittedly, the SPICe figure is for the previous year, but there is a big discrepancy and I believe that there are certain question marks around the report. We must accept that the issue is complex. There will be economic advantages if we can attract more tourists to Scotland, which is an objective that we all share. At the same time, however, we must not overstate the economic consequences. All members have received a briefing today from Transform Scotland, which refers to research by the Aviation Environment Federation. I do not have time to read it all out, but I was struck by a quote from someone who is called Sir Brian Donohoe—it is news to me that my colleague Brian Donohoe is a Sir. As a great supporter of aviation and a great opponent of air passenger duty, he said: “I’ve not had a single person tell me they are not going on holiday because of APD.” We have to keep those things in perspective. Finally, we have to consider the loss of tax receipts that would result from lowering the tax. We have a Scottish National Party Government that once again wants Scandinavian levels of public services and American levels of tax. Every tax that is proposed for devolution and every tax that the SNP talks about in the context of independence will apparently be reduced. That will have an opportunity cost in economic as well as environmental terms. I support the Labour motion, particularly because it supports the devolution of tax. However, we need a mature debate on the issue, which recognises that air passenger duty is complex rather than simple with regard to its environmental and economic aspects.

Our amendment is as clear as day, because it says “believes that devolution of APD to Scotland should form part of” a review of APD, along with other measures by the UK Government. The position is absolutely clear.

I congratulate Jim Eadie on bringing to the chamber this important and interesting motion, which has a hopeful and encouraging message at its heart. When confronted with this tragic genetic disease, our first thoughts are for the boys who are affected and their families. I first became aware of the condition when I was approached by my constituent, Eileen McCallum, who some members might know as a well-known actress. She has two grandsons who have Duchenne, and she has campaigned tirelessly for better care and support as well as for funding for research. As part of that campaign, Eileen went to Denmark to make a film about the superb care that young people receive in that country. We should certainly learn from that—Mary Fee has already referred to that in her speech. She also mentioned the fact that boys in Denmark who are affected live longer into adulthood, and I am sure that we can learn many lessons by looking outwith Scotland. Having said that, I believe that we should also acknowledge the developments in care and treatment that we have seen over the past few years in Scotland, particularly through the Scottish muscle network, which is one of a large number of managed clinical networks that have greatly improved the standard of treatment and care in Scotland over the past 10 years. The focus of this evening’s debate is on recent developments in gene therapy. I have been aware of gene therapy as an exciting area of medicine for some time, particularly in relation to cancer, but I was not aware of the specific developments in relation to Duchenne muscular dystrophy until I read Jim Eadie’s motion and looked into the background. The motion highlights the use of the adeno-associated viral vector for gene therapy. The aim is to mask the deleted exon or exons that are a feature of muscular dystrophy to facilitate production of the dystrophin protein. It is really encouraging to read in the motion and some of the background papers that gene therapy is already producing some exciting developments and results. That is why there is such a message of hope in Jim Eadie’s motion. Jim Eadie also made some positive and helpful suggestions about carrying the work forward, and I hope that the minister will respond to them in the winding up speech. We need to pay tribute to the super work of Action Duchenne in the context of the debate. It has been involved in partnership funding on research and, as Jim Eadie has suggested, the Scottish Government should pursue that model. The largest sums of money for medical research clearly sit with the UK Government and funding councils, but the chief scientist’s office has a significant budget for research and its current chief scientist, the brilliant Professor Andrew Morris, has a particular interest in the genetics of medicine. I hope that the Scottish Government will respond positively to Jim Eadie’s call for the involvement of the Scottish Government and the chief scientist in partnership funding for research. The other aspect that Jim Eadie referred to was the importance of clinical trials. Again, the motion refers to some new developments that give us encouragement. I hope that the Scottish Government will do all that it can to ensure that those who are affected in Scotland are involved in clinical trials. Once again, I pay tribute to Jim Eadie for bringing the motion to Parliament, and to Action Duchenne and the many people who work tirelessly for that organisation. That includes John Miller, who is in the public gallery and who prompted me to speak in the debate, for which I thank him.

I start by thanking and congratulating the Finance Committee. The stage 1 reports of committees have always been one of the strengths of the Scottish Parliament compared with other Parliaments, and the report that we are considering shows the committee system operating at its best. I congratulate everyone on that committee. Various speakers, including Paul Martin and Iain Gray, mentioned the history of the freedom of information legislation. The Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 is one of several acts that those of us who were in Government at the time can rightly be proud of. That does not include only Labour members; we should also pay tribute to the Liberal Democrats, who pushed for the legislation. It was Jim Wallace who took the bill through Parliament, and he famously said during the stage 3 debate: “Provisions allow providers of services to the public to be added to the bill case by case, and I reassure the Parliament that that power will be exercised.”—[Official Report, 24 April 2002; c 8111-2.] That has been much quoted in recent debates. In a sense, the main issue that is before Parliament today is what is not contained in the bill. Hitherto, the Scottish Government’s view has been that any additions to the bodies that are covered by the freedom of information rules should be dealt with after the bill is passed. I welcome the change of position that the Deputy First Minister announced in her opening speech. I think that we all know what the problem is. Many bodies have been created over the past few years, particularly by local authorities. For example, Audit Scotland has identified 130 ALEOs, although it has said that it is not sure how many there are overall and there are probably quite a lot that it does not know about. That points to the wisdom of Willie Rennie’s suggestion that when a new body is created there be consideration of whether it should be covered by freedom of information legislation. Various people who have given evidence on the bill have pointed out the failure of section 5 of the 2002 act. That is why amending that section must be a key part of what the Parliament does at stages 2 and 3. As I said, until today, the Government was saying that it was not going to deal with the issue in the bill, but today the cabinet secretary mentioned two proposals that are based on regular review and widening the scope of the required consultation. Perhaps an oddity and a weakness of section 5 of the 2002 act is that, in the case of a new body, consultation is required only of that body, which clearly has a particular interest in the matter. The wider public are excluded. I welcome the proposals as far as they go, but I wonder whether they go far enough. We are all familiar with the defence that is used in various situations when someone says, “I have reviewed the situation,” and the next statement is, “and I have decided that I will make no changes.” We need to go further than just reviewing the position. I would like to see a purpose section in the bill. That suggestion has come from the Campaign for Freedom of Information in Scotland, which stated: “A purpose clause should be introduced to affirm that FoISA provisions are intended to apply to all public authorities and all other bodies providing public services, carrying out public functions and/or functions of a public nature.” That wording might have to be looked at, but it is important that the principle be enshrined. Here, of course, I disagree with Bruce Crawford, because I believe that there is an urgent need to get many of the bodies that are not presently covered covered as quickly as possible. The simple principle is that, if a body takes taxpayers’ money, it ought to follow the freedom of information rules. As I said, that is the most important issue that is before us. Hitherto, the Government has said that it was not to be considered as part of the bill, but now, fortunately, it will be considered at stage 2 and possibly stage 3. The only other substantial controversial issue is the royal exemption. I support what my colleagues said about that and I disagree with what the Government has said, although I do not regard the issue as being as important as the previous one that I discussed. I will not list all the members of the astonishing royal coalition that Gavin Brown referred to, but it has been a matter of slight amusement that the Scottish Government in particular is so anxious to have common arrangements across the UK. As I think Iain Gray reminded us, when we passed our legislation we were quite proud of the fact that it was stronger than the legislation that was passed by the UK Labour Government at the time. If I had been responding to Bruce Crawford’s intervention about the action of the UK Labour Government in February 2010, I would have said, “So what?” After all, in a devolved Parliament, we are not bound by the decisions that our party might make in London. I believe that the royal family already has adequate protection and that there is flexibility in the current arrangements for considering the public interest, and sticking with that position will pose absolutely no threat to the royal family. I can cover the rest of the bill in the 30 seconds I have left, as it contains nothing controversial. The amendment to section 18 of the existing legislation on refusal notices and the amendment to section 25 on accessible information are both without controversy. I support the flexibility that will be given to section 59 of the 2002 act with regard to use of historical information—I am pleased by the cabinet secretary’s announcement that she will consult on the matter quickly—and I support the amendment to section 65 on the ability to bring prosecutions if material is destroyed. To be able to bring such a prosecution within six months of the discovery of evidence is a sensible proposal, but I am not so sure that we need the backstop of three years since commission of an offence.

6. To ask the Scottish Government when it will publish the second report on proposals and policies. (S4O-01431)

Given that the first emissions target under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 was missed, how will the revised RPP for 2010-22 ensure that Scotland meets all the future legally binding climate targets that the Parliament has set? Does the minister agree that an important part of that will be shifting as many proposals as possible into the realm of policies?

I join John Park in paying tribute to the work that Kezia Dugdale has done on a range of issues and, for the purposes of this debate, her work on the living wage. She certainly took that up as one of her major campaigning activities when she was elected to Parliament and I recognise the enormous contribution that she has made. I join others in wishing her all the best and I hope that she is back, fully recovered, very soon. Given that John Park has taken Kezia’s place in the debate, it is also appropriate to pay tribute to the work that he has done. I hope that members will hear more about that as his proposed bill progresses. The idea that he has put forward in the bill, about using procurement as a way of spreading the living wage into the private sector, is one that I support and which I believe is fully compatible with European law. I wish him all the best for his bill as it progresses through the Parliament. For me, the debate on the living wage is reminiscent of the debates that we had in the House of Commons in the 1990s on the minimum wage. Without being too party political, it is fair to say that the Conservative Party in particular was totally opposed to that proposal from Labour on the grounds that it would lead to more unemployment. However, we know that that has not happened. I welcome the fact that there is now a broader coalition of forces supporting the idea of a living wage than there was in those days supporting the proposal of a minimum wage. I was particularly struck by an editorial in The Scotsman yesterday, the headline for which was “A living wage is nothing to be afraid of”. If I were to recommend one piece of writing to someone who was not particularly on the left in politics, it would be that editorial. It shows passionate support for a policy that certainly would not have been supported by The Scotsman in the 1990s or even a bit more recently. John Park gave some reasons for that coalition when he quoted the research from London about the benefits that the London living wage has brought for employers. I will not repeat the details, but the London living wage has reduced staff turnover and improved the morale of workers. Many employers in London and now elsewhere, including in Scotland, will testify to the benefits that the living wage brings them. That is an important part of persuading the wider population to support the policy. For me, the cornerstone of the policy must be that it helps to combat low pay and poverty. It is a staggering fact that is often forgotten—the motion reminds us of it—that 60 per cent of children living in poverty live in a family in which at least one person is in work. Therefore, we cannot address the issues of child poverty and poverty more generally without doing something about low pay. Apparently, only 12p of any pound of United Kingdom gross domestic product goes to the 50 per cent of people in this country who earn the lowest pay. That is considerably less than a few decades ago. We therefore have a problem with how much income is taken by low-paid people, which leads not only to poverty but to economic problems. The other argument for a living wage is that it helps to improve demand in local economies, and perhaps the fundamental problem that our economy has faced over the past three or four years is the lack of demand in the economy. The more that the living wage spreads through the public and private sectors, the more it will help people living in poverty, the wider economy and employers. There is a comprehensive story to be told about the benefits of the living wage and we can support it on a broad basis going forward. I thank Kezia Dugdale and John Park for the work that they have done, and I commend the Scottish living wage campaign and the trade unions Unison and Unite the Union, which have been particularly active in supporting the campaign.

I welcome the debate and the minister’s speech, which she started by referring to the recent report by the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration. I found that report an interesting and worrying read at the weekend. It underlined the importance of securing decisions about permanent homes for looked-after children but found, as many speakers reminded us, that there were worrying delays in making such decisions. We are now familiar with some of the figures in the report. More than half of the children in the study took more than four years to achieve permanence. Moreover, nearly half experienced at least three moves and more than a quarter experienced at least four moves before achieving permanence. Given the importance of secure attachments—particularly, as we now believe, in the very early years—which was another major theme of the minister’s speech, it is essential that services intervene as early as possible to support children and achieve permanence. Because of that, I welcome the Government’s care and permanence plan from 2011, with its emphasis on responding to the needs of children as early as possible. I also welcome the establishment of CELCIS—I am not quite sure what the correct way to pronounce that is. It has a dedicated care and permanence team, and I am sure that we look forward to the comprehensive work to which the minister referred on attachment theory. In some conversations that I had before the debate, it was put to me that there was a lack of adoption experts within CELCIS. I hope that that is not true, but perhaps the minister can tell me in her closing speech or in correspondence whether that information is correct. Of course, the debate is not only about adoption, but I will concentrate on that aspect because I became interested in the subject after a constituent came to one of my surgeries a few months ago. What she told me and the subsequent work that I did on the matter opened up a particular perspective on the adoption process. I accept that it is only one perspective, but I will give it because it adds something to the points that other speakers have made. The experiences about which that constituent told me highlighted several aspects of the problem. First, she said that the children whom she sought to adopt had been kept for too long in the family home. I know that that is a common complaint and I understand the complexities of the matter, but it is important to place my constituent’s comment on the record. She also said that there were further delays in moving from the previous foster carer to her and her husband as foster carers because everything must now be referred back and forth between the sheriff and the hearing. Apparently, that did not happen in the past. She then talked about a two-year process for adoption after all that and highlighted problems in following the letter of the 2007 act. For example, one sheriff did not specify zero contact with the birth parents, although that must be explicit. That caused a delay, but a more significant problem arose because the judiciary lodged the application in the wrong jurisdiction, which led to an appeal, and the whole process had to start all over again. My constituent described how, in that second judicial round, she faced two gruelling weeks of being grilled by the counsel for the other side and how the social worker endured the same grilling. She commented that there is a major disparity between what happens in the legal process and what social workers do in their day-to-day work and decision making. I hope that, when they are introduced, the new court rules on timetabling and judicial management will help. In particular, the proposals to change sheriff court rules should enable sheriffs to play a more proactive role at a much earlier stage. When I discussed my constituent’s concerns with a family law lawyer, I was given a further worrying perspective that suggests that there is a fundamental problem with the 2007 act, which was introduced to Parliament by the Government of which I was a member. The lawyer described to me the way in which the legal process is getting bogged down in lengthy disputes, and referred in particular to section 31 of the 2007 act, which she said completely defeats the aim of taking the focus on parental blame out of adoption and making the welfare of the child the principal focus. In particular, she said that the courts are now clogged up with cases that take weeks to resolve and require huge sums of public money in order to satisfy section 31(4)(b) of the 2007 act. In the majority of cases, the child will have gone through the full gamut of child protection and children’s hearings proceedings before having been placed for adoption, and yet the court is often faced with hearing days of evidence from social workers, who have to rehearse all the ways in which the parents have failed, simply in order to meet the legal test for dispensing with consent. The lawyer with whom I had that conversation suggested that there should be a much simpler test of safeguarding the child’s welfare, amended to reflect the necessity test under article 8 of the European convention on human rights. I was concerned to hear that the adoption working group, which met for years before the bill that became the 2007 act was introduced, recommended such a test, but that amendments that were made to the bill as it went through the Parliament changed that. Quite apart from the specific points that the lawyer was making, I found the conversation very interesting with regard to the need for post-legislative scrutiny. I hope that the minister will address that point, which I offer in order to bring a slightly different perspective to the issue. I very much welcome the minister’s speech and the announcements that she has made today.

I congratulate Kenneth Gibson on lodging an important motion, and I apologise to him, to the Presiding Officer and to the minister, because I must leave the chamber shortly. I am sponsoring the launch of the national dementia carers action network, which takes place in committee room 3 at 1 o’clock. The figure of 650—the number of patients who are waiting for a transplant in the UK—has been much quoted. We should also remember that 43 people died last year while waiting for a transplant. In view of the figures, I take an entirely pragmatic view of the subject and will support any policies that bring about more organ donations. In coming to such a decision, I would want to listen, in particular, to people who are closely involved with the service and to look at the evidence from other countries. A figure that was perhaps not well known until relatively recently is that 15 per cent of potential organs for donation are lost because relatives do not follow the stated wishes of their loved ones. That figure led to the establishment of the respect my dying wish campaign, which was launched recently. I strongly support the campaign, and I am sure that all members are impressed by how it is using Facebook and Twitter to get the message out. Along with many people, I have done everything that I can do to promote and support the campaign. I do not think that any member would not support the campaign. However, an interesting point is that the leader of the campaign, Professor Kevin Rooney, is not persuaded of the benefits of an opt-out system. In The Sunday Times on 7 October he is quoted as saying that such an approach could be counterproductive. He went on to say: “As pro-organ donation, I think you risk losing more people than gaining them.” Those words gave me pause for thought. The point is that relatives are much more likely to agree to organ donation if their loved one had previously expressed a positive view. Indeed, figures from the campaign back that up. It appears that 90 per cent of relatives will say yes if the person had expressed a positive view, whereas only 40 per cent say yes if no such view had been expressed. Under the current system, relatives’ views are always respected. That is not necessary under the Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006—which introduced the concept of authorisation—as, strictly speaking, the views of relatives can be overridden. However, I think that we are all speaking about a context in which relatives’ wishes are respected. I am therefore a little worried about the loss of a positive list, given the evidence that relatives are much more likely to say yes if their loved one had expressed a positive wish to donate, as opposed to failing to express a negative wish—if that is the correct way to describe the opt-out system. The issue gives me pause for thought. As I said in a previous debate on the matter, it appears that Belgium has two lists: an opt-in list and an opt-out list. The system seems cumbersome and I do not entirely see how it would work successfully in practice, but I am told that Belgium is the most successful country in Europe in terms of organ donation, so perhaps we ought to look at the system, which gets round the problem that the lack of a positive list would cause by having two lists. I am entirely open-minded about opt-out and I would certainly support it if I was convinced that it would lead to more organ donation. I certainly have no objection in principle to an opt-out system, but I am not fully persuaded—although, of course, I will read the other speeches in the debate later. I conclude by saying that I am a strong supporter of the respect my dying wish campaign, which I hope goes from strength to strength.

Once again, I am—I think—the first member to speak who is not a member of the Justice Committee. Let me begin by commending the Justice Committee for another excellent report. I always find that I am, if I have read the committee’s reports and oral evidence, absolutely prepared for the debate. That was perhaps rather a rash thing to say, but time will tell. On part 1 of the bill, which provides for the civil justice council, I think that the main areas of concern are about who is to be on the body, how it is to be appointed, and how someone might be dismissed from it in the rare event that that is required. It seems to me to be of central importance that the opinions and needs of users and consumers must be adequately reflected in the make-up of the body. As Lewis Macdonald reminded us, what is currently written in the bill could mean that the civil justice council has as few as two non-legal members. When Jenny Marra raised that point in an intervention, the cabinet secretary said that he would discuss the issue with the Lord President. However, I think that we—and the bill—must take a view on the issue. The same issue arises in the appointments procedure. It is not good enough to refer to the Lord President’s assurances, as I think the cabinet secretary did in relation both to this matter and to policy. The fact is that Lord Gill will not be Lord President forever and, as always, it is the words in the bill that matter. I think that there ought to be something about the appointments principles on the face of the bill. The cabinet secretary also highlighted the policy role of the council when he referred to its keeping the civil justice system under review. As David McLetchie rightly said, those policy responsibilities must not be too wide and, as Jenny Marra said, they must be tightened up. Clearly, this is an area that needs to be looked at during stage 2. Perhaps in order to emphasise the centrality of ministers and Parliament in matters of policy, there could be an amendment that would place a duty on the council to provide advice to ministers on policy. I have a general concern that too many of the decisions are being left to whoever happens to be Lord President at the time. At the end of the day, ministers and Parliament must have an important role in all this. Finally on part 1, I note the concerns of Scottish Women’s Aid about the wording on alternative dispute resolution at section 2(3). Scottish Women’s Aid made the important point that alternative dispute resolution must not be assumed to be required in all cases because, clearly, it is not appropriate in domestic abuse cases. That point provides me with a bridge to part 2 of the bill, on which I was also struck by what Scottish Women’s Aid said—the example was also quoted by the cabinet secretary—about the apparent injustice in domestic abuse situations in which a woman might have to pay for civil legal aid while the violent man does not. All I say in response to that—which the cabinet secretary made central to his argument—is that it is dangerous to base a whole case on one example. For a long time, I have argued that women should not have to pay the money that they currently pay in order to get injunctions and so on. My preference would be that no contributions at all be required in domestic abuse cases in the civil courts. Domestic abuse apart, I think that the criminal situation is different from the civil situation, because the power of the state is against the person involved, who has no choice and may be innocent. There are also ECHR implications concerning the right to representation. I note that Professor Alan Miller said that there had been no proper human rights consideration by the Government in relation to its proposals in the bill. I certainly accept the principle of a contribution to criminal defence when the person can afford it—that principle is already enshrined in the current system. However, I have serious concerns about the level of unassessable disposable income being set at the first £68—an amount that has obviously been picked to mirror the limit for civil legal aid. We should reflect on the fact that that system was set up in the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986. In 1986, the amount was £49, so we ought to reflect that the amount has clearly not kept pace with inflation when it comes to civil aid. I understand the financial difficulties so, domestic abuse apart, I am not arguing for changes to the civil legal aid system, but I am arguing that £68 is a pretty low sum in relation to what was originally proposed for civil legal aid in 1986. I therefore hope that that figure will be looked at again. Two other changes are needed, which are especially required if the £68 figure is to be kept. First, the Scottish Legal Aid Board should collect the money. It has a 95 per cent collection rate for civil legal aid—which has the disposable income threshold of £68—so it is clearly quite good at it. It has systems in place, so it seems obvious that it ought to do that. The danger is, of course, that if the board does not collect the money, people may end up being not represented in court, which is a serious matter. Secondly, I want refunds for people who are acquitted in court. I know that the argument against that relates to people who privately fund their cases, and that it would be expensive to refund some people who get expensive advocates. Therefore, it would be perfectly equitable to refund only those who are in receipt of legal aid. That is a form of means testing; those who do not receive legal aid can afford the payments far better than can those who are in receipt of legal aid. I understand that it would not be financially possible to refund everyone who was acquitted, but if the new system comes in—particularly at the £68 disposable income threshold—I hope that there will be a refund for people who are in receipt of legal aid. The changes that are being proposed by various members in the debate are perfectly feasible, as well as desirable. We are not talking about enormous sums of money—the total saving on part 2 of the bill is less than £4 million. Some of the suggested changes would still allow substantial savings, would be more equitable and would be more in the interests of justice.

I have always thought that the Deputy First Minister is a superb debater and today she spoke with her usual forcefulness and style, but her speech—as were those of her colleagues—was constructed from building blocks of fantasy: fantasy about Labour’s position on these matters; fantasy about the world of limitless resources that she would rather have than the world of declining resources that we live in; and fantasy about Scandinavian welfare with Romney-type tax cuts, which is her prospectus for an independent Scotland. The first mistake about Labour that she made was to say that we broke our promise on the council tax. We made it absolutely clear in the run-up to the election 18 months ago that we supported the council tax freeze for two years. As far as I know, this is the second year of the parliamentary session, so let us hear no more such accusations. The second mistake about Labour that she made—one that was also made by all the other SNP speakers—was to say that we are against universal provision. Of course we are not. We created the welfare state, but the welfare state has always been a combination of universal and targeted provision, and the principle of universality has always been applied on a case-by-case basis.

If Mark McDonald had thought before he made that intervention, he would have realised that single parents benefited very greatly from the measures that the Labour Government introduced in a targeted way through tax credits and childcare tax credits. I think that, in their heart of hearts, Scottish Government ministers also believe in a mixture of universal and targeted provision. I heard rather a good speech from Derek Mackay at the early years conference on Monday. I wrote down some of the phrases that he uttered during that speech, because I thought that they were striking: “sometimes universal”; “sometimes targeted”; “just evidence that”. I wrote them down because we will adopt precisely such an approach in our review. Alex Neil came to exactly the same conclusion a couple years ago in relation to the central heating programme, when he changed the universal provision that we introduced and made it targeted, and I do not criticise him for doing so. For the avoidance of doubt, we will consider, openly and transparently, contentious issues such as the continuation of universal entitlement, as Campbell Christie urged us to do, and in doing so we will avoid the polarised terms that he warned against, and which we have heard in spades from the SNP this afternoon. The SNP is in denial about the real world of political choices and is failing to recognise that every specific decision has an opportunity cost. That is a central rule of politics, especially at a time when budgets are going in one direction and demographics in the opposite. None of the universal entitlements that are being discussed today was a linchpin of the post-war welfare state in the way that the NHS is—which is not to say that they are not desirable or that I do not have a particular personal commitment to some of them, such as free personal care. That will not surprise people, given that I chaired the care development group and introduced the legislation. However, I fully accept that all that must be reviewed. As we look around Scotland today, many other desirable objectives are before us.

The answer to that last bit is obviously yes, but it is still a flight from the real world to say that we cannot take account of the overall budget that we have. To do so is to engage in more fantasy politics. We might wish that we had more resources, and the SNP might tell us—although we do not believe it—that it would have limitless resources in an independent Scotland, but at the moment we must deal with the resources that we have. As I was saying before Patrick Harvie’s intervention, there are many other desirable objectives that I am sure many members of the Parliament share, such as the new ambitions that we have on the early-years agenda, which has grown in providence over the past few years; I welcome that. Other desirable objectives include the abolition of child poverty, ending homelessness, introducing the living wage, and providing services to the most disadvantaged in our communities and giving them the opportunities that others have but which they do not. Politics is about making hard choices between competing desirable objectives in the light of the available resources. That is the real situation that we confront. It is not the case that some of the entitlements that we are discussing today are undesirable—for goodness’ sake, we introduced most of them when we were in Government. Of course they are desirable, but everything is relative. We have heard from members on the Labour benches, led by Johann Lamont, of all the problems that we have in our disadvantaged communities and more generally. It is a matter of weighing up the competing desirable objectives and deciding which are most desirable for us within the current financial situation. We have taken that ground-breaking step: it is time that others moved on and took the same step.

I congratulate Linda Fabiani on securing this important debate. We can celebrate the improvements that there have been in breast cancer survival rates. Twenty years ago, just over 60 per cent of women survived five years beyond diagnosis; twenty years later the rate is upwards of 80 per cent. However, we must remember that more than 1,000 women a year die from breast cancer. We must also remember that five-year survival is not always the end of the matter. Nanette Milne reminded us that slow-growing secondaries sometimes arise. Of course, the primary tumour can recur, as I was reminded at the moonwalk reception last night, when a marvellous woman from Glasgow, who is still young, told me that, sadly, her breast cancer, which was treated a little while ago, has recurred. A problem that we have in Scotland is that more people die within a year of diagnosis than is the case in other countries. That is related to late presentation, which is why the Government’s detect cancer early initiative is so important. As other members did, I welcome the recent advertising campaign in that regard and I pay tribute to the work of Breakthrough Breast Cancer in its TLC campaign. Breakthrough should be commended for a range of work that it has done during the past few years, such as the service pledge that it pioneered, its campaign on lymphoedema, a debate about which I was pleased to introduce two years ago, and its great work in the field of research. I acknowledge the great Breakthrough Breast Cancer research unit at the Western general hospital. I also pay tribute to the amazing breast unit at the Western general. The main reason for our much better five-year survival rates than we had 20 years ago is the improved treatments and services at units such as the one at the Western general in Edinburgh and the Beatson in Glasgow, which Aileen McLeod mentioned. I have talked about Breakthrough Breast Cancer, but it would be wrong to forget other charities that work in the area, which are mentioned in general terms in the motion. Breast Cancer Care provides invaluable services and three years ago developed standards for secondary breast cancer that were widely praised at the time. It would be interesting to know to what extent the standards have been taken up, if the minister has information about that. Challenge Breast Cancer Scotland had a meeting in the Parliament last Tuesday—we have had three such receptions in the Parliament in a week. I have a particular attachment to that campaign, which started in 1994 and used to be called the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign. I remember introducing a debate in the House of Commons a few months after the organisation started up, one of the purposes of which was to praise the campaign and the enormous lobby of Downing Street that took place in 1994 to demand more research and better services—two areas in which there has subsequently been great progress. At the Challenge Breast Cancer Scotland meeting last week a general practitioner from Glasgow gave a talk that contained a very negative message about screening. I think that the majority of people in the breast cancer field would not agree with what she said, but I support Challenge Breast Cancer Scotland’s demand for an informed choice for women about screening decisions. I think that we can all agree with that, but I also think that positive messages must be sent out about screening as well as checking and general awareness. Given that 1,000 women a year die from breast cancer, no one—not the health service, the Government or the charities—can rest until that number has drastically reduced.

I welcome today’s debate and the women’s employment summit, which focused on the barriers facing women in accessing the labour market—barriers that must be removed, as the minister reminded us, both for equality and because of economic necessity. There is no doubt that there are enormous challenges in removing those obstacles, which are exacerbated by current circumstances, as was emphasised in the recent Fawcett report “The Impact of Austerity on Women”. Those challenges are also reflected in some of the dismal figures on women’s employment in recent times. For example, in the third quarter of 2011, 34,000 women in Scotland lost their jobs—370 jobs a day, at a time when male jobs were on the increase. More generally, the level of women’s unemployment is currently 8.3 per cent, compared with 4 per cent pre-recession. The problems are not new. Another way of looking at them is to focus on the glaring anomaly in the educational qualifications and job destinations of girls and boys. For some time, girls have consistently outperformed their male counterparts in the subjects that they choose at school, yet that is not reflected in their employment rates in later life. A higher proportion of girls go on to higher education—40 per cent of girls compared with 32 per cent of boys. The same is true of further education—29 per cent of girls go on to further education, compared with 25 per cent of boys. Yet the percentage of females who are employed in later life within the category of medium to high-skilled jobs—jobs that have degree-level qualifications attributed to them—is just 22 per cent, compared with 38 per cent of males. Similarly, a huge difference exists in the category defined as medium to low-skilled jobs, where the figures are 46 per cent of females and only 24 per cent of males. I am sure that anybody who even glances at the statistics drawn from the analysis of school leavers and their prospective destinations would be—and certainly should be—shocked by the disparity. We must ask why the situation is as it is. It seems that women cannot access the jobs for which they have the qualifications. Many of the reasons for that have been highlighted in the debate. The lack of affordable childcare is central. I will not speak at length on that subject, as I usually do—except in anticipating tomorrow’s debate, to which Christina McKelvie’s speech really belonged. I think that she would agree that one of the things that has helped people with childcare is the provision of tax credits in general and childcare tax credits in particular. That is a targeted benefit that has made a significant difference, and I deeply regret the fact that the current UK Government cut the rate from 80 to 70 per cent. Other issues are relevant, such as the need for flexible working opportunities for both women and men. The absence of quality part-time jobs for women is a big issue, and access to job sharing is all too infrequent. Occupational segregation is relevant, too. It is rife both horizontally, through job stereotyping, and vertically, through women missing out on positions of influence and power. That relates to early gender stereotyping, which must be addressed, as the minister reminded us. We must also address gender stereotyping that occurs later in life, through modern apprenticeships, for example. Only 2.6 per cent of engineering apprentices are female, while the reverse is the case for childcare apprentices. That must be addressed as well. Occupational segregation feeds into the pay gap. Margaret McDougall gave the figures for that. If we compare women’s and men’s full-time hourly rates of pay, we see that the mean gap is 10 per cent. However, if we compare women’s part-time and men’s full-time hourly rates of pay, we see a mean gap of a staggering 32 per cent. There are enormous challenges, but the beginning of a solution to the problems is that we face up to them. I look forward to the minister’s winding-up speech, in which she has undertaken to outline how the outputs of the conference will be carried forward by the Scottish Government.

Without pre-judging council investigations into the death of my constituent John Gibson and the homecare services that he received, is the Deputy First Minister concerned that six complaints about the private homecare provider in question have been upheld by Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland—the care inspectorate—since February alone, and that employees of that and other homecare companies seem to be overburdened, with too many clients and too short a time with each client? Will the Scottish Government undertake an urgent review of the way in which homecare services are commissioned and delivered, particularly in view of the increasing and welcome emphasis on homecare in health and social care policy?

At a conference organised by Bowel Cancer UK two weeks ago, we heard about the bowel cancer screening programme’s great success. Will the cabinet secretary tell us whether there are any plans to develop that programme? Will he also tell us about any action that the Scottish Government is taking to reduce some of the unacceptably long waits for colonoscopy?

Unlike the previous speakers who, I am sure, are all justice experts in their varying capacities, I read the Carloway report for the very first time during the past few days. I found it to be very persuasive. It is set out with great clarity. I am sure that everyone is aware that there have been strongly different reactions to the report, so it is very important for us to hear all the views and acknowledge the issue’s complexities. Large parts of the report are probably not too contentious, particularly those parts on detention, arrest, questioning and access to a lawyer. I welcome the changes that happened after Cadder because we must always remember that some people who are arrested and charged are, in fact, innocent, and we must ensure that all our judicial processes are consistent with human rights. I am pleased that Carloway says that interviewing in the presence of a lawyer should take place only within a police station because I know that Scottish Women’s Aid’s initial response to the Carloway consultation expressed concerns about interviews at the scene of the crime. Like Roderick Campbell, I welcome the proposal that detention should be limited to 36 hours, although making that happen is going to be one of the challenges for the Scottish Government. I particularly support that proposal because, not too long ago, one of my constituents in Edinburgh was arrested on a Friday night and held in cells until Monday—in Dumfries, as there was no room in the Edinburgh cells—but eventually his court case was dismissed. Like Margaret Mitchell, I note the concerns of Scottish Women’s Aid in relation to police bail. That option perhaps has to be used carefully, although it would clearly be useful in certain cases. In all my views on the review, I have been influenced by Scottish Women’s Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland. As I think is widely known, both those organisations support the removal of the need for corroboration. Scottish Women’s Aid has emphasised the importance of the quality rather than the quantity of evidence, and Rape Crisis Scotland has said that the change could make a significant difference but, crucially, only if other action is taken. Rape Crisis Scotland suggested to the Justice Committee that there should be independent representation for complainers in rape or other sexual offence cases. I am sure that many other actions need to be taken. I do not think that any organisation says that removing corroboration will, in itself, improve the situation, but it will help. That view was taken by Professor Fiona Raitt, when she gave evidence to the Justice Committee at the end of 2011. I found her evidence to be probably the most powerful of all the evidence that the Justice Committee took on the issue. If members, or members of the public, have not read her evidence, they should do so, as it is certainly well worth reading. She gave various reasons for supporting the abolition of corroboration, the first of which was to do with sexual crime. Very strikingly, she referred to something that Lord Hope said: “In a public lecture at the University of Edinburgh in 2009, Lord Hope of Craighead posed the question whether the demand for corroboration in circumstances such as those”— she had been talking about sexual crime and sexual violence— “might make us conclude that certain crimes in Scotland were beyond the reach of the criminal law. Of course, were that to be the case, it could not be a fair or proper outcome of a modern justice system.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 13 December 2011; c 628.] That was central to Professor Raitt’s point. By the way, she is professor of evidence and social justice at the University of Dundee. Professor Raitt made two other relevant and interesting points. The first was that the criterion should be “a sufficiency of evidence”, which is quite separate and not dependent on corroboration. Also, looking into the history, she argued that corroboration has become “eroded over the decades”, that its application is often “artificial and technical” and that its integrity is now “discredited”. I found her evidence to be persuasive, and it backed up what I had already read and heard about for a long time from Scottish Women’s Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland.

I cannot answer that in the one minute that remains of my speech, but I am sure that the member could read Professor Raitt’s writings. She has various articles on Carloway that can be found if the member googles her name. She has certainly written about that. Other changes might be made as part of the forthcoming legislation, although personally I do not think that they are directly related to removing the requirement for corroboration. An example of that relates to the eight-to-seven majority on a jury. For a long time, I have felt uneasy about that, irrespective of the issue of corroboration. For example, I feel very uneasy about anybody being sent to prison for life on the basis of an eight-to-seven jury verdict, and so I would be happy if that rule was changed. Obviously, the rule could be changed in various ways, but a minimal change might be to make the necessary majority 10 to five, although a more radical change could be made if that is what people wished. Obviously, I do not agree with Christine Grahame on corroboration, but I agree with her on the very last section of the Carloway report. Lord Carloway let himself down on the very last page, because he suddenly says that the High Court should still consider whether an appeal is in the interests of justice, which seems to me to be inconsistent with what he said on the previous pages. The High Court had the gatekeeping role post Cadder in case there were lots of appeals but, like Christine Grahame and Roderick Campbell, I do not see why the High Court should have that role or something similar to it now. That apart, and with the other caveats that I mentioned, I certainly welcome the report.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what action it and its agencies will take to address the environmental issues at the Seafield waste water treatment works. (S4O-01303)

Is the minister aware that, despite some investment by Scottish Water in Seafield, there are still frequent odour emissions that are completely unacceptable to the local community? Is he further aware that the City of Edinburgh Council’s transport, infrastructure and environment committee resolved at its meeting last week to make representations to Scottish Water about investment and action to deal with the continuing problems? Will he raise the matter with Scottish Water, as I will at a meeting this Friday?

I welcome the bill, which is the first piece of legislation in this policy area since the Community Health and Care (Scotland) Act 2002, which extended the scope of direct payments to all care client groups. Self-directed support, however, is about much more than direct payments. I particularly welcome the new option 2, whereby the supported person decides the support and the local authority arranges it. Self-directed support requires profound cultural change to make it work properly and action on the postcode care issue, which will require some central direction, as Jackie Baillie outlined. Culture change is certainly necessary. Not that long ago, the City of Edinburgh Council was preparing to change social care provision for hundreds of disabled people without any consultation with those who were about to lose a trusted carer. That was stopped because of a great campaign against it, but it leads me to agree totally with Professor Frank Clark, who said: “The situation is a bit like what happened with the integration of health and social care, in that there is no point in getting the structure right unless practitioners on the ground behave differently.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 15 May 2012; c 2266.] That is partly about training, and it is certainly about an understanding of the personalisation agenda in health and social care and a determination to do things with people rather than to them. Self-directed support has to be about promoting human rights and independent living rather than consumerism and the cost of services. To make it work effectively, however, there has to be investment in independent advice and advocacy to help people access it. Age Concern and the Scottish Association for Mental Health argued for that in their submissions on behalf of their respective client groups. It is also crucial that people should get the appropriate level of direct payment; a related point is that, where charging is permissible, they should be charged fairly. More central direction is required for that via a framework of standards, and an appeals system is probably necessary to ensure equity.

That will become quite an issue during discussion of the bill and the forthcoming health and social care legislation. There is always a balance between local decision making and national decision making—I have been having a Twitter conversation with Roseanna Cunningham and others over the weekend about that. My general view is that there needs to be a bit more national direction—a framework of standards—because otherwise people will feel that the system is simply not fair. Charging people very different amounts and assessing them in different ways will be a threat to this excellent bill. That is why we need a framework of standards and an appeal mechanism. I accept that there are no large sums of extra money available for self-directed support, but it is important to ensure that the policy is not used as a cost-cutting exercise. The principle of equivalence of resource is important in the context of the bill. There are fears about costs—Duncan McNeil talked about COSLA’s view—but we should remember that, in his report, Professor David Bell said that self-directed support costs are similar to the costs of existing commissioned services. The issue to do with bridging costs has been recognised for a long time, and it is interesting that the financial memorandum draws on the direct payments finance project report of 2003—the situation has become easier since then, because of the move from block to spot contracts. Such issues can be resolved. Many more issues will be discussed in detail at stage 2; I will touch on two or three matters in the remaining time that I have. There is an issue to do with personal assistants, who were not included in the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001. Barnardo’s is calling for a register of carers and personal assistants who are eligible to be employed. I am not sure that we need to go that far, but we should certainly ensure that all carers and personal assistants are covered by the protection of vulnerable groups scheme. The Government should consider the SSSC recommendations in that regard, because there needs to be protection for vulnerable people. As SAMH pointed out, many potential employers will be vulnerable. I agree with what the minister said about the employment of family members. The move in that regard from exceptional to appropriate circumstances is entirely right. The interplay between the bill and the health and social care integration agenda needs greater clarity. In a sense, it is unfortunate that we are not discussing two bills together. The committee said in paragraph 199 of its report: “the Committee encourages the Scottish Government to ensure that the principles of self-directed support enshrined in this Bill can be extended to address the health needs of people also in receipt of social care.” I support that. I strongly support the inclusion of children and young people in the scope of the bill, but I was interested in Barnardo’s comment that not enough evaluation has been done. It is important that there is full analysis of current projects that involve children. In general, I certainly agree that children and young people should be included in the bill.

Engagement and empowerment are ideas that we have been talking about in different contexts for many years in this Parliament. They have led to important documents such as the current Government’s “Scottish Community Empowerment Action Plan”, and a previous Government’s “National Standards for Community Engagement”, which I seem to remember launching in 2005. Notwithstanding the good examples that the minister has given, it is fair to say that policy and practice have often diverged over the years. The important thing in this debate is to ensure that we come up with practical ways of driving forward the agenda. To be fair, the consultation paper is full of many such suggestions. I will deal with the three parts in reverse order. On part three, I welcome the additional powers that are suggested to sell or lease long-term empty properties, which picks up on a theme that we debated in the Parliament last week. I like the idea of communities having the right to request local authorities to use compulsory purchase orders, although we must look at strengthening them. I welcome question 38, on the recovery of costs in relation to dangerous and defective buildings, although I gently suggest that the minister looks at David Stewart’s bill for an answer to that question. Moving on to part two, there is the fundamental concept of the transfer of assets. As a city MSP I would be delighted if the right to buy that rural communities have had was extended to urban areas, as we all know about the success of that policy in rural parts of Scotland. I received a communication this week from Maggie Fyffe of the Isle of Eigg Heritage Trust. I do not have time to read it all out, but she said: “Eigg is a different world than it was 15 years ago—owning Eigg has opened up so many opportunities for development ... because confidence has grown, a lot of new independent businesses are springing up & because there is so much happening, we’re seeing young people return & settle here which is probably one of the most important aspects”. I like the idea in part two of communities having the power to request that the public sector transfer underused or unused assets, but in that regard we must confront the issue of state aid rules, which are often a barrier. In my own constituency, about two years ago a community group wanted the transfer of land at Granton, but the council invoked state-aid rules as a barrier to that. My understanding is that those rules apply only when there is a commercial competitor, which probably means that there is not an issue in many situations. I suspect that the state aid rules are being overused by some public authorities, so I hope that the Government will look at that. Given that there are general block exemption regulations at a European level, I wonder whether the Government could take action by asking for a GBER notification for all community assets. I do not know if that is possible, but perhaps it could be explored. Part one, about strengthening community participation, is of course central to the whole consultation paper. I welcome the idea of a duty to follow the national standards for community engagement. This is not mentioned in the paper, but I also think that we should look at using and developing the co-operative model that Sarah Boyack mentioned. I am glad that the Scottish Government has accepted that amendment. I suggest that the Government looks at what is going on in Edinburgh at present—of course, there is a council coalition in Edinburgh between Labour and the Scottish National Party, although it is fair to say that the co-op model was a flagship policy of the Labour manifesto earlier this year. We should also build on the work of community councils. I regularly attend them—I have a high regard for their work—and building on their work is the right way to go. In relation to strengthening participation, I also want to highlight that effective participation starts with effective communication—that should be central to policies in this area. There are examples of best practice that we can learn from, where community activists are using the tools that they have to hand to improve communication in the hope that that will strengthen local interest and participation. As we begin to adapt communication technologies to aid participation, a large number of independent sites that allow for highly localised content have started to emerge. One such site is The Edinburgh Reporter, which provides regular updates through a hyperlocal news site. The focus is on the activities of community councils and news stories that are of particular appeal to local residents. If participation can be improved through developing greater links to an open and accountable council system, straightforward reporting of council and community council meetings can help to achieve that. Some of The Edinburgh Reporter’s most popular stories have come from a comprehensive coverage of campaigns, as well as an unbiased account of what is really going on in the city council. That news can be delivered immediately using Twitter and live blogs and can invite responses from any interested party. I am not saying that in order to give The Edinburgh Reporter free publicity—I believe that the success of this local online news service should be an example for the whole of Scotland. I appeal to the Government to do everything that it can to support and encourage the development of such services. In that context, I should also mention Greener Leith, which provides a similar local news service, and the Greener Leith social website, which is an interactive forum for raising awareness of local concerns. If such a format can be applied to hyperlocal news, why not to community councils or to local social events as well? I can see that I am running out of time to talk about my suggestion of an online hub that could be established to provide a two-way flow of information between community councils, or community planning partnerships, and community members. I cannot say more about that, but new technologies can help to change the culture of “doing to” to a culture of “doing with”. At the end of the day, that is what this debate is all about.

I start by welcoming Margaret Burgess, minister designate for housing and welfare, to her new position. I wish her all the best in her important role. I welcome half of the bill that is before us today, as it is basically a bill of two halves, the housing support grant having long since withered on the vine everywhere in Scotland except Shetland. The good half relates to council tax and empty homes. It extends the action that the previous Government took in 2003 to help to deal with the serious problem of 25,000 long-term empty homes. On that half of the bill, the minister has been in listening mode, and I welcome his announcement about increasing the penalty to £500 as an incentive to make it worth while for councils to take action in the area. There are certainly issues about exemptions from the new regime. I have raised issues about exemptions from the 2003 regime with the council—that is the regime that reduced the discount for empty homes to 10 per cent. On exemptions, however, I agree with what Shelter said in evidence to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee. It is quite important in my view. “We warn against having too many exemptions that are subjective, because that makes the system more expensive to enforce. We would like the balance to be on the other side, where someone who is in genuine hardship and is doing everything that they can to bring the property back into use is given incentives and financial help from the council, using money that has been recycled from the levy.”—[Official Report, Local Government and Regeneration Committee, 16 May 2012; c 969.] The minister mentioned some of the actions being taken by the Government on empty homes, but more is needed. Some of that is highlighted in that quotation from Shelter and there are many more suggestions in its written submission. I urge the minister to look at that submission and perhaps focus on the issue of empty homes as her first action as housing minister. If she wants a precedent for that, I point out that my first announcement as housing minister in May 1997 was an empty homes initiative with some money attached. I can reveal for the first time that it was inspired by Shelter.

I certainly welcome that. Members will realise that, like Joan McAlpine, I am not a member of either committee that has dealt with the bill so, if I am not fully conversant with all the details, I am sure that members will forgive me. That is perhaps not the best way to introduce the bad half of the bill, which is certainly how the non-domestic rates provisions can be described. I did not hear the minister announce any improvements today, although I note that Mark McDonald was referring to the minister being in listening mode for all parts of the bill. If I have missed something, I am sure that someone will correct me. Even the minister seemed to be a bit defensive about the non-domestic rates section, because the first thing that he said about it was that it created only an enabling power. Kevin Stewart can correct me, but I thought that he said that he thought that there were no plans to bring the power into action. That needs to be clarified.

That is the case, but we need the position to be clarified. To be fair to the minister, I think that I recall him saying that he intended to introduce regulations in 2013. Perhaps that can be clarified in the summing-up.

I thank the minister for that clarification, if such it be. I note that the committees—especially the Finance Committee, but even the Local Government and Regeneration Committee—were quite critical of the Government for a lack of consultation on the non-domestic rates section and for the financial memorandum’s inadequacies. In his speech, the minister said that no business and regulatory impact assessment was necessary, because the number of affected properties was small, but the Finance Committee pointed out that the provisions could affect all businesses that use commercial properties. The Finance Committee concluded that “the Bill’s proposals may impact detrimentally both on individual businesses and the broader economy” and it pointed out that there was no evidence that reoccupation rates in England had increased. This important part of the bill contains not evidence-based policy but policy without evidence. The evidence from England, to which Sarah Boyack referred, is about older buildings being demolished. As Jim Hume pointed out, it seems that even more buildings are becoming empty. Such evidence as we have from Scotland suggests that a lack of demand is the key issue and that commercial buildings are rarely left empty on purpose. There was little evidence about how the figure of £18 million in savings was arrived at and there was a lack of reliable evidence about the number of public sector properties that will be affected, which will obviously reduce the overall public expenditure savings.

I do not know whether I am pushing it for time—I see that I am all right.

I thank the minister for that helpful intervention. An interesting point about the financial memorandum is that, as far as I can see, it does not assume that owners will bring vacant properties back into use. I might have missed that, but it seems that nothing is netted from the savings on the basis of the bill’s stated purpose. If the Government does not believe that its policy will be effective, why should we believe it?

Okay.

I thank the minister, but what he says is quite revealing. It seems that a lot of the policy is based on guesswork. It ought to be guesswork informed by such evidence as we have, but it looks as though the evidence that we have from Scotland and England has not really been properly taken into account. I believe that it is the wrong policy at the wrong time and that that part of the bill should certainly be reconsidered.

The minister will not wish to comment on the decisions that courts have made or may make on this matter, but will she, in general terms, applaud the decision that was taken by the City of Edinburgh Council—and, I believe, Dundee City Council—not to allow marches by the so-called Scottish defence league? Does she agree that there is no place in Scotland for the Scottish defence league’s message of hate against ethnic minority communities in general and the Muslim community in particular? [Applause.]

I congratulate Jamie Hepburn on bringing the issue to the chamber. I am sure that the debate will unite members across parties. We can be in no doubt that, at a time of great international unrest and conflict between nations and regions, the flow of arms needs to be monitored and controlled. There has been a great deal of debate in recent months about how best to encourage countries to relinquish their nuclear weapons, particularly in the light of recent developments in the middle east. However, when we see the human rights abuses that are caused by the unregulated and free trade of conventional weaponry across borders, we must acknowledge that the time to address that issue is now. The flagrant disregard for the rights of citizens in favour of profiteering and strengthening economic ties cannot be allowed to continue. We have seen that situation most recently in the export of Russian arms to Syria through Cyprus. That is widely believed to have contributed to the escalation of civil unrest in Syria. We must not forget that we are trying to achieve a safer and more secure world for our children to inherit. Some young people in Scotland have shown that the issue should not be confined to one generation or one elite group of decision makers. A delegation of students from Scotland who are working with Amnesty International travelled to Westminster this week with the aim of lobbying the relevant Foreign Office minister to push for the most robust treaty within the realms of what is politically possible. Students from Paisley grammar school, the University of St Andrews, the University of Glasgow, the University of Stirling and Queen Margaret University will have a chance to learn more about the UK Government’s stance in advance of the conference in July. They have shown enthusiasm and willingness to engage with the difficult questions that the treaty throws up, and we should adopt a similar approach. If we do not try, we do not progress. As the UN conference prepares to meet at the end of July to discuss a route to a lasting and sustainable strategy, we must welcome the indications of support from many large member states, but we must also acknowledge that, as the global annual burden of armed violence stands at $400 billion, the undertaking will be mammoth. However, it is a starting point for a long-overdue process. Until now, there have been no internationally agreed standards to ensure that arms are “only transferred for appropriate use”. That phrase was used by the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. I am sure that we would be interested to know exactly what “appropriate use” is determined to be when we refer to the transfer of conventional weaponry between ruling powers in nations. However, the arms trade treaty gives us cause for optimism, as signatories to it will begin to take a more proactive approach to regulating trade, in what it is hoped will be the first step towards far greater internationally enforced restrictions. The arms trade treaty’s overarching goal will be the creation of a standard set of guidelines for international arms transfers through requiring all states to abide by transfer controls, which will go some way towards increasing global security. I wanted to go into detail on that but, as I am restricted to four minutes, I had better not. We should acknowledge the part that we have to play as residents of one of the main exporters of conventional arms among UN member states. Let us make the case for establishing a strong—or, as Amnesty terms it, a “bulletproof”—treaty. Let us realise that we have a part to play in encouraging representatives of the UK to approach the meetings next month with a proactive attitude, mindful of the immense political challenges that we face. Before the debate, I tweeted: “About to speak in Arms Trade debate in support of proposed UN treaty. Thinking of Dylan’s great song Masters of War which goes a bit further”. Indeed it does, but the proposed treaty is an important step in the right direction. I congratulate Jamie Hepburn again on bringing the issue to Parliament.

This is a very difficult time for both women and men, but there is no doubt that many problems have a particular impact on women. Unemployment among women is increasing; the pay gap persists; childcare is too expensive; flexible working is not widely available; and occupational segregation is rife, both horizontally through job stereotyping and vertically through women missing out on positions of power. Over and above all that, there is the sometimes subtle and unconscious discrimination that is quite difficult to identify and remove but which has been clearly exposed by many pieces of research. The problem is knowing where to begin but, as in last week’s debate on gender quotas, it might be particularly helpful if we look at Nordic countries. This week, for example, a constituent recommended the Norwegian system of parental leave, which reserves some leave for men and allows both maternal and paternal leave to be taken simultaneously. Such a move would be helpful for women as well as everyone else and would fit into the wider agenda of family-friendly and flexible working that is so vital to families. When that is not available, it is invariably women in our society who suffer—and let us not forget that the economy, too, suffers. Other members have referred to the Royal Society of Edinburgh report, which points out that, in contrast with men, the majority of women with qualifications in STEM subjects are not working in those areas and estimates the resulting cost to the economy at £170 million a year. The public sector needs to show a lead in flexible, family-friendly working and I note that, in the Equal Opportunities Committee’s evidence-taking session, the NHS was particularly praised in that respect. I would go along with that view, although I know of another constituent who recently had to leave her job as an NHS nurse because she could not get the flexible arrangements that, as a single parent, she required. Affordable, flexible and high-quality childcare is clearly central to all of this. Indeed, that was recognised over 20 years ago by women in the greater Pilton area of my constituency, when they identified campaigning for a childcare centre as central to their ambitions to get out of poverty and get into reasonably paid employment. In a Facebook exchange with me this morning, a woman who used the centre wrote: “The Pilton Childcare Centre helped me to progress. I would not have been able to work full-time and do my degree without that project. I will never be able to thank the women who campaigned for the Centre enough.” As I have said, such provision is central—and, as the minister knows, I cannot get through any of these debates without mentioning that wonderful childcare centre. Occupational segregation is not only another massive issue but a major contributor to the pay gap. As gender stereotyping starts in the earliest years, it must be addressed at that point. However, it also needs to be addressed later on in, for example, modern apprenticeships, which various speakers have mentioned. The fact that only 2.6 per cent of engineering apprenticeships are female, while the reverse is the case for childcare apprenticeships, shows that this is a big issue. The occupational segregation within companies and public organisations has been encapsulated in the phrase “glass ceiling”, but it also operates in subtle and unrecognised ways. A constituent who is doing research on the matter referred me to several fascinating pieces of research but, with only half a minute to go, I have no time to mention them. There is also little time to mention the current public sector cuts package that is coming, in particular from the Westminster Government, but the fact is that, as the Fawcett Society makes clear in its report, austerity is having a particularly bad effect on women. It says—and this will be my final quote: “Taken individually, the elements that make up the current austerity package will make life more difficult for many women across the UK; added together they spell a tipping point for women’s equality.” I hope that that is not the case, but the Fawcett Society will be right if we do not redouble our efforts to address the many factors that make up gender inequality.

We will not get far in this debate unless we face up to two facts—first, that there is a serious problem, and, secondly, that the action that we have taken so far to deal with it has failed. I could read out the long list of boards on which there are either no women, just one woman, or just two women, but as I have only four minutes I will not do that. I say in summary, however, that in the case of executive NDPBs, which are important public bodies in Scotland, there are 261 men and 89 women, and in the case of police boards, in which context the issue was originally raised by Jenny Marra, the figures are 119 men and 27 women. I would take seriously Christine Grahame’s argument about appointment on merit if it was true, but in the face of those figures, she cannot possibly believe that appointments are being made on merit. The fact of the matter is that the merit of a man is being regarded as of more worth than the merit of a woman.

I will give way if I have time towards the end of my speech, but I must make my four or five points first. As I said, we have to face up to the fact that what we have tried so far has not worked. I take Humza Yousaf’s point. I was the minister with responsibility for equalities, and we did a lot in those days in relation to gender equality, but we did not do what is proposed in the motion. We have to face the fact that we have tried certain things and they have not worked. We should pay tribute to the wonderful new members around me, who are coming up with lots of new ideas. In the context of this morning’s debate, I pay particular tribute to Jenny Marra, who has run with the idea. It seems to me that Karen Carlton is coming to a similar conclusion. She is the Public Appointments Commissioner for Scotland who for several years has headed up the work around “Diversity Delivers”—unfortunately, that is a bit of a misnomer, because we know that the strategy does not deliver. Nevertheless, she has headed up that work, which has been based on increasing the number of women who apply for positions on boards. In her latest annual update on “Diversity Delivers”, she states: “despite an increase of nearly 4% to the application rate there has been no significant change in the percentage of women being appointed, and an actual reduction at the point of shortlisting.” That actually refers to the figure that the minister quotes positively in her amendment. Karen Carlton is criticising the figure that Shona Robison has highlighted. In the same report, in response to Scottish Government proposals to conduct more research into applications, Karen Carlton states: “the research necessary now is into the barriers to women when they do apply—that is, the barriers women face in the Scottish Government’s process.”

If I have time, but I do not think that I will have. People must be prepared to change their minds in the face of the facts. The minister talks about building consensus, but she should look at the people who are already supporting the position that we are putting forward. The report on universities has been referred to, as has support from Oxfam, Scottish Women’s Aid and the STUC. Europe is also crucial in this area, and, to answer the point that Shona Robison made with reference to the Equality Act 2010 and positive action, Labour’s positive action in relation to candidates was tested and was found to be consistent with the act. More fundamentally, it is obvious from the European examples—it is not just Finland; I was going to talk about Norway and Denmark, but I do not have time—that the 40 per cent process is consistent with the European Union equality legislation that underpins the 2010 act.

I am sure that that happens, but I am talking about the generality of the issue. Christine Grahame has to face facts. She cannot argue with the figures that I have presented. We have tried to make progress through encouraging more applications and so on, but that has not worked. It is time to take a bold step, although it is not that bold, because it is already done throughout Europe.

I first became very concerned about the issue a few weeks ago when a constituent came to one of my surgeries and showed me photographs of two breast implants that had been removed from her—one intact, the other ruptured. The contents of the ruptured implant had spread into her lymph nodes and she was experiencing great pain from lumps in that part of her body. I am pleased to report that she said that the NHS care that she received in the Western general hospital in Edinburgh was very good, but it is clear that there are inconsistencies in the NHS response throughout Scotland, to which Jackie Baillie referred. My constituent also explained to me the shocking response that she got from the private clinic when she went to see it about the problems that had arisen. That shocking response has now become an absence of response, because the e-mail that she sent to the clinic three months ago, in which she summed up her concerns, has still received no reply, although I have recently followed up on that for her. I hope that we will hear something from the clinic soon. My constituent also has many issues with the MHRA, the most urgent of which relates to testing of implants. I have written several letters to the MHRA and have asked for a meeting with it, because it is not willing to test the implants. Members will understand the anxiety of my constituent, given that the contents of one of those implants are still, to some extent, in her body and were in it to an even greater extent until recently. I ask the Scottish Government to continue to raise that issue with the MHRA. If the MHRA will not test the implants, I ask the Scottish Government to arrange testing. There are two massive historical issues to do with the MHRA. First, why was it so slow to react when many clinicians pointed out problems, for which there was statistical evidence? Secondly, why did it not make more effort—indeed, it made no effort at all—to inform women once information about the use of industrial silicone became clear in March 2010? That question could also be put to the UK Government and the Scottish Government. The Government’s amendment offers uncritical support for the UK Government’s Howe report, which I have read. I have never seen so many SNP members competing with each other to praise a UK Government report. I am sometimes more disposed to be more sympathetic to the UK Government—although not the present one—and I was highly critical of the Howe report. My views were shared by the Health Select Committee at Westminster and by its widely regarded chair, the Conservative Stephen Dorrell, who was the Secretary of State for Health when I was a Westminster MP in the 1990s. They are certainly not happy with what one might call an internal whitewash of the MHRA, and my constituent and the other women campaigners are not happy with it, either. I empathise with them and sympathise with their request for an independent look to be taken at the issue. I am sure that Michael Matheson must also have some empathy with them, as he took that view in relation to hepatitis C several years ago when I was the Minister for Health and Community Care. I am happy to admit that he was right about the need for an independent inquiry on hep C and that I was wrong. An inquiry into breast implants would not just be about the past, as was the case with the hep C inquiry; it would also be about the future. An inquiry needs to look at regulation of private health care. The whole area, including private healthcare clinics, is a devolved responsibility of the Scottish Government. The way in which medical products are regulated and licensed also needs to be looked at. There is a procurement dimension to that, which is also a devolved responsibility. An inquiry could also consider the numbers issue that has come up. The basic message is this: let us stand in the shoes of the women who have been affected, empathise with them and realise that they want the issue to be looked at independently.

Given that single-supplier framework agreements are restricted to four years under the European Union procurement directive, is the cabinet secretary confident that hubs are compatible? Assuming that they are—and I hope, in the interests of the north Edinburgh health centre, that they are—will he tell me why the north Edinburgh health centre is taking so long to materialise, given that an initial agreement on the project was approved by the Scottish Government capital investment group in 2009?

9. To ask the Scottish Government how many complaints were made about the Seafield waste water treatment works in the monitoring year following completion of the odour improvement plan. (S4O-01137)

Given the large number of complaints, despite the fact that option A in the odour improvement plan was supposed to take more than 90 per cent of the local community out of the odour zone, and given the particular failure of option A to deal with peaks of solid effluent coming into the plant, does the Government accept that further investment will be required, and is it ready to take account of that in future financial allocations to Scottish Water?

Can the cabinet secretary give an assurance that the category of victims of sexual offences and domestic abuse will include victims of stalking?

The rights of victims and witnesses are much greater than they were in 1999. I welcome the further proposed extensions that the cabinet secretary has outlined. Those extensions are, to some extent, driven by the draft European Union directive, which results from the new justice competences of the Lisbon treaty. The problem—or challenge—is how those rights can be enforced, because there has been, and still will be under these proposals, an absence of mechanisms that allow people, victims in particular, to enforce them. I am told—when the Minister for Community Safety and Legal Affairs winds up, she will tell me whether I am right—that, in Australia, victims can go to court to enforce their rights. We should perhaps consider that option, but the victims commissioner proposed by David Stewart would also be very helpful in that regard. Notwithstanding the progress that has been made, especially post-2001, it is fair to say that progress on the matter has sometimes been slower in Scotland than in England, perhaps because of the strength, and sometimes the resistance, of the Scottish legal establishment. Special measures for witnesses had to be driven through. Although I welcome the extension of special measures to victims of sexual offences and domestic abuse, there is scope for much greater extension of special measures. Indeed, Victim Support Scotland has called for all witnesses to be allowed access to special measures. I hope that that option will be considered in the context of the forthcoming legislation. I also support further specific measures for victims of domestic abuse. Lewis Macdonald and others have mentioned domestic abuse courts. I know from having twice visited the court in Glasgow how effective it has been. The court, which has specialist sheriffs, and the victim support service in Glasgow, called advice, support, safety and information services together—ASSIST—have been crucial in providing much better support for victims. I hope that the model can be rolled out further across Scotland. I welcome the fact that such an approach has just started in Edinburgh. I also support widening the scope of the victim notification scheme, so that all victims of domestic abuse are informed when a perpetrator is released. Lewis Macdonald reminded us that that was a specific proposal in Labour’s manifesto at the last election. That leads on to the subject of information, which is central to the proposals. I welcome the proposals to give more information to victims and witnesses. However, we must ensure that protections are in place, especially with the proposed online information hub. I note that the IPPR’s recent report on information for victims recommended that there should be accessibility via mobile phone and a secure website. It will be worth looking at the detailed proposals in that report when we consider our own legislation. We must always think of victims and witnesses in the context of the information that is publicly available. In a recent justice debate, I raised concerns about court websites and the information that is available to everyone in the world who goes online and visits them. The cabinet secretary referred to protecting the personal safety of victims and witnesses. A lot of information about my constituent’s divorce was on a court website, and her safety was put at risk. In fact, she became a victim. Obviously I do not want to go into the specific details of her situation, but I know that she wants me to raise the general issue of the information that is publicly available on court websites. As I indicated when I referred to the matter a month or so ago, her bank details were on the website. Although those have now been removed, she is concerned that her address is still available. We need to look at that issue in the context of protection for victims and witnesses and not just allow the Court Service to do whatever it wishes in that regard. There is a democratic role for politicians in doing that. I know that the information commissioner is taking a close interest in that particular case and in the general issue. A lot of information happens not online but in a one-to-one situation. Victim information and advice in our courts provides information to many victims. We need to look at the nature of that service and the extent to which it is sensitive to the concerns and needs of victims. I have been told by a constituent that VIA is perceived by her simply as an arm of the prosecution service. She did not feel that it was really sensitive to her needs and her situation. That is another aspect that we need to consider. I welcome the proposals to make offenders pay and restitution orders for police officers. John Finnie referred to the shocking figures of 5,000 assaults on police officers in the past two years. However, we should remember that 12,000 council workers and 13,000 national health service workers were subjected to violence. Therefore I would support the proposal from the Royal College of Nursing that the bill should be widened to cover those workers. Like other members, I welcome the proposals in general but hope that they can be built on.

I welcome the key messages in the report. The report says that in most European countries children start to learn a second language between the ages of six and nine. What is the evidence for starting them at four or five rather than at seven or eight? I am aware of the evidence of the advantages for children of being brought up bilingually from birth, but I genuinely wonder what evidence there is of the advantage of starting them at four or five rather than seven or eight, which seems to be the norm in Europe.

As many members have emphasised, there is a complex relationship between obesity, physical activity and general health. We all know that obesity is a risk factor for many diseases, including several cancers, as was emphasised at the Scotland against cancer conference a couple of weeks ago. Perhaps we can also agree that there are many factors involved in obesity, of which the lack of physical activity is just one and probably not the most important. Since physical activity is the main focus of the debate, however, we should remember two points. First, physical activity is beneficial to a range of health factors—particularly cardiovascular health—quite apart from the obesity dimension. Secondly, physical activity will be beneficial for obese and overweight people even if they remain obese or overweight. Sir Harry Burns made that point when he spoke at lunch time today at the cross-party group on health inequalities. All of that explains why physical inactivity has been identified as the fourth leading risk factor for mortality globally. I welcome much of what the minister announced today—for example, the initiative with the Royal College of General Practitioners, the quality interventions and the emphasis that she placed on dance-related projects for teenage girls, who often lose interest in other forms of activity during adolescence. I point out that such activities may also be beneficial to teenage boys and, indeed, older boys such as myself. I also welcome the minister’s announcement of the national walking strategy and the emphasis that she and other members placed on walking generally. More people are travelling about in cars and sitting at desks in offices all day, so there is a particular issue about getting exercise as we go to and from work. I welcome what she said about the Paths for All Partnership and the walk to work scheme that is running this week, as workers across the country take to the paths of our cities to prove that, where there is an option to go on foot, we should make the most of the paths that are available. A similar campaign is running for schoolchildren in response to recent figures that showed that fewer than half of Scottish schoolchildren walk to school. I welcome the emphasis that Alison Johnstone put on creating the best environments to encourage walking, and I am sure that she would support me if I made the same point about cycling. If we had safer roads for cyclists, that would help more people to travel in a healthy way. I support the target of having 10 per cent of journeys made by bike, and also the demand that several groups have made for 10 per cent of the transport budget to be spent on active travel. The minister also mentioned the tangible benefits of exercise for older people. Increasing physical activity and exercise in older people has been identified as a key target by the World Health Organization active ageing framework to reduce the global burden of non-communicable diseases. One of the delights of being on Twitter is that, if we follow the right people, we read all sorts of interesting postings. This week, Lesley Holdsworth, who led the older people’s work for the Kerr review, tweeted a selection of Cochrane reviews that assessed the benefits of physical activity and exercise for older people. I could speak for up to my time limit on that, but I had better not, because I want to move on. Quite rightly, much of today’s debate has focused on young people. The minister said that the PE target will be met by 2014 and mentioned £6 million of extra funding for that, but I am sure that she is aware that, in her local authority area, the number of PE teachers has been reduced recently. I am sure that she will use whatever influence she has with the administration to reverse that, but it highlights the discrepancy between the overall rhetoric of policy and what is actually happening in many cases on the ground.

I accept to some extent what the minister says about primary schools, but I think that we all agree that specialist teachers are required in secondary schools. The Government also made a manifesto pledge to work towards a guarantee of five days of outdoor education for every school pupil, but information that was published in July 2009 in response to a freedom of information request revealed that only seven local authorities held information centrally on outdoor education and in none of them had all pupils been involved in it. We need to address the cultural challenges that lead to obesity in young people and in people more generally. That was recognised by Dr Andrew Walker in his study of the economics of obesity in Scotland in 2003. I will not quote the cost that he mentioned, because it is a lot more now than it was then, but he said that, for any strategy to work, it must take into account the complexity of the condition and not simply address it as one issue in isolation. He stated: “A radical programme is needed to tackle this serious modern health issue - a nationwide and collaborative obesity management strategy: firm targets, structured care, health promotion, disease prevention and collaboration between Government departments.” I trust that the minister is at least ensuring that that collaboration is taking place, and hopefully most of the other objectives as well.

One of the pleasures of growing older is a return to the early years through looking after and playing with grandchildren. Apart from the pleasure that I get from that, it has reinforced my belief that how we treat children in the early years of life—in particular, in the first three years—is absolutely crucial for the development of individuals and the future of society. That is why I welcome the emerging strategy from the Government. In the past, people would probably have said that parenting is not the business of Government, yet I can think of little that is more important for Government to address now. I particularly welcome the minister’s statement that strand 3 of the strategy would be about preparing young people to be the parents of the future. I am sure that most of us in the chamber—the younger ones and the older ones—did not really have any preparation for being a parent. I am looking forward to that part of the strategy because I think that it is a desirable prerequisite for the support that parents need once they have children. The fundamental principle underlying the strategy should be support for all families but with more intensive support, and sometimes very intensive support, for those families that need it most. There is perhaps a distinction to be made between supporting families in general, which can be formal or informal and is offered by a variety of people and professionals, and specific parenting support that is delivered by people who are trained to ensure high fidelity to a specific programme. There are many outstanding examples of support for parents in the first sense. I mention in passing organisations for young parents in the Pilton and Granton parts of my constituency, such as Circle and Stepping Stones, and, in Leith, Home-Start and Dr Bell’s family centre. I apologise to those that I have not mentioned. Dr Bell’s is an interesting example of a family centre on a fairly small scale, and I am pleased that the Government is considering family centres as part of the support given to parents. On specific programmes, the positive parenting programme, the incredible years and the family-nurse partnership have the strongest evidence behind them. I am particularly interested in the family-nurse partnership because it focuses on the very early years. As I said, I have come to believe—and I think that many in Parliament share my view—that the years nought to three are the most fundamental years in anyone’s life, and that how people are treated then will determine their life outcomes. I was reflecting the other day that, sadly, many people spend the rest of their lives trying to undo the damage that has been done to them in those first three years of life. In that regard, there is an issue about the balance between universal and targeted services. Health visitors have a key role to play in identifying the most vulnerable children and allowing other services to move in to give them support. Perhaps we went too far in targeting health visiting under the “Health for all Children 4” arrangements, although, as they were introduced when I was the responsible minister, I will hardly criticise them. However, I am pleased that the Government is now talking about implementing the new Hall 4, which involves continuing visits to a larger number of families. I welcome that. Giving support at an early stage is fundamental. If we do that, more children can stay in their families. However, we recognise that in some cases children have to be removed from families. When that has to take place, the earlier it happens, the better. I recently had an interesting conversation with a constituent who has had difficulties in adopting children. She explained to me that the process has taken two years and is still not complete. I wrote to the cabinet secretary about that and eagerly await a reply. I hope that the issue of adoption can be looked at because when adoption is necessary it should take place as speedily as possible.

I welcome this debate and note that all political parties here and in London are now talking about the need for growth. However, there is no use talking about the need for growth if particular Governments are imposing policies that impede it. I shall talk first about the UK Government, because its actions still have a massive influence on what happens in Scotland. The UK Government’s focus has been the causes of the deficit. A lot of political capital is still being made by the UK Government and the Scottish Government out of that subject, with the last Labour Government getting the blame. It is important to state from the outset that it was not fiscal laxity that caused the crisis. The budget deficit that so many people are worried about is the result of the financial crisis, not the cause of it. If the Tories or, indeed, the SNP doubt that, I remind both parties that they agreed entirely with Labour’s spending limits before 2008. In fact, I seem to remember the SNP wanting far more spending than Labour was carrying out. More fundamentally, we must look at the consequences of trying to reduce the deficit—or aiming to reduce it too fast, because that is what we are basically living with now at a UK level. Many commentators who are not particularly on the Labour side of the political divide are now saying that the Government in London has fundamentally got that wrong and that it is implementing policies that are counterproductive from the point of view of reducing the deficit and bringing about growth. Just yesterday, I was struck by the assertion by a Tory former adviser to Norman Lamont, when he was chancellor, that the UK Government’s fundamental mistake was to try to reduce the deficit too fast before growth had been achieved. He contrasted that with what happened in the 1990s. I was struck also by the words of Martin Wolf in the Financial Times yesterday, when he said: “Fiscal tightening does not improve outcomes in shrinking economies. Thus, austerity is merely begetting more austerity.” I note that the managing director of the IMF, and the April review of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, both carry a similar message, which is that all the budget cutting is merely leading to increased deficits and less growth. There is a strong body of opinion now, not particularly on the left of politics, that the UK Government has got it wrong. We are living with the consequence of that in Scotland. At UK level, the Labour Opposition is showing the way with its emphasis on reducing VAT, bringing forward infrastructure investment—especially in housing—and having a well-thought-out and costed jobs plan. That is the model that we need in Scotland, too. Turning to the Scottish Government—

I am exactly halfway through my speech but I had better give way since I have been criticising the Conservative Government.

The member completely fails to understand the basis of my argument. One of the fundamental problems is lack of demand in the economy. If we can reduce tax in a targeted way and boost growth, that will help the deficit in the long run. In a sense, the member’s intervention encapsulates what is wrong with Conservative, and indeed the coalition Government’s, thinking at Westminster. I welcome much of what the cabinet secretary said about renewable energy in general and Gamesa in Leith in particular. However, where is the Scottish Government’s comprehensive jobs plan? Where is the Scottish Government’s action on the most important infrastructure element of job creation, which is housing? Where is the Scottish Government action on procurement? To deal briefly with those three topics, we are all concerned that the projection for Scottish unemployment is that it will rise for the next four years. Gavin Brown mentioned the projection that unemployment in Scotland will be beyond the UK level by the end of the year. We desperately need a finalised strategy, particularly for youth employment. I welcome the fact that a dedicated minister has been appointed for youth unemployment, but the finalised strategy is nowhere in sight, notwithstanding a number of smaller announcements in that area. In housing, we welcome the increases late in the budget process. However, from the Scottish Government’s point of view, the simplest way of bringing about a big jobs boost would be to put more money into housing. As Ken Macintosh mentioned, 30,000 construction jobs have disappeared in the past year. The number of construction jobs is still falling, and housing investment would help the economy in the most effective way and would fulfil an essential social need. Finally, where is the action on procurement? I know that a bill has been promised, perhaps for next year, but we need action now, particularly to help SMEs. We need a simplified procurement process. The business gateway needs to give advice to SMEs so that they can come together to bid for contracts. Contracts that are too large and which therefore exclude SMEs need to be disaggregated. Where disaggregation is not possible, SMEs need to have the opportunity to get subcontracts. I do not know whether I have time to quote from—

Therefore, I conclude by merely referring briefly to the Jimmy Reid Foundation report on procurement, which indicated that the Government could implement European Union directives far more flexibly and in a way that helped SMEs and the Scottish economy in general.

Gavin Brown knows full well that, in the general election two years ago, Labour said that it would halve the deficit in four years. At that time, the economy was beginning to grow and unemployment was falling. If that plan had been maintained, that improvement would have continued.

I commend the cabinet secretary for bringing this debate to the chamber and I join her in praising the outstanding work of the national performing companies over the past five years during which, as part of their flexible, inclusive and democratic approach, there have been thousands of large-scale performances and numerous comprehensive educational events. The broadening of access to cultural output through community outreach projects and work with our educational institutions is essential in decentralising the national companies and opening up to a much wider audience what they have to offer. In my speech, I will deal in turn with Scottish Ballet and Scottish Opera and—if I have time—with the orchestras and the National Theatre of Scotland. I start with Scottish Ballet partly because of a constituency connection with one of their projects that will become clear in a moment. Since 2007, Scottish Ballet has performed in front of more than 330,000 people in venues ranging from big theatres to community halls. It has set the standard for partnership working as a means of bringing ballet to new audiences and has operated in conjunction with English National Ballet, National Dance Company Wales and National Galleries of Scotland. Such an approach encourages cultural bodies to share ideas, create new performance formats and ensure that content is kept lively, fresh and relevant to today’s audiences. For example, March this year saw the culmination of a project that was being run by Scottish Ballet and National Galleries of Scotland. “Desire”, which is an innovative performance event that was created by the gifted students of Telford College in my constituency, and Broughton high school, which serves a large number of young people in my constituency, sought to convey complex and emotional themes based on Scottish Ballet’s new production, “A Streetcar Named Desire”. It was a great opportunity for young dancers and choreographers and is an example of just one of the many ways in which our cultural institutions are adapting the manner in which they work in order to encourage new talent from all backgrounds. The students of Telford and Broughton should be proud of their accomplishments, and I hope to see many more such initiatives that encourage exceptional standards of performance and ambition in our young people and set a precedent for the future endeavours of our national performance companies. Outreach projects are also instrumental in introducing young people to opera, and in challenging preconceptions about who opera is for and what opera is about. As a fan, I have always felt that politics and opera go hand in hand, just as opera and love so often go hand in hand. We certainly see love and politics come together in “Tosca”, which I look forward to seeing in a few weeks. Opera is a celebration of life and human relationships in specific social settings, and is often presented in a manner that transcends the years, with themes that are eminently relevant to the most contemporary of settings. Of course, as in politics, operas sometimes end in tragedy. Before I leave that theme, I recommend a superb book about it by Anthony Arblaster called “Viva la Libertà!: Politics in Opera”, which is one of the best books I have ever read about politics. I warn Annabel Goldie that its political approach is slightly left wing, but I am sure that she would still enjoy its coverage of all the great operatic composers. Apart from its major production, Scottish Opera also conducts an annual primary schools tour, which is one of our longest established and most popular education programmes, in which about 10,000 children each year see the performances. The operas are tailored to the young audience and their narratives convey advanced themes, such as environmental awareness, the creation of the universe and the need to protect the earth’s natural resources. By entering an inclusive process of artistic expression with a young audience, Scottish Opera’s primary schools tour aims to help children to garner a sense of self-fulfilment, confidence and self-esteem, which is so vital for maximising interest in opera as an art form and for reassuring young people that it is relevant to them. We have heard mention of Scottish Opera’s initiatives for younger people. Many of us heard about “SensoryO” on the radio this morning, and reference has been made to the “BabyO” programme for even younger young people. I congratulate Scottish Opera for all that. It has enjoyed five years of direct funding from the Scottish Government and it is in good order. I am sure that the same can be said of the other national performance companies. I see from the clock that I have only one minute left to cover the orchestras and the National Theatre of Scotland. I give all due respect to them.

The same themes can be reiterated with reference to the National Theatre of Scotland and the orchestras. We all know of the outreach work that they do. The Royal Scottish National Orchestra, for example, does outreach work that reaches young people and holds performances in healthcare settings, including hospices and paediatric healthcare settings. It also has a massive geographic reach and has covered many of the regions in Scotland on its various tours. The National Theatre of Scotland, too, has performed all over Scotland. I am told that during the five-year period of direct funding, 81 per cent of the Scottish population has been within 20 miles of a National Theatre of Scotland event. The events have been held in venues ranging from the Playhouse theatre in Edinburgh to a converted drill hall in Dumfries. The National Theatre of Scotland has also toured internationally, most famously with “Black Watch” in New York. I am sure that most of us have enjoyed seeing that great production, as well as others such as “The Bacchae”. I was struck by another initiative, which I did not know about, to my shame: the “5 Minute Theatre” project that took place in summer 2011. It was intended as a participatory and creative celebration of the National Theatre of Scotland’s fifth birthday year. Joyce McMillan said in The Scotsman: “this brave and ground-breaking event has subtly changed the landscape of Scottish theatre for ever, reconnecting with a myriad of grassroots impulses to dramatic expression that have long been undervalued or marginalised. Completely original in concept, performed live yet mediated through the internet and through a constant babble of online comment, this was a 21st century event that expressed and celebrated the wild and beautiful diversity of Scotland today in a thousand different voices”. I wanted to quote that to show the range of work that the National Theatre of Scotland has been involved in. I also wanted to quote Joyce McMillan, because she is always right about the theatre and is usually right about politics, too, so I am happy to leave the last word to her.

As the convener reminded us at the start of the debate, the homelessness legislation—in particular the 2012 commitment—is one of the most important pieces of legislation that this Parliament has ever passed. It is also perhaps the most internationally recognised Scottish legislation, as I discovered when I spoke at a homelessness conference in Brussels in 2005 and realised that the whole of Europe was looking at Scotland’s approach to homelessness legislation. We should pay tribute once again to the various organisations that made important contributions to the preparation of that legislation, particularly those in the homelessness task force. Many of those organisations have continued to contribute to our discussions, including our committee deliberations and the stakeholder event that we held at lunch time today. Like the convener, I thank Angela, the service user, with whom I spoke at lunch time. Nothing is more important for MSPs than to talk to those who are experiencing or have experienced the problems of homelessness. We all know that homelessness is about more than bricks and mortar, although those are clearly vital, as I will discuss further in a moment. Prevention has always been central to the homelessness agenda. I agree with Margaret Burgess that there have been great improvements in the past 10 years, and many witnesses who gave evidence to the committee spoke about the change in culture that had come about through the housing options approach and in other ways. The committee makes two recommendations in that regard: first, that there should be measures to ensure consistency in the housing options approach; and, secondly, that there should be a measurement tool for homelessness prevention work. Various members have mentioned the 20 per cent reduction in applications in one year. I do not wish to rubbish that figure, but members ought to note the recent article by the director of Shelter, which asked probing questions about that. We must be very careful to ensure that the housing options approach is implemented in the most effective way, which is why measures to ensure consistency are particularly important. On prevention, there is a new duty to provide support, which arises from the Housing (Scotland) Act 2010. A consultation on that has just concluded. The committee recommends that that support should include money advice and debt counselling. At lunch time, I became aware that a debate is going on about whether regulations or guidance should be provided in relation to that duty. It was interesting that most of the stakeholders to whom I spoke at lunch time thought that guidance would be preferable. We do not have time to speak at great length on the supply of affordable housing, but the committee clearly believes that it is strongly relevant to the issue of homelessness. I have spoken on many occasions over the past few months about the importance of investment in affordable housing, and I repeat my view that it should be the number 1 priority for capital expenditure, although I recognise the late improvements that were made in the budget process to increase the amount of money that goes into that area. The private sector is important, too. The committee looked in considerable detail at the sector’s role and recommended that the Government should look at the possibility of a new tenancy regime for the private sector to make that sector more attractive for people who are homeless. It is clear that the housing benefit changes could have a negative impact on that. Time is running out, so I cannot make the obvious points that I made in the recent debate on housing benefit about the general negative effect that those changes will have on our homelessness commitment. Temporary accommodation will have to be used even more from the end of this year, but the committee cautions against unacceptable levels of temporary accommodation and recommends that there should be standards for temporary accommodation, on which the Scottish Housing Regulator should report. My time is up. We should recognise the progress that has been made, but we should certainly not be complacent.

Does the cabinet secretary accept that it would have been helpful to have consulted the information commissioner at a much earlier stage in order to resolve some of these issues more quickly?

Presiding Officer, I think that I deserve full marks for bravery as the first non-member of the Justice Committee to venture into these choppy waters without the benefit of the committee tutorials. However, I have read the committee’s excellent report. I note the committee’s view, which was expressed near the beginning of the report, that the bill might have benefited from more consultation, and I agree with the emphasis that Jenny Marra put on the need for more consultation on data protection, in particular. From my reading of the report, I agree that, in relation to part 1, there was a genuine problem that needed to be dealt with and that the judiciary should be given appropriate discretion. However, I noticed several quotations about the complexity of the proposed solution. As Jenny Marra said, James Wolffe QC told the committee that the Government had taken an extremely complex piece of legislation and made it more complex—and I award full marks to Christine Grahame for trying to unpick some of the complexities. According to the Scottish Government, the bill is not unnecessarily complex but, as I listened to the cabinet secretary, the words went through my mind: “Explaining legal matters to the nation—I wish he would explain his explanation.” The committee was attracted by the relative simplicity of alternative approaches. Perhaps some of those could be investigated during stage 2. It is not surprising that—like, I suspect, the general public—I am more interested in part 2. I have a general interest in the Megrahi case and I found several of the issues that the committee raised in its report interesting. For example, a former member of the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission suggested that the Government, rather than the commission, should make the decision to publish the statement of reasons. I note that the committee did not agree with the suggestion and I am happy to go along with the committee in that regard. However, I also noted a discussion about whether the factors to be taken into account by the commission should be spelled out in the bill. That certainly seems worthy of discussion at stages 2 and 3. The report made clear that data protection was the main issue that was raised during discussions about part 2. I have been puzzled by the cabinet secretary’s insistence—until very recently—that data protection was an obstacle to publication of the statement of reasons and I hope that he will talk more about that when he winds up the debate, if he is doing so. The Information Commissioner’s Office said in written evidence, which is quoted in the report: “the Bill contains a robust legislative framework which will ensure that such disclosure is fair and lawful.” I am sure that many members read Lucy Adams in the Sunday Herald on 1 April. She said: “The Information Commissioner’s Office ... wrote to The Herald to deny claims that the report was held back by data-protection laws.” She went on to say that the ICO had told the minister that, too. If that is not the case, the minister will no doubt want to say so. I am genuinely puzzled. David McLetchie has a particular political explanation for the Government’s approach. I do not particularly want to go down that route, but it is puzzling that data protection was for so long held to be the main obstacle to publication. Having said that, I think that there are genuine data protection issues with regard to other aspects of the legal system. That is not the main subject for today’s debate, but perhaps the Presiding Officer will forgive me if I briefly refer to a constituent who came to see me during the past couple of weeks. She was most concerned that a full 20-page transcript of a protracted divorce proceeding that she had been involved in was published on the Scottish courts website. The document gave intimate personal details, as well as—believe it or not—details of specific bank accounts. I do not know whether that happened by accident or whether it is routine practice, although I believe that such reports are routinely put on the Scottish courts website at the discretion of sheriffs. I contacted the Scottish Information Commissioner and he told me that reports of court proceedings must comply with all eight data protection principles, so I think that there is a genuine data protection issue, which the Government, the Lord President and whoever else has an interest in the matter should address. However, I do not think that that issue is relevant to the publication of the statement of reasons in the Megrahi case. That being the case, I hope that the SCCRC will officially publish the statement of reasons very soon, although many people will have already read it thanks to the Sunday Herald.

I welcome the Scottish Government’s reaffirmation of its commitment to ensure that 10 per cent of journeys will be made by bike by 2020, since that is clearly highly desirable in terms of health and climate change. However, being realistic, I do not think it looks like we will achieve the target given that—late increases in the budget process notwithstanding—the active travel budget is still less than 1 per cent of the total transport budget. It seems to me and, I am sure, to others in the chamber that safety is the key to reaching the target. Alison Johnstone highlighted the sad and tragic fact that 16 cyclists have died on Lothian roads this century. Cyclists desperately need more space on roads and more 20mph limits in residential areas. In that regard, I emphasise the importance of the Labour amendment and I hope that the Scottish Government will consider the guidance that appears to discourage some local authorities from introducing such zones. Of course, cycle paths are important—there are many good ones in my constituency, which will encourage me to return to cycling in due course—but action on cycle training is also required. Alison Johnstone and I attended a recent cycle training event at Leith primary school, but we would agree that action on cycle training of that sort is to no avail if the other safety measures are not taken. Local community-led campaigns, such as the we love Leith campaign by the Greener Leith organisation, are important. I pay tribute to the Scottish Government for providing much of that campaign’s funding through the climate challenge fund. It involved community consultation, behaviour change work and efforts to tackle the barriers to active travel that were identified by local residents. The first consultation, involving 450 residents, put the behaviour of other road users at the top of the list of reasons for people disliking cycling, along with danger and vulnerability in general. That is perhaps not surprising because, as I was alarmed to read in a newspaper report a couple of weeks ago, Leith Walk has been flagged up as one of the 10 most dangerous streets in the United Kingdom for cyclists. When residents were asked what would encourage them to cycle more, 49 per cent said that infrastructure improvements would be the main thing that would get them back on their bike. A second consultation flagged up dedicated cycle lanes on main arterial routes as the top cycling priority. Greener Leith has also highlighted the need to reduce traffic growth in general in order to encourage cycling, as well as for many other purposes. In particular, it flagged up the social cohesion of neighbourhoods, the sense of ownership of public space and mental and physical health. Therefore, I am alarmed that traffic trends tend to be going in the opposition direction. I have lodged some parliamentary questions about that this week. Edinburgh has been referred to quite a bit. We must acknowledge that a lot of good work has been done, but I think that the 5 per cent of the budget for active travel schemes next year is not matched by this year’s budget for them, which is 1 per cent of revenue spend. Edinburgh Labour has emphasised the separation of bikes and road traffic, the safe storage of bikes, possible cycle hire schemes, school cycling training and 20mph speed limits. I re-emphasise that last point. It seems to me that the widespread use of 20mph speed limits in residential areas would benefit cyclists and pedestrians alike.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency regarding PIP breast implants. (S4O-00860)

There are many issues and anxieties for the women affected. I will raise a couple on behalf of a constituent who has contents of a ruptured PIP implant inside her body. First, will the cabinet secretary put pressure on the MHRA to analyse the contents of my constituent’s implants, which were removed by the NHS? Failing that, will she ensure that the contents are tested in Scotland? Secondly, given that the MHRA put out an alert two years ago this month, is it not reprehensible that the women affected heard nothing about the problem until December 2011?

I apologise for seeking to influence the order in which the Presiding Officer calls speakers, and I undertake never to do so again. I am sure that I will be suitably punished by giving a bad speech this afternoon. I will start in the safe territory of the respected economist Will Hutton, who always gives a fair and balanced view of budgets. In his Sunday column in The Observer, he was moved to say at the very start that “The budget was a disgrace. The government has washed its hands of any attempt to relieve the worst recession since the 19th century.” I believe that millions are paying more now so that millionaires can pay less in a year’s time. For the avoidance of any doubt, and for the sake of SNP colleagues, I assure members that the Labour Opposition at Westminster will lodge amendments to the Finance Bill to ensure that the 50p tax is maintained. We probably do not want to hear any more about what happened on Monday night but—as the cabinet secretary will know as a former Westminster member of Parliament—the vote was not specifically about corporation tax, and it would not have been the normal time to register opposition to specific tax changes as distinct from the budget as whole. However, that is enough of that. What is striking about the budget is not only what is in it, but what is not; one could make a whole speech about the missing elements. I see that Gavin Brown is unfortunately not in his place just now. One of the most significant things in the Office for Budget Responsibility report, to which he referred, is that there is no material adjustment to its economic forecast this week, as compared with two weeks or a month ago. In other words, the budget did not fundamentally change the macroeconomic outlook and was, in that regard, a missed opportunity. The budget contained some good measures, such as the tax relief for the video games industry, which was first granted by Alistair Darling and then removed by the Conservative Government. Such specific examples can be given, but of far greater importance is the disaster that the budget brings for millions of ordinary people. As the Institute for Fiscal Studies has pointed out, and as the cabinet secretary reminded us, it will be people in the lowest two deciles who will suffer the most—especially families with children.

That is another dimension. The budget not only describes things that are going to happen in the immediate future—in this year and the following year—but points, as I was going to mention, to £10 billion of further cuts to the welfare budget, which is truly shocking and scandalous. The budget also intimates—as the cabinet secretary highlighted—a wish to go down the path of regional pay. Public sector pay is the last prop of many local economies. It would perhaps not be described in that way in Edinburgh, for example, but the idea that people cannot get jobs in the private sector because of the level of pay that is received by nurses and teachers is absolutely absurd. There are thousands of well-qualified people who are desperate to get employment in Edinburgh and elsewhere, and we welcome the jobs that are coming, particularly from Gamesa. It is lack of demand, not the pay of public sector workers, that is causing problems in the economy. I was saying before that intervention that the lowest deciles will suffer the most. To a significant extent, that is because of the raid on tax credits. I was very pleased that Ed Miliband announced in a speech today that Labour would seek to protect working families from the raid on tax credits and would raise the money for that by reversing the Government’s pension tax break for those who earn more than £150,000 a year. Labour budgets over the years were fair and progressive and what we are arguing for on tax credits and VAT reductions, given that VAT is a regressive tax, are in that tradition of fairness and progressiveness. It never ceases to amaze me that lower-paid people are to be made to work harder by getting less, while the rich are to be made to work harder by getting more. According to the red book, they will gain £3 billion, which will rise to £4 billion, from the corporation tax cut.

I am in my last minute. Otherwise, I would be delighted to take an intervention. I will be guided by the Deputy Presiding Officer.

I cannot speak for what Labour at Westminster will say on that issue. It is well known that there are problems with the proposal, in that someone who earns £50,000 could lose money whereas a couple who earn £99,000 would lose nothing. My personal priority is to reverse the raid on tax credits. I thank the Deputy Presiding Officer for giving me that extra time. One of the few good things to come out of the budget is that the Labour lead over the Conservatives before the budget was 4 per cent, and it is now 17 per cent. I suggest to SNP colleagues—although they will not agree—that the answer to a bad UK Government is a good UK Government, and the sooner we have one, the better.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement and the expert team that will address long-term sustainability, but I have questions on the two issues on which she will receive reports. First, on information to boards, does she have a national standard against which she will judge the proposals of the chair of NHS Lothian? Secondly, what action will she be prepared to take in relation to management culture if the problems are as serious as they appear to be?

I have no time to deal with all the housing benefit cuts that started last April, continued this January with the extension of the single room rate, and will be ratcheted up in a year with the underoccupancy and other provisions. I will concentrate on the negative effect that the changes will have on our historic homelessness commitment. It appears that the UK Government did not give that commitment any thought or consideration when it was making the changes. Many members have spoken about the underoccupancy measures. The Scottish Government estimates that they will affect 95,000 people in Scotland. Alex Johnstone talked about people moving to smaller homes. Yes, we could incentivise that if people want to do it. City of Edinburgh Council offers people an incentive to do that, and that is fine if that is what they want to do. However, the UK Government has not taken on board the fact that, in many cases, no suitable alternative accommodation is available. In written evidence, the Scottish Council for Single Homeless told the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee: “There is clearly a mismatch between housing benefit policy and the requirements of the homelessness legislation.” It pointed out that more than 75 per cent of social rented houses in Scotland have two or three bedrooms, while many homeless people, particularly those who have new rights coming on stream this year, are single. The result will be that many people in existing tenancies will build up rent arrears because their housing benefit will be cut by 14 or 25 per cent. More people who are in such housing will become homeless and, crucially, single people who are currently homeless will not be able to be offered a house because not enough one-bedroomed accommodation will be available. That single policy will have a negative effect on our homelessness commitment, and that was flagged up by the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee in its report this week on homelessness. Many councils are, rightly, looking more to the private sector to deal with some of the homelessness issues, but even there a series of measures will have a negative effect. Last year, it was the reduction in how much housing benefit someone could get to the 30th percentile, and next year housing benefit will be uprated by the consumer prices index rather than rent levels, which historically have risen faster. There is also the shared accommodation rate for anyone under the age of 35 that is already kicking in in the private rented sector. There is also an issue around the lack of availability of shared accommodation and its unsuitability for many people. For example, a single person who had separated from their partner would have to live in shared accommodation and would be unable to have any of the children of the previous relationship staying with them, so that measure will also be entirely negative for the homelessness commitment. The third issue that has been raised concerns the abolition of choice for tenants about whether housing benefit is paid directly to them. Of course, that has created a lot of anxiety in the housing associations. On 26 October, evidence was given to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, which can be found at column 226 of the Official Report and which I do not have time to quote in detail, about how mortgage lenders are very anxious about the effect that the decision will have on the ability of housing associations to have a regular income stream to repay their borrowings. I also have not had time to mention the on-going consultation on housing benefit for temporary accommodation, but such an approach will necessarily be used more in the early days, post-December 2012. If it is negatively affected, there will be more negative effects on our homelessness commitment, too. In conclusion, I believe that we need to consider the whole issue of the devolution of housing benefit, irrespective of the views that we hold on any other aspects of devolution or, indeed, independence. There has always been a logical case for the whole of housing policy to be considered in its totality.

I hope that that will be one of the conclusions that we draw from this whole sorry experience.

I accept that there are issues for the Scottish Government to look at in the forthcoming legislation, including Liam McArthur’s suggestions about what is happening in England. However, does he accept that the biggest issue of affordability relates not just to the number of parents who are losing tax credits but to the reduction of the cap on childcare costs from 80 to 70 per cent?

As the member knows, I supported the arguments for minimum pricing that the cabinet secretary put forward, and I still do. However, I found it rather odd that she did not refer to Labour’s amendment, which I also support. Will the member give either a personal view or the Scottish Government’s view of the sensible proposal in Labour’s amendment?

I was not intending to intervene, because I have no knowledge of Aberdeen, but I am interested in tax increment financing. Having listened to the debate, I am concerned that TIF may be being brought into disrepute. Will the cabinet secretary agree to look objectively at the TIF proposal and judge it only in accordance with the strict criteria for approving such proposals?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will issue guidance on the new public entertainment licensing regime. (S4F-00515)

I thank the First Minister for the letter, which was at long last issued yesterday, so soon after my question appeared in the Business Bulletin. Last week, I spoke at a constituency meeting of more than 200 people who were very concerned about the threat to grass-roots culture and very annoyed about the new licensing legislation and the absence of any guidance about it. Given that the Scottish Government did not understand the immediate implications of its proposed legislation when questioned about it at stage 1, will it now take every action possible to promote and support our vibrant grass-roots culture in this year of creative Scotland?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the availability of supply teachers across the country. (S4O-00775)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that in Edinburgh there have been 1,494 requests for short-term cover in the current academic year, of which 10.6 per cent have not been filled, and 200 requests for long-term supply cover, of which 24.5 per cent have not been filled? Does the cabinet secretary realise that those figures mask another reality, which is that a large number of experienced supply teachers have dropped out of the system altogether? One such supply teacher who wrote to me stated: “If the Government fully recognises our contribution, then why do we, who have worked our way to Point 6, get paid virtually half our usual salary for a day’s work?” What action will the Government take to deal with the situation, which in certain schools is clearly causing a massive problem for students?

In relation to the kind of childcare services that Alison Johnstone described, will the minister follow the example of her predecessor, Angela Constance, and beat a path to North Edinburgh Childcare in my constituency, which is the finest childcare centre in Scotland, not only because of the quality of services, but because it has always had an understanding that childcare is an essential part of regeneration and anti-poverty strategies as well as more general early years policies?

There is no room for complacency when it comes to improving the care of older people, but I believe that certain people should be commended. First, the Health and Sport Committee is to be commended because the report is impressive and comprehensive. When I started on Twitter at the end of September, one of my earliest tweets was from the Health and Sport Committee and was about how the committee showed Parliament at its best. The Opposition, too, should be commended for raising various issues during the past few months. Last, but by no means least, the cabinet secretary has shown herself to be very willing to respond to the concerns that the committee and Parliament were expressing. This subject was one of the first to be debated after the election. I spoke in that debate on 9 June, partly because I had grown very interested in what was happening at the Elsie Inglis nursing home in Edinburgh. It is frustrating that neither the Health and Sport Committee nor anyone else can get any insight into that situation because of the police inquiry. I know that because I have submitted a freedom of information request yet still have not been able to get information because of the police inquiry. We might eventually know more about what happened there, but it threw up many of the issues that have been the subject of debate and inquiry since. One of those issues is the frequency of inspections and, again, the cabinet secretary is to be commended for—I have to say this gently—going back to the original 2001 system of one unannounced inspection a year. She deserves credit for making that decision. The other issue that was raised by the case of the Elsie Inglis home was the consistency of inspections. It seemed odd to everyone that a home that had had a good grade became totally unacceptable; we still do not know all the reasons for that. We are told that there were management changes at the nursing home. That might explain it, but people are still concerned about consistency of inspection. The committee, rightly, made a recommendation about that. Another interesting issue is the number of themes that should be inspected. The committee gave a measured recommendation on that and talked about taking a risk-based approach. The cabinet secretary is going further and saying that we need to deal with all four quality themes, so that issue is still to be resolved. The main theme that I emphasised during the debate on 9 June 2011 was the need to involve residents in the inspections. We need to look at their emotional care and the stimulation that they receive as well as their physical condition. Although the committee highlighted that issue, it is the one area that the committee might have emphasised more in its report. We are asking the care inspectorates to inspect more often, to deal with more quality themes and to have more user focus, so this is a difficult issue. We have to trust our front-line staff to have some discretion, which is why, on balance, I probably agree with the committee’s approach to thematic inspections and with the need for flexibility in relation to the number of themes to be explored. We need to reduce the bureaucracy of care inspectorate staff to a minimum, so that they have as much time as possible to spend in care homes and, in particular, to engage with care users. That kind of user focus was embodied in the original 2001 care standards, of which every member at the time was proud, but the committee’s recommendation that they should be reviewed and the Government’s acceptance of that recommendation are important. We have to move forwards, particularly in relation to the dementia standards. Finally, commissioning is the one area on which I am not entirely clear. The committee made a good recommendation about a greater role for the care inspectorate in commissioning, but the Government says that it is already possible for the inspectorate to do a lot of that work. I am a little unclear about what can and cannot be done, but it is certainly an important area. I hope that the commissioning practices of councils will be increasingly challenged, where necessary, by the care inspectorate.

This is an important subject in itself, but it also raises interesting general questions about the role of the Public Petitions Committee, of the Parliament and of Government in relation to clinical issues. Politicians certainly have a role to play in representing and championing the concerns of patients, and I congratulate the committee on doing so. We also believe strongly now in a partnership with patients and in the increasing ability of individual patients to have power over the decisions that affect them. That is a feature of the 21st century health service unlike any other in any previous health service. I still believe, however, that we must tread rather carefully when it comes to clinical matters. I am not entirely sure that it is the Scottish Government’s role “to review and overhaul the current out-dated and ineffective method of diagnosing and treating Pernicious Anaemia”, to use the words of the petition. At the end of the day, although it is the Government’s role to drive forward improvements in quality—the minister mentioned improving quality in primary care—diagnosis and treatment are matters for clinicians. Guidelines are properly a matter for the royal colleges, NICE and NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. The correct thing to do is to ask those bodies to consider the issues that have been presented in the debate, while taking full account of patients’ views and in partnership with patients. John Wilson referred to a SIGN guideline but, in fact, SIGN has never produced a guideline on pernicious anaemia. All that exists are criteria in the Scottish programme for improving clinical effectiveness in primary care. Perhaps one thing that the Government should do is to ask SIGN or NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, over which the Government has more direct influence, to consider that matter urgently in the light of the concerns that have been expressed. It was interesting to read the submissions on the issue, particularly the submission from NHS Lanarkshire. One issue that I homed in on as a matter of primary concern was that of how frequently people with pernicious anaemia should receive injections. There was a lot of debate and controversy about that in the submissions and in the oral evidence session. NHS Lanarkshire’s submission said: “Most patients who are on 3 monthly vitamin B12 will run with higher than population norms of vitamin B12 levels and these can easily be assayed. Were we to see a patient who ran with lower than normal levels despite ‘a standard vitamin B12 supplementation’ and particularly were they symptomatic, it would certainly be our guidance to consider increasing the frequency of B12 administration.” That perhaps explains some of the seeming inconsistencies. It certainly suggests that, at least in NHS Lanarkshire, clinicians are willing to look at the specific individual circumstances of a particular patient. At the end of the day, we in the Parliament cannot give a definitive medical view and nor can the minister or his civil servants. It is up to the clinicians and the bodies to which I have referred to consider the issue. I hope that one outcome of the debate is that they will do so.

Is the cabinet secretary suggesting that the UK Government has a veto on the publication of any report from the commission, because of the reservation of data protection?

The cabinet secretary referred to the excellent work that TARA does. During the evidence that he gave to the Equal Opportunities Committee in the previous session, when it was pointed out that its services are concentrated in Glasgow because of a lack of funding, he said that he would investigate whether funding could be increased so that it could operate across Scotland. Has there been any progress in that regard?

8. To ask the Scottish Government how it will monitor progress by NHS boards in meeting the clinical standards for neurological health services after the implementation programme ends in March 2012. (S4O-00714)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer and for her detailed answer to Paul Wheelhouse. We all recognise the recent progress that has been made with the implementation programme, but the cabinet secretary will know about the concerns of several organisations that work in neurological health about what will happen in the future. She referred to a peer review that is being conducted, but will peer reviews be conducted subsequently? I suppose that that relates to a more general issue about the role of Healthcare Improvement Scotland, which has done great improvement work in neurological standards. Will it have a continuing scrutiny role in their implementation?

It is right that in the debate today we concentrate mainly on the Scottish Government’s policies, but it would be ridiculous to hold the debate without looking at the wider UK framework. The reality is that the SNP and Labour have substantial agreement on our analysis of what is happening in that regard. The deficit reduction programme is clearly too severe and is leading to an increasing deficit, and demand in the economy has collapsed because of the real-terms fall in the wages of the majority of the population. At the same time—I hope that the SNP agrees with Labour on this, although sometimes its attitude to business suggests otherwise—we have a massive build-up of surpluses by business and the super-rich. That is why Labour at Westminster has a policy of a super-tax on bonuses, plus a policy of reducing VAT to inject demand into the economy. I hope that the SNP will support those policies, and I am glad that in the debate today we have not heard the kind of nonsense that we heard in the debate on the Budget (Scotland) Bill, when the SNP claimed that Labour and the Tories had an identical economic policy at Westminster. Turning our focus on Scotland, I think that we can agree—well, I certainly hope that those on this side of the chamber agree—that Ken Macintosh struck the right tone in the debate when he said that it is not that the Scottish Government is doing nothing but that it is overegging what it is doing and making exaggerated claims about the consequences of its policies. I am certainly happy to go along with a lot of what the Scottish Government is doing, but the reality is that it is not making as much difference as it claims. I think that the article by Professor David Bell, to which Ken Macintosh referred, gives good evidence of that.

In the first two minutes of my speech, I indicated that I think that, given its actions, the UK Government bears a lot of responsibility for what is happening in the Scottish economy. However, that cannot become the single, repeated excuse for what the Scottish Government fails to do. Although I have acknowledged what the Government is doing, we see from the example of the construction sector that a third of construction firms expect employment to fall this year and that 30,000 jobs in the sector were lost in the past year, which is 15.2 per cent of the number of people employed in construction. That is way beyond the figure for any other part of the United Kingdom—I will not embarrass the SNP by quoting the percentages for the other countries in the UK. Although there was a fall in the housing budget—the cabinet secretary will think that I am a housing bore—we were of course pleased that a bit more was put into housing at the final stage of the budget bill, but why was housing way behind other areas? More investment in housing would have not just served a social imperative but boosted employment far more quickly. The Scottish Government has to look at its attitude to construction in general and housing in particular. I also want to talk about procurement, which is mentioned at the end of our amendment. I am not going to join the battle of the Forth bridge, which we have waged quite a lot over the past couple of weeks. However, a constituent of mine from an SME approached me about not getting any work for the Forth bridge and I wrote to the cabinet secretary about the situation. I cannot read all of his reply, but one sentence said: “Supply chain sourcing and management is a commercial matter for the main contractor which is to all intents and purposes outwith the scope of the Regulations.” The problem is that, once a contract is awarded, it is up to the contractor, who can do what they want with the work. The person who approached me on behalf of an SME in Leith made the point that none of that work was coming his way. We should listen to what Margaret McCulloch said about SMEs and procurement as well as what she said about apprenticeships, because she knows a lot about training, apprenticeships and procurement. She made some suggestions that I fully back, particularly her call for the proposed sustainable procurement bill to be produced as quickly as possible. Some of the points that she made were also made in the recent report from the Jimmy Reid Foundation by Jim and Margaret Cuthbert. The Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment is not listening at the moment, but I am not making points about the Forth bridge, which our parties have had battles about; I am making a plea to him to read that report and address its recommendations. The Cuthberts make the point that one way in which Scottish contractors could benefit from large projects would involve splitting contracts into small blocks to make it easier for small firms to win them. The report highlights the fact that public sector contracts have been designed in the interests of big business that is located mainly outside Scotland, with the country’s large, small and medium-sized business sector largely squeezed out of the bidding process. It also points out—crucially—that Scotland has a “much more restricted view” of European Union law on the awarding of the contracts than other nations. It states that “those drafting the Directive were ... aware of the importance of being able to protect various disadvantaged groups, of taking social, economic, and environmental issues into account, of encouraging research and development, and of the economic importance of SMEs. A number of exemptions and provisions were written into the Directive to allow for these needs.” That approach to the directive is not being taken by the Scottish Government. I am not making a party-political point, as some of the blame lies with the way in which directives were transposed into regulations a few years ago at Westminster and here. Nevertheless, the Scottish Government can act now to ensure that directives are implemented and interpreted far more flexibly.

It is difficult for anyone to follow the moving opening speech from Dennis Robertson, but I am sure that we all applaud his courage in advancing an issue that affects both the mental and the physical health of many thousands of individuals in Scotland. It is a subject that is still much misunderstood—including by some of the medical profession, as Dennis Robertson reminded us—and it rarely enters public discourse. Today offers a great opportunity to have a frank and open discussion in a week of events that are led by Beat and which are aimed at raising public awareness of the severity of conditions such as anorexia, bulimia nervosa and body dysmorphic disorder. It is unfortunate that we need to have the debate at all, but the stigma that hinders further discussion has meant that common misconceptions regarding eating disorders—that they are a fad, a trend or an image problem—have been allowed to prevail and to become a dominant feature of normative attitudes towards what is in actuality an extreme mental health problem. When we reflect on the fact that it is largely our younger community who suffer the physical and mental scars of their situation, we must acknowledge our role as policy makers, leaders and adults. We must work with agencies such as Beat and the NHS to help to create a climate of trust and understanding in which taboos may be broken and stigma challenged for the future health and mental wellbeing of our young people. In the context of stigma, the work of the see me campaign should be mentioned. I note that it has a new campaign that is aimed at young people, which I think is being launched at present. However, in many cases it is older people whom we have to inform about the problem. As previous speakers have said, it is a mental health problem that not only harms the body, but takes people into a private world of shame and isolation. What we can do to help sufferers back is inform and support those who have contact with them on a regular basis and get them to understand that the situation cannot be helped through vilification, disgust or indifference. Ignoring the issue because you are unsure of how best to approach the subject feeds into the shame and secrecy that dominates a sufferer’s life and can quite easily lead to their developing long-term bodily damage. All those points are outlined in Beat’s aims and objectives, which are to change the way everyone thinks and talks about eating disorders, improve the way services and treatment are provided and help anyone believe that their eating disorder can be beaten. To do that we need to challenge the stereotypes and stigma that people with eating disorders face, campaign for better services and treatment, and provide information, support and encouragement to people to seek treatment and recovery. Support must be available at clinical and therapeutic levels. When an individual is ready to talk about their situation, the facilities must be available to support in-house recovery if necessary, or to allow access to a healthcare professional in their locality who has specific knowledge of the psychology of eating disorders. NHS Scotland has shown through the development of services such as the Eden unit that treatment of eating disorders must be flexible to suit the needs of patients, with the most severe cases being hospitalised and accessible regional services being made available for those who are less severe. However, as the facilities for in-patient rehabilitation are so limited, great emphasis must be placed on the need to understand the reasons for disordered eating, however varied they may be. We must also consider how best we may prevent their emergence through engagement with professional bodies such as Beat, which offers invaluable expertise that should inform a more preventive approach. The need for support cannot be measured simply by the number of hospital admissions in Scotland at a specific time, nor can it be judged on the number of cases who present to GPs and service providers, as there are likely to be many thousands who do not have the confidence to reach out for help. Therefore, we must look to charities that have the first-hand experience that we need to inform our policy, and we must push to make information accessible and confidential for sufferers, their families and their teachers and lift the stigma that costs lives every year. Once again, I pay tribute to Dennis Robertson for his speech and his courage in bringing the matter to Parliament. I must apologise because I am chairing a cross-party group at 5.30, so I shall leave after the next speech if that is acceptable to you, Presiding Officer.

Last Thursday, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice abolished prison visiting committees and said that he would build on them. Today, his colleague has said that he will abolish the chartered teacher scheme and build on it. There seems to be a pattern here. Does Mr Russell not think that it would be wise to keep the chartered teacher scheme until he has developed concrete proposals to provide accessible opportunities and concrete arrangements for the masters profession that he wishes to create?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to improve services for children and adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. (S4O-00664)

I thank the minister for that response, and I certainly acknowledge the work of Healthcare Improvement Scotland on childhood ADHD. However, at a recent meeting of the cross-party group on mental health, we were told about the lack of a strategy, guidelines, training and clinics for adult ADHD, in particular. Given that improvement challenge 2 of the draft mental health strategy refers to developmental disorders, will the minister ensure that the development of services for child and adult ADHD is given particular attention in the final strategy?

The cabinet secretary will also know that those prisoners who had experience of visiting committees had a very positive attitude towards them. I ask the cabinet secretary to solve a mystery for me. How can it be sensible or logical for him to introduce legislation to ensure that there is visiting of police cells to fulfil our obligations under international law while, at the same time, he is removing visits from prisons? People are genuinely puzzled by that contradiction.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

As one of my colleagues said, it is a case of, “Thanks and goodbye.” Does Jamie Hepburn not realise that, although its amendment talks about building on the role of visiting committees, the Government wants to abolish that role and to create a completely different service that is highly desirable, but which will not in any way perform the role of the visiting committees?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will reconsider the decision to abolish prison visiting committees. (S4F-00441)

It would help if the First Minister withdrew the letter that he submitted a few days ago saying that he would abolish the committees. We all recognise the need for independent advocacy, and many prisoners should already have rights to it under the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, but will the Government stop using that as cover for the abolition of prison visiting committees, which fulfil a completely different role in monitoring, complaints, and the reporting of problems? In the current Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, the Government has recognised the need to strengthen the independent monitoring of police custody cells. Will the First Minister demonstrate consistency and coherence by allowing the prison visiting committees to continue their vitally important work?

I congratulate Colin Keir on bringing the motion to the Parliament for debate. Clearly, his area is not in my constituency, but I can share vicariously in the obvious pleasure that he took from the hub’s opening a few days ago. When he was talking, my mind went back to two weeks ago, when the rebuilt Royston Wardieburn community centre in my constituency was opened. That great occasion brought enormous pleasure to the whole local community. I pay tribute to the City of Edinburgh Council for the community hub. I know that we spend a lot of time on criticising the council—I flag up concerns about the library service in Edinburgh more generally—but we must pay tribute to it when good achievements are realised. It is clear that the Drumbrae hub is one such example and the Royston Wardieburn community centre is another. The hub concept is not new, although the funding is different and is worth remarking on. In the past few years, people have tried to emulate the idea of having more services in the local community and having different services in the same location. I remember—it seems quite a long time ago now—that I visited more than one such hub when I was a minister. The one in Dalmellington—which is not far from your constituency, Presiding Officer—is a fine example. We should all support the idea of co-locating as many services as possible in local communities, but the hub model involves a different way of financing that. Colin Keir focused on the hub that has been built, but he shares with me an interest in the proposed north-west Edinburgh partnership centre, which would be on the edge of his constituency and would serve my constituency. The plans for that throw up two problems with the hub model. I am certainly not against that model in principle and I will be pleased if it can deliver, but the time that some such projects are taking to come to fruition seems to be a problem. People in Pilton in my constituency and in Muirhouse in Colin Keir’s constituency are frustrated and keep saying, “And what about this centre?” because we have talked about it for a long time. Having talked this week to Peter Gabbitas, who is now heading the project as the City of Edinburgh Council’s director of health and social care, I know that movement is afoot. I hope that we will have a report on good progress soon. It is frustrating that some such projects take so long to get together. Without getting too political, I will say that people should be honest about the hub. It is a variant of private finance. It is a little bit different from PPP, but it is not as different as some people think. The principle is the same—private money will be used and will be paid back annually. We all accept that model, but we should be up front and honest about what is involved. My main interest is to keep arguing for the north-west partnership centre, which will have a much bigger health service presence than the Drumbrae centre has. Council services, the health service and, I hope, other services will all be co-located in the community, which is consistent with the general direction of health policy as well as other policies. We need to get as many services as possible in local communities and, ideally, in new buildings that people will take pleasure in using, which will mean that they are more likely to access the services. That is particularly necessary in north-west Edinburgh because of the increasing population at the waterfront. I am sure that Colin Keir and I will both continue to campaign for that. Of course, today is Drumbrae’s day, and I acknowledge what the council has achieved there. I pay tribute to it and once again thank Colin Keir for securing this debate. I apologise to the minister as I am hosting an event in the Parliament and will probably have to leave at half past 5.

Although I accept that some people in my constituency will benefit from mid-market rents under the national housing trust scheme, will the minister accept that the drive towards mid-market rents through the trust, which is caused by declining subsidies to housing associations, cannot be a substitute for social rented housing if councils are to have any chance of meeting their homelessness obligations at the end of this year?

I and everybody in Labour fully support the “right of the Scottish people to determine the form of Government best suited to their needs”. We have supported that for a long time. I know that the cabinet secretary will think that this is a trivial point, but she must understand how galling we found it when the First Minister asked us a few weeks ago to reaffirm a commitment that he had never affirmed in the first place. Setting that aside, I say for the avoidance of doubt that we reaffirm that commitment. At the heart of the debate is a gigantic step by the Scottish Government from that commitment to saying that the Scottish Government should determine all the processes of a referendum. In a way, we really need to focus on that. Among the many interesting articles on the subject in the past week or two, the most interesting that I have found was by the former leader of the Liberal Party of Canada—members can find it in the Financial Times of 18 January. He started the article with the stark statement that “how the rules” in a referendum “get made will determine who wins.” That might be a slight overstatement, but it makes us realise how important the process is. He also said: “For the Scottish referendum result to have legitimacy, both nationally and internationally, both sides will have to compromise and agree on language, timing and process.” In the context of what we are talking about, perhaps we should refer to “all sides” rather than “both sides”. We are talking not about Edinburgh and London but about all sides of Scottish opinion. I probably agree with much that the Scottish Government said in the two days before Michael Moore’s statement in the House of Commons, because the UK Government’s approach before that statement was incredibly cack-handed, although Michael Moore made a much better shot of it in his statement. We are talking not about Edinburgh and London, but about how we ensure that all sides of Scottish opinion have a say in this vital decision on the referendum process. As Patricia Ferguson did, I welcome the commitment that the First Minister made during questions today. We will have to see how that works out. However, it is really important that the quotation from Michael Ignatieff that I read out be taken on board. We must have a process that is acceptable to all sides: we cannot have someone saying at the end of it all that the referendum was not fair or not clear and so on. That is why the Labour amendment—in which the words “clear”, “unambiguous” and “decisive” are central to our argument—is so important. I will home in on what is perhaps the most contentious area of all with regard to process: whether there should be one or two questions. I expressed a view on that matter a few months ago, but I have thought about it a great deal in the past three or four months, and I have come to the conclusion that it will be very difficult, if not impossible, to have a multi-option referendum on the issue. That does not mean that I go back in any way on what I have written about the need for this Parliament to have greatly increased powers, but I see two fundamental problems with a multi-option referendum. First, we do not have a clear third option. I know that the Scottish Government has in its head a clear third option, and I was rather concerned to read on page 15 of the document yesterday that the Scottish Government’s position remains that it is “willing to include a question about further ... devolution on the lines of ‘devolution max’”. In other words, the Scottish Government is prejudging and deciding what the third option should be. However, the third option of the Scottish people may well fall far short of devolution max in its pure and absolute sense.

I am describing the practical difficulties; the first difficulty is that we do not have a third option worked out in detail.

I will give way in a minute, but I know that I will be cut short. I will just make my points and then I will give way. The second point concerns the practicalities. Peter Kellner has written very interestingly about a second question: he comes up with four different voting methods that get four different results. Willie Rennie has expressed the dilemma in terms of what happens if we get 80 per cent for devo max and 51 per cent for independence. The public would not accept that independence had won that poll. I will let Nicola Sturgeon intervene after I have made this point. I saw her tweeting this morning—I do not know whether she said this last night, because I did not see the programme—that her favoured option is to ask the people whether they want a change from the status quo and then to ask a question that offers a choice between independence and devo max. The problem with that is that many of the people who do not want a change—and who would answer the first question to that effect—would abstain on the second question. We could therefore get 50 per cent voting for independence on the second question, but it may well be that 40 per cent or less of those taking part in the referendum actually voted on that question. I give way to Nicola Sturgeon.

I am certainly interested in developing such an option. The point that I am making today is that such an option cannot be on that ballot paper. We must have a clear, decisive and unambiguous question on independence.

I agree with every word that the member has said, but is the logic of his position that there must be some check and limitation on the sovereignty of the Scottish Government when it comes to the referendum?

It is quite right that we concentrate in the debate on the decisions that the Scottish Government must make within its powers and resources, but I must first address a point that Chic Brodie and Kenneth Gibson made. SNP members are spreading about a new myth, which is that somehow Labour and the Conservatives at Westminster have the same economic policy—the cabinet secretary, being a more reasonable man, merely implied that that is the case. The fact is that the economic policy of Labour at Westminster has not changed. We remain adamant that the cuts that are being made are going too far and too fast. Mr Swinney quoted the IMF, which said that the overvigorous deficit reduction strategy is having an entirely negative effect on growth and employment and indeed on the longer-term prospects for reducing the deficit, and I quite agree. Let us concentrate on what we can do in the Scottish Parliament.

I will do so in a moment. As Kenneth Macintosh said, there is a larger measure of agreement about what Labour is proposing than people might think that there is. From the front benches, Ken Macintosh emphasised colleges and housing. I will talk about those two subjects, although if I have time I will also talk briefly about the budget for sustainable and active travel, which the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, of which I am a member, has been considering. We can address the problems of the housing and further education budgets within the money that has not been allocated. It might also be possible to make some shifts, but such a significant sum is available in the unallocated moneys, particularly in relation to capital, that there is ample scope to spend more on housing and FE. The two areas tick all the boxes that we want to tick: the economics box, the employment box, the social justice box and the preventative spend box. Why on earth is a Government that claims to prioritise youth employment cutting the FE budget by 20 per cent, with the cut front loaded at 13 per cent next year, on top of 10 per cent this year? Perhaps a 10 per cent cut can be accommodated this year through efficiencies of various kinds, but can that be repeated next year? I very much doubt it. The Government’s decision is illogical and I hope that it will be reversed. We all know about the social need for housing, but we must also remember what a profound boost to the economy a house building programme would provide. We are told that we will get 4,000 social rented houses a year. Notwithstanding that many of the organisations that know about such things are a bit sceptical about that happening, that is 2,000 fewer houses than were promised in the manifesto and will in no way meet our crying and urgent need for more houses. Last week I visited the City of Edinburgh Council and East Lothian Council, in relation to the 2012 commitment on homelessness, and both councils told me that they will really struggle to meet the objective. There is an urgent need for more social rented housing for social, employment, economic and climate change purposes, so let us ensure that unallocated capital goes into the area, as the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee recommended in its report to the Finance Committee.

That is certainly one of the things that the council is having to do, but the approach will not in itself solve the council’s problem. I mentioned the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s report. There is not just agreement among many Opposition parties; the reports of many committees, which of course have an SNP majority, say much the same thing and ask that the number 1 priority be that unallocated capital be given to housing. On active and sustainable travel, we are talking about relatively small sums of money. If we took £1 million from every line in the transport budget we could probably address most of the concerns that I will raise. I will focus on three recommendations of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee. The committee recommended that the future transport fund “be focused on capital projects that provide high economic return”, with a particular focus on cycling, because a 10 per cent modal shift to cycling is required under the report on proposals and policies under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. However, there is a massive cut to the cycling budget. Sustrans has received £5 million a year, but it will now get £1.5 million, possibly over two years, but perhaps four—it is not clear. Another recommendation was that “the Scottish Government should give consideration to setting the active travel budget as a proportion of total transport spending.” The Government said in its response to the committee that it refused to do that. We know why—it is because, last year, the figure was 1.21 per cent of the overall transport budget, whereas next year it will be 0.67 per cent. The figure will reduce from £25 million this year to £16 million next year. The committee also recommended that the cabinet secretary should maintain cycling, walking and safer streets funding at the current level of £7.5 million a year, but it has been reduced to £6 million. The cabinet secretary is going against not only what Opposition members say, but what his own party’s members have said in committees. The freight facilities grant, which is a further small amount of money in the sustainable travel budget, will go down from £2 million to £0.75 million. The availability of that funding has been critical to shifting freight from road to rail. In my remaining few seconds, I point out that the issues can be dealt with by small shifts in the transport budget. By taking £1 million or £2 million away from some of the many lines in that budget, I hope that the issues can be addressed without having to invade any other budget.

The member does not mention the many suggestions that have been made in the debate, such as that more money for housing would create jobs in Scotland. Nevertheless, I thank the member for quoting the five-point plan, which is still subscribed to by the Labour Party. That belies the assertions that were made by his colleagues, Chic Brodie and Kenneth Gibson.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what consultation it carried out before announcing the criteria for the latest round of international development funding. (S4O-00586)

Did the Government consult organisations that work in Zambia, Tanzania and Rwanda, which are, of course, also eligible for funding? Why did the priorities that were set exclude health and education, for example, as possible areas for work in those countries?

We have had several tweets about the issue. I referred Humza Yousaf to The Scotsman article of 24 November in which I talked about devo plus, given the ambiguity of devo max. I also pointed out that support for that option does not necessarily involve a further question in a referendum.

Neither the cabinet secretary nor the minister has said anything about supply teachers. I know from my constituency mailbag that there are serious problems with the lack of availability of supply teachers in Edinburgh, and I am sure that that is the case elsewhere. What will the Government do about that?

One of the great strengths of the Scottish NHS compared with the English health service this century has been its tendency to progress through evolution instead of structural upheaval and we have another fine example of that before us. I welcome the proposed development of CHPs into health and social care partnerships and the focus on “nationally agreed outcomes”, “clinical and care professional leadership” and integration, especially the integration of budgets. As other speakers have emphasised, the prize in all this is achieving the shift in the balance of care required by demographics as well as improving the quality of care. The prerequisite in that respect is better working together, not only between health and social care without the perverse incentives and “cost-shunting” referred to in the motion but—and we must not forget this—between community clinicians and specialist hospital clinicians. After all, that was part of the drive behind the establishment of the CHPs in the first place. I am very well aware that I and others were making many of these comments seven years ago when CHPs were set up—and, indeed, nine years ago, when the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 was being considered. I thank Mary Scanlon for reminding us of that, although I am sorry to say that I was not in the chamber at that moment. There has been progress since then but, in retrospect and having watched developments over the past few years, I make three observations. First, there was not enough prescription on pooled budgets in the legislation. Secondly, I do not think that there was enough autonomy, including budgetary autonomy, for community health partnerships. Thirdly, I do not think that there was enough clinical leadership in practice in community health partnerships, although when CHPs were set up it was certainly the intention that there should be clinical leadership. Budgets will be central to what is proposed. As some members will remember, there was provision in the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 for facilitated pooled budgets, but in practice very few areas have taken them up. I assume that the forthcoming legislation will require pooled budgets to be set up. There are a lot of questions about how the budgets will operate in practice. A difference between what is proposed today and what the Arbuthnott report proposed is that budgets will be subject to local decision making; I understand that Arbuthnott suggested that they should be distributed centrally, on the basis of a funding formula that is similar to the one that applies to health boards—or indeed the one that applies to local authorities. I do not have particularly strong views one way or another, but if we are to have local decision making it is clear that questions will be asked about how that works in practice, because if local authorities or health boards can adjust their contributions each year there could still be cost shunting. I presume that the matter can be sorted, through legislation or guidance. We must ensure that we get as much of older people’s services as possible into the community health and social care partnerships. Indeed, as far as possible, we should get all older people’s services into the new partnerships, including geriatric beds in NHS hospitals—I am not sure that that is still the correct terminology. I accept that the intention is to start with older people, but it is clear that the more that we can get other care-group budgets and perhaps specific disease budgets into the health and social care partnerships the better, in terms of shifting the balance of care. As I said, and as the BMA briefing reminded us, greater integration of community and hospital services is crucial for the health and social care partnerships, as it was in the context of the setting up of CHPs in the first place. In preparation for my speech, I looked into the archives last night and found a speech that I made to the NHS Confederation, which is a United Kingdom body, on 25 June 2003. I was speaking to mainly English health leaders, who thought that Scotland was in the stone age at the time, and I had to explain what we were trying to do. I said: “Tomorrow in our Health Reform Bill we shall be establishing Community Health Partnerships, which will empower frontline staff in the community and give them the resources and flexibility to deliver services in new ways and bring community and specialist hospital staff together to design services for patients in a way which ensures their journey of care across the NHS is smooth, integrated and effectively managed.” I am sure that that is still our objective, even though it has not entirely worked out in that way—although as we look across the border to the NHS in England I suppose that we might ask who is in the stone age now. As the motion emphasised, clinical and care professional leadership is fundamental. That was the intention behind CHPs in the first place, but mechanisms must be established to ensure that such leadership happens in practice. The focus on national outcomes is absolutely right, but along with that there must be local flexibility and local empowerment, so the forthcoming legislation will have to establish the balance. I remember debates on the issue when community health partnerships were set up. In general, the cabinet secretary has got the balance right and I commend her proposals.

As the member well knows, I was referring to the current proposals of the current Government in London.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what success it is having in increasing employment opportunities. (S4O-00489)

I welcome what the cabinet secretary has said, but he will know of particular concerns about the alarming levels of youth unemployment. Therefore, while welcoming the community jobs Scotland initiative, which is supporting 2,000 work opportunities in the third sector, will he give serious consideration to using some of the new resources announced for youth employment to expand that scheme within the voluntary sector and into the private sector, as happened with the future jobs fund, which the United Kingdom Government mistakenly abolished when it came into office?

I was perhaps a bit unkind to say in last week’s economy debate that the infrastructure investment plan was the longest wish list in history, but I was certainly right to say that it needed to be costed and, most of all, that it needed to be prioritised. I think that I was also right, last week, to be sceptical about how that list could be funded within the 5 per cent revenue rule. I hope that the cabinet secretary will cover that in his winding-up speech. The plan is oblivious to that rule, yet the Scottish Government tells us: “We will cap our future revenue commitments related to capital investment to a maximum of 5% of our expected future annual DEL budget. These revenue commitments will include existing PFI commitments we have inherited, future debt repayments once we have borrowing powers, and payments made under both the Non-Profit Distributing model and Network Rail’s Regulatory Asset Base.” A study by the Centre for Public Policy for Regions, written by Jo Armstrong and John McLaren and published today, analyses the future revenue consequences of the plan in some detail. It is the most interesting commentary that I have yet read on the plan. Basically the authors say that by 2014 the Scottish Government would be quite near that 5 per cent cap and, therefore, it is not clear where future payments would come from.

Obviously that needs to be looked into, but the principle stands. When I read the plan last week I thought intuitively that there was something wrong, because it seemed to be completely inconsistent with the 5 per cent rule. No doubt people will do more number crunching on that. Politics is always about choices, more so than ever in hard economic times. I believe that the infrastructure investment plan must be prioritised against the key criteria of economic growth, social justice and climate change objectives. Prioritisation must also be based on evidence and Maureen Watt referred to very interesting evidence that we received in the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee. I cannot deal with all the issues, but I have taken a particular interest in broadband and in transport because we have been covering those issues over the past few weeks. It seems clear that there is definite evidence—some of it was given to us yesterday—about the benefits of doubling broadband speeds. We were told yesterday that a study of 33 countries by the OECD says that such a doubling would lead to a 0.3 per cent upgrade in gross domestic product and further evidence was given from a study that indicated increased productivity from such additional speeds. That confirmed, perhaps, what we expected, but more surprising was the evidence from transport professors. Members should read the Official Report of the committee’s 5 October meeting. I will read a couple of quotations, because they are very interesting. The first is from Professor Tom Rye of Edinburgh Napier University: “It is extremely difficult to find empirical evidence that investment in transport infrastructure—especially large-scale transport infrastructure—grows the overall economy. You can find a lot of evidence that investing in specific pieces of transport infrastructure will move economic activity around it, but trying to find evidence that it will grow the economy overall is really difficult.”—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 5 October 2011; c 166.] I can see that time will not allow me to read the other quotations, but Professor Iain Docherty said something similar and referred to the work of Professor David Banister of the University of Oxford. I realise that that is controversial, but we need to question whether the infrastructure investment plan should allocate 39 per cent of the supposedly available capital to transport, in particular to road building, given that that is contrary to our climate change imperatives. I am particularly disappointed that there is no detail whatsoever in the plan about low-carbon transport investments such as active travel, which is so important for climate change as well as health improvement and other objectives. I have said repeatedly in several debates in the past few weeks that I believe that the top priority for capital investment in the immediate future should be housing, including a retrofit programme to improve the energy efficiency of Scotland’s homes. The cabinet secretary talked a good game by referring to 4,000 extra social rented houses a year, setting aside the fact that he promised 6,000 earlier in the year. The fact of the matter is that the experts say that he will struggle to achieve that objective, even though he has changed the counting method to counting completions rather than starts. He will struggle to reach 4,000, but of course that number of houses in itself will not enable us to achieve the homelessness commitment that we have to achieve by the end of next year. If we go for increased housing investment, certainly in the next year or two—there is obviously capital yet to be allocated—it will tick the employment box, the economic growth box, the social justice box, the climate change box and the 2012 homelessness commitment box. Last week we heard that the City of Edinburgh Council cannot meet its 2012 homelessness commitment because of the shortage of affordable rented housing in Edinburgh. That must be the immediate imperative for infrastructure expenditure. I hope that the cabinet secretary will start speaking the language of priorities. I am sure that in his youth he quoted Nye Bevan: “the language of priorities is the religion of socialism.”

Violence against women is preventable but, tragically, as Kofi Annan has put it, violence against women and girls is “perhaps the most pervasive violation of human rights across the globe”. It is therefore absolutely right that successive Administrations and this Parliament have focused on the issue in the past 13 years. They have gained recognition for that work. As the UK End Violence Against Women coalition has put it, “Scotland should ... be regarded as a benchmark with respect to its strategic approach, its recognition that violence is a cause and consequence of women’s inequality”. That gender-based analysis has recently been challenged in a petition to the Parliament and by one or two members in a debate on violence against men last year but, to the Government’s credit, it has stuck with the gender-based analysis. There is no doubt that male violence against women is a profound societal and cultural problem that is rooted in gender inequality, rather than just in the psychopathology of individual men. For several years, policy has been based on the three Ps—prevention, provision and protection. I will talk mainly about the first two, although I welcome the development of the domestic abuse court in Edinburgh, which is an important further initiative in the protection part of the agenda. Prevention should not involve only targeted early intervention, but should take a population-based approach. That is because violence against women is not limited to certain classes or areas but applies across society, and because everyone is responsible for recognising, challenging, speaking out against and educating on violence against women. The population-based approach was pioneered in Edinburgh 20 years ago by Zero Tolerance. I thank the minister for his too-kind words about me, although I should point out that Christina McKelvie is the co-convener of the new cross-party group and will in fact chair its first meeting, at 5.30 next Wednesday, to which all are invited. Certainly, anything that I know about the issue I have learned from Zero Tolerance, Scottish Women’s Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and the many women who have educated me. I was pleased to attend the launch of another Zero Tolerance initiative this morning. The initiative, to which the minister referred, is called PACT, which stands for policy, action, communication and training. The focus of the PACT initiative is on employers and the workplace. It provides employers with a package of materials with which they can begin to engage with issues of violence against women as they apply to the workplace. Mainstreaming prevention and early intervention across agencies is crucial. I was concerned to hear at the launch this morning, from somebody who is involved in the local multi-agency partnership on violence against women, that education is not involved in the local partnership here. I do not know whether that is the case throughout Scotland. Schools are central and have been flagged up by the End Violence Against Women coalition as a key area for prevention, but Zero Tolerance has pointed out how patchy treatment of the issue is in schools. It is launching an updated respect education programme in the spring. Evaluation of the pilot of that programme some years ago indicated that 78 per cent of primary school children said that their behaviour had been changed as a result of the programme. I hope that more work can be done by schools because that is central to the prevention agenda. The health service is also an important area for prevention and early intervention, as the minister reminded us. Concern has been expressed by some people that the national domestic abuse delivery plan has come to an end in health with the disbanding of the dedicated team within the health and social care directorate. I am sure that that work will continue in other ways, but perhaps the minister can say in his summing up how that work will be carried forward, because health is also central to the prevention and early intervention agenda.

I am sorry. I thought that I had six minutes—my mistake. I meant to spend my last two minutes on funding, but I cannot, for which I apologise.

In last week’s statement, the UK Government continued to damage the economy, to penalise those on lower incomes in particular and to blame everyone else except itself. Our objective should be to do the opposite in all three respects. The most shocking summary of the statement is to be found in the distributional impact graphs of the Institute of Fiscal Studies, which showed that the biggest losers are families with children. Even more horrific, the population’s lowest two income deciles lost the most—and the third, fourth and fifth poorest deciles thereafter—while those in the upper deciles were penalised the least. The UK Government itself has admitted that last week’s statement, with the changes to tax credits and certain other policies, will result in child poverty in the UK rising by 100,000 next year. That is a shocking admission—and perhaps even more shocking is the UK Government’s blatant disregard of the internationally recognised definition of child poverty, which it says it will henceforth ignore. That is not just blatant social injustice; it is taking income away from low-income families and further shrinking demand in the economy. Of course, the collapse in demand is perhaps the key problem facing the UK economy just now. It is not just the left that is objecting to such moves. This week, the OECD criticised the UK Government, saying that it must do something about income inequality; in fact, it advocated further taxes on the rich. Alas, last week, the UK Government did exactly the opposite. With regard to the wider economy, the UK Government began its term by saying that it could not borrow its way out of a crisis. However, as we know, borrowing is now higher than ever. That is not surprising—after all, it is the economy that defines the size of the deficit, not the deficit that determines the size of the economy. Last week’s statement was not a statement for growth. The cabinet secretary has already referred to the report from the OBR, which made no adjustment as a result of the measures set out in the statement. Gavin Brown might have found some economist to back his point of view but the reality is that there are just as many—indeed, there are more—distinguished commentators who disagree with him. I have not got time to read out the full quotation but in October even the International Monetary Fund, which is often quoted by the Conservatives, said that the UK Government should consider delaying some of its planned consolidation. Of course, it is not just the IMF that is saying so; the same is being said by a clutch of Nobel prize-winning economists and very reputable commentators, including Martin Wolf of the Financial Times. I know that Gavin Brown wanted to quote the Financial Times but Martin Wolf certainly does not share the view that Mr Brown quoted. One such Nobel laureate is Paul Krugman who, this week, made a striking statement when he compared the chancellor to “a medieval doctor bleeding his patient, observing that the patient is getting sicker, not better, and deciding that this calls for even more bleeding.” We have heard the usual arguments from the Conservatives today: if we had not had “bleeding”—to use Paul Krugman’s word—interest rates would have gone through the roof. However, that is not the case. It is illiterate fantasy to believe that long-term low interest rates are the result of the policies of the United Kingdom Government. They are, in fact, a sign of stagnant growth. We saw that with long-term low interest rates in Japan in the 1990s.

The Italian situation is completely different from the UK situation. Italy is in the euro. At least Italy has higher growth than the UK; in the European Union, only Greece, Portugal and Cyprus have lower growth than the UK. The main result of the autumn statement is increased capital expenditure for Scotland—although it would be good to hear from the cabinet secretary, when he winds up, exactly what the matched funding for the sleeper will do. Although we are getting extra, it seems that we will have to put quite a lot of it into the sleeper. It is a worthy objective, but it means that the extra is not as much as it seems. The big capital expenditure document this week is the infrastructure investment plan, which, on a cursory reading, seems to me to be the longest wish list in history. I do not see how it is affordable, if revenue payments are to be kept within 5 per cent of the budget. However, the key things about the document are that it ought to be costed and that it must set priorities. My main advice to the Scottish Government would be to give up its obsession with road building and focus on housing in the next two or three years. We heard this week that Edinburgh could not meet its 2012 homelessness target, and that there will be a 30 per cent cut to the affordable housing budget. My simple message to the Scottish Government today is this: prioritise housing. At the start of my speech, I castigated the UK Government for penalising those on low incomes and sabotaging growth in the economy. Prioritising housing is a way of supporting those who are disadvantaged while simultaneously boosting the economy. Of course the Scottish Parliament needs more financial powers to enable it to do more, but that should not blind us to what we can do with the powers that we have at present. Prioritising housing will help the economy and help those who are disadvantaged. That should be the immediate priority for the extra capital that we are getting.

I wish the minister all the best for his time in Durban. I know that he has a strong personal commitment to the agenda, and I hope that as part of the UK delegation he will help to push other countries towards the legally binding international cut in carbon emissions that we so desperately need. I hope that the UK delegation will also support developing countries to adapt to climate change to deal with the problems that Sarah Boyack so powerfully described at the beginning of her speech. I am sure that the minister will tell others of our landmark climate change legislation, and we can all be justifiably proud of the act that we passed two years ago. However, the key to the act has always been in the implementation, and it is right that Sarah Boyack and others have shifted the focus of the debate towards the action that is being taken now, as that should be our primary concern. At the beginning of his speech, the minister talked about our unique competitive advantage in the low-carbon economy. We can all be grateful for that and the great opportunities that we have in areas such as wind and tidal power. I commend the Government’s enthusiasm for renewable energy and I always support the Government in what it is doing on that. I was particularly pleased a couple of weeks ago when at question time the First Minister referred to a memorandum of understanding between Scottish Enterprise and local partners to develop Leith docks as a hub for renewable energy. Leith docks would be an ideal location for developing the turbines that are necessary for offshore wind. I say in passing that the Scottish Government should be clear that the large-scale biomass plant that Forth Ports wants to go along with the offshore wind facility is negative from a climate change point of view. I hope that the Government can make that clear. Even if a small amount of heat from the development could be used, its consequences for climate change would be negative, not just because of the mass transportation of timber but because of the increase in emissions from large-scale biomass plants for many decades. If Scotland is strong in renewables, transport policy is at the opposite end of the spectrum. I have long regarded transport as the Achilles’ heel of our climate change activity. In its budget submission to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, Transform Scotland was slightly less polite than I have been, saying that transport is “the basket case of climate policy”. There certainly seems to be a contradiction between the rhetoric of the RPP and the budgetary choices that have been made in the transport budget. Transport is the second largest emissions sector, accounting for just over a quarter of our emissions, and yet recent trends continue upwards. Stop Climate Chaos Scotland tells us that the 2012-13 budget provides not more than 6 per cent of the funding measures required by the RPP. Although I accept what the minister said about the role of the private sector, I do not believe that it can fill such a large gap. Two thirds of the transport emissions come from road transport, and yet the Government continues to be obsessed with road building. Marco Biagi referred to the road budget. I should tell him that the rising PFI charges are linked not just to roads that have already been commissioned but to the new roads that the Scottish Government is planning. I had an interesting exchange during an Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee meeting with Alex Neil, who was trying to argue that building the M74 was helpful for our climate change objectives. People can take whatever view they like about the pros and cons of that project from an economic point of view, but it is a bit absurd to see a road that generates more traffic as helping our climate change objectives.

I am afraid that I will be short of time. I will give way if I have time, but I need to deal with the transport budget in more detail. Active travel was highlighted not only by a report from one of the Parliament’s committees in 2009 but by the SNP’s manifesto, which promised “to increase the proportion of transport spending that goes on low-carbon” and active travel. However, as Sarah Boyack reminded us, the sustainable and active travel budget line is down 45 per cent in next year’s budget. Sustrans has told the Parliament that it will get nothing next year, although one of the five transport milestones in the RPP is that at least 10 per cent of all journeys should be made by bicycle. That will be impossible with the funding cuts. The freight facilities grant has also been abolished, although the RPP emphasises the modal shift of freight. Although there is a ring-fenced cycling, walking and safer streets budget for local authorities, which stands at £7.5 million for this year, there is no guarantee that it will be continued till next year. I urge the Scottish Government to ensure that it is continued. I never like to ask the Government to spend large sums of money without saying where they should come from. The transport lines that I have mentioned are not large and, with small shifts of resources within the transport budget, it would be easy to ensure that the sustainable and active travel budget was maintained. Marco Biagi made great play of the future transport fund, saying that it was £50 million. I accept that some of my former colleagues sometimes rolled up three years’ budgets into one, but the fact is that the future transport fund budget for next year is £3.25 million. That certainly does not cover the enormous gap in next year’s transport budget that Sarah Boyack and others described.

The conclusion is obvious: make small shifts in the transport budget and make sure that it contributes to combating climate change.

I recognise the great difficulties that the minister faces because of the cuts in the capital budget from Westminster, but given that £200 million of capital is still to be allocated by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, will he guarantee that he is fighting for a large slice of that money to come to housing? Given that he has dual responsibilities for housing and transport, which sometimes compete for capital, will he assure us that housing is his top priority for the extra capital that is still to be allocated?

I welcome the Scottish Government’s proposals to remove the subsidy from large-scale, electricity-only biomass. However, will the minister clarify the Scottish Government’s proposals for large-scale electricity biomass where a small, but not insubstantial, amount of the heat is also used?

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether the protocol agreed by the Scottish Executive and the STUC in December 2002 concerning employment issues in public-private partnerships is still in force. (S4O-00362)

I welcome that reply. The cabinet secretary will know that section 9.5 of the protocol says: “The service provider will be required to offer new recruits to a PPP workforce access to the same pension arrangements as transferred employees.” The cabinet secretary may not be aware that the City of Edinburgh Council’s proposed privatisation of a large number of council services does not conform with section 9.5. I hope that the proposal will, in any case, be rejected but, in the meantime, will he write to the council to remind it that the protocol—and that section in particular—is still in force?

The cabinet secretary may be aware of concerns expressed by advocacy organisations about the fact that the recently launched draft “Mental Health Strategy for Scotland: 2011-15” contained not one word about advocacy, in spite of the duty in the 2003 act to which the cabinet secretary referred a moment ago. Will she ensure that the final version of the strategy addresses the crucial issue of advocacy for mental health service users?

I am always fascinated by the continuity in health and community care policy from the Administration that governed until 2007 to the current Scottish Government. That is certainly true in the debate’s themes. Members might have seen the Scottish Parliament information centre’s material for debates document, which mentions the rehabilitation framework from 2007 and “Healthy Working Lives” from 2004, and which might well have mentioned the David Kerr report, whose central theme was shifting the balance of care into the community. The current Scottish Government has produced “Health Works”, which picks up on “Healthy Working Lives”, “Improving the Health and Wellbeing of People with Long Term Conditions in Scotland” and “Reshaping Care for Older People”. The themes and messages of those reports are consistent with the earlier reports that I mentioned. I am sure that we were all struck by the demographic information that the minister gave. We are all familiar with it in general, but I was struck by the 144 per cent increase in over-85s by 2031 that he cited. I was also struck by a statement by Dr Roger Gibbins at the Health and Sport Committee a couple of weeks ago, in which he tied demographics in with funding issues. Dr Gibbins, a former NHS Highland chief executive, said: “Broadly speaking, the number of older people in Highland was increasing at about 5 per cent a year. As older people consume about 50 per cent of the health budget, that meant an immediate pressure of 2.5 per cent on the health budget that had to be addressed just to stand still.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 25 October 2011; c 376.] As the minister said, that is completely unsustainable. Services must be redesigned for financial reasons, but that must be done in a desirable way, as the minister reminded us. That is always a challenge for us in looking at new models of care. We can perhaps see the benefits for the service, but can we see the benefits for individual service users? We must be able to see both if we are to approve redesigned services. I took the word “reablement” to be a specific reference to a form of rehabilitation that has existed in England for a few years and which was pioneered in Scotland by the City of Edinburgh Council in 2008. When reablement started in Edinburgh, it was quite controversial and people had many concerns about it. The theory of reablement is that work is done with people to make them as independent as possible, doing things with them rather than to them. Under the Edinburgh model, which follows the model that was used extensively in England, work is done with people for six weeks, either when they come out of hospital or when they are referred to the service from the community. Intensive work is done with them for six weeks. They are then, the theory goes, able to look after themselves to a far greater extent. Obviously, there were concerns that reablement would just be a cover for cuts, but the Scottish Government commissioned an evaluation in 2009 that indicated a 41 per cent reduction in hours of care resulting from the six weeks of reablement. It also said, perhaps reassuringly, that most of the reabled clients had a positive view of the service that they received. The evaluation was of a fairly small number of people, so there is perhaps more room for qualitative research. However, most people were reassured by what they learned from that report and from what they heard from people who had used the service.

I accept that, and I realise that the scheme has been rolled out in many other parts of Scotland, but Edinburgh was the first when it started in 2008. The reshaping care for older people programme has many interesting points that relate to reablement. The programme document tells us that current spend on health and social care for over-65s is £4.5 billion, 7 per cent of which is spent on home care. There is a commitment to double the proportion of the health and social care budget for older people that is spent on home care over the 10 years from the launch of the programme—that is, the decade that we are in. It would be interesting to have an update on that. There are wider concerns about the way in which low-level, preventative and anticipatory care at home is being squeezed as we have higher eligibility thresholds for home care to meet statutory duties. Is the balance of care being shifted significantly? The change fund is highly relevant to that issue. Everyone welcomes the fund, although I think that the minister ought to respond to some of the concerns that Jackie Baillie raised. I have spent too long talking about older people so I do not have so long to spend talking about the more general management of long-term conditions. Most people accept the good model of a productive partnership between informed and empowered people with long-term conditions on the one hand and prepared and proactive health teams on the other. I am sure that we all recognise that it is right that the individual should take the lead in managing their own health. Clear information is important in that regard. However, some who are involved with people who have long-term conditions have expressed concern that self-management could become a replacement for services. I am sure that that is not happening in every case, but there are concerns about it. Unless I am allowed a bit of extra time, I will not have time to say what I want to say about the healthy working lives strategy—I have already referred to it—which was launched in 2004 and which the Government has reviewed. The 2004 publication, “Healthy Working Lives: a plan for action”, emphasised the need to establish a joined-up approach between business, health, local government and trade unions in the delivery of vocational rehabilitation pilot projects—I thank Jim Eadie for giving us an update on those. The Scottish Executive also established the Scottish centre for healthy working lives within NHS Scotland to oversee the development and delivery of advice on workplace health and wellbeing as well as promoting a healthy working lives awards scheme. The Government’s 2009 review of the strategy said: “For many common health conditions, early intervention provides the best opportunity for a speedy and full return to work. We will establish minimum standards for access and support, defined in a ‘Scottish Offer’”. Will the minister say something about that when he is winding up?

I thought that I would be able to go on for ever—that was the mood music. All good things must come to an end.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the proposed privatisation of services by the City of Edinburgh Council. (S4O-00298)

I hope that the minister is opposed to the council’s privatisation proposals. On a specific point, is she aware of the protocol between the Scottish Government and the Scottish Trades Union Congress that requires that transferred employees and new appointees to a public-private partnership workforce have access to the same or broadly comparable pension arrangements as are currently available to council employees and that, where possible, that should be achieved through the use of admitted body status? Will she confirm that the protocol remains in force and that it is directly applicable to the Edinburgh alternative business model programme? Will she write to the City of Edinburgh Council to that effect?

For the sake of accuracy, Humza Yousaf should point out that I accepted that there was a legitimate role for strategic opposition on a whole range of issues, of which this may well be one.

Is the minister aware that local housing associations are telling me that future developments will have to be 70 per cent mid-market-rent housing and only 30 per cent social rented housing because of reduced subsidy levels? Given that, already, many people who are entitled to permanent accommodation are having to stay in temporary accommodation for long periods, how on earth can we meet the 2012 commitment if we do not have far more social rented homes in Edinburgh?

Does the minister find it acceptable that the supply of social rented homes is plummeting, whereas he is talking about the broader definition of affordable homes? Is it acceptable to cut the housing budget by 36 per cent in real terms when the infrastructure budget of his department will increase in real terms in the next three years?

Does Lewis Macdonald agree that the situation is even worse? When he replied to me earlier, Keith Brown said that the commitment was now to build 4,000 social rented homes, but the whole housing lobby believes that that is based on a set of completely heroic assumptions, given that only 1,500 social rented homes have been approved for this year and that, according to what the Port of Leith Housing Association in my constituency tells me, a typical new development for it will involve 30 per cent social rented housing and 70 per cent mid-market rent housing. In the past, the vast majority of housing in such developments was social rented housing.

I will be brief. Did the member not hear the question that I asked of the minister? I made the point that the infrastructure budget is increasing in real terms. I am not suggesting one thing; I am saying that if we look across the budget it will be perfectly easy to find extra money for housing.

As the member knows, John Swinney still has to allocate the £200 million switch from revenue to capital. Will Mr Mason and his colleagues argue that the housing budget should have the first call on that money?

Can the cabinet secretary give us a general update on her thinking on the integration of health and social care, particularly whether she still favours a lead commissioning model; whether she would prefer a reformed community health partnership, with or without dedicated budgets; whether she has some other model in mind; or whether she wishes to allow areas to have freedom and flexibility to develop their own arrangements?

I very much welcome the debate, which highlights dilemmas that we face now, and which will become far more acute in the near future. On a recent visit to the labs at the Edinburgh cancer research centre, I heard David Cameron—the very highly regarded David Cameron, who is the new professor of oncology at the University of Edinburgh—describing how new cancer treatments are targeting specific subtypes of cancer, which means that the already expensive cancer drugs are likely to become far more expensive in the future because they will be used on smaller subgroups of patients rather than on everyone who has a particular type of tumour. He highlighted what difficult choices we would have to make as the drugs budget increases exponentially in the next decade. My second general point is one that the cabinet secretary made: drugs are not the only weapon against cancer. In a recent talk, Professor Alan Rodger, who was director of the Beatson oncology centre until quite recently, gave figures on the contribution that different treatments make to curing of cancer. For surgery, the figure was 68 per cent; for radiotherapy, it was 28 per cent; and for chemotherapy, it was 4 per cent. That is not to downgrade or to devalue in any way the role of chemotherapy, but we need to see cancer treatment in that broader context. We can justifiably be proud of the Scottish Medicines Consortium, which is the foundation of our system for cancer drugs. I remind members that the director of Cancer Research UK said at the Public Petitions Committee on 29 April 2008 that “the SMC is the envy of clinicians who work in England”, and that it is “a model of good practice”.—[Official Report, Public Petitions Committee, 29 April 2008; c 709.] We can justifiably be proud of it—without being complacent. Some years ago, guidance on the Scottish Medicines Consortium was issued that, I think, said that NHS boards should ensure that recommended medicines are made available to meet clinical need. I am concerned that there still seem to be issues with NHS boards’ implementation of SMC decisions. The briefings from Cancer Research UK and from Breakthrough Breast Cancer, Macmillan Cancer Support and Myeloma UK highlight the need for more transparency not only on decisions but on boards’ implementation of them. I am sure that everybody would like that to happen. The briefing by Breakthrough and others also makes the key point that they want recent initiatives to have the chance to bed in. The cabinet secretary should be commended on the announcements that she made in 2009 on exceptional prescribing becoming more transparent. She talked about “greater transparency in the flexibility that can be used by the SMC” and “a national framework for assessing ... patient access schemes”.—[Official Report, 25 March 2009; c 16129-30.] That was all good but, in the interest of transparency, it would also be good if the developments on those policies could be explained to MSPs and the wider public—the cabinet secretary will probably not have enough time in her closing speech to address that point. For example, I am told that guidance on exceptional prescribing was issued in March 2011, but most people probably do not know the contents of that guidance or how it is operating. If there was more confidence in exceptional prescribing, there might be less demand for the drugs fund. In many ways, I sympathise with what Murdo Fraser said and can see exactly where he is coming from. However, as Cancer Research UK reminds us, we should remember that a cancer drugs fund could exacerbate regional inequalities and may be doing that in England. Therefore, guidance on exceptional prescribing may be a more equitable way to deal with the problem.

I generally welcome the draft mental health strategy, which builds on previous and continuing work and suggests 14 distinct outcomes that define the actions that the Scottish Government will endeavour to take over the next four years. However, I will have time to consider only the first two. I am very pleased that up front, at number 1, is the key issue of protecting and promoting mental health. Ten years ago, there was a major drive to develop a mental health improvement agenda, which was spearheaded by the see me and choose life campaigns. It has always been a matter of regret to me that the Scottish public has never fully appreciated the groundbreaking nature of that work, a central part of which has been to combat stigma. In that regard, I pay tribute to the continuing work of see me, which during mental health week in a couple of weeks, will have 250 stalls across the country. As a recent study by see me showed, stigma can manifest itself in the kind of disgust that prevents sufferers of conditions such as anorexia and bulimia nervosa, for example, from seeking the support that they need. Broader society still misunderstands those life-threatening mental illnesses, so in broaching the subject and forcing it into public discourse, see me does an immense service for the hundreds of young Scots who suffer in silence every day. It gives information to family and friends on how best to intervene safely, and its material highlights the severity of the conditions. Without raising awareness of the complexity of mental health problems, we would find it impossible to achieve the objective of removing stigma; only when we have broken down the stigma surrounding poor mental health will we truly realise the potential of our community services to provide a route out of social exclusion and marginalisation. Clinical treatment is only half the solution. Often, what is needed most is the knowledge that someone to whom a person can relate understands their situation and is ready to talk and listen. That is the worth of community-based services, and I hope to have time to mention some that are based in my constituency. That community focus is also relevant to the suicide prevention strategy called choose life, which, like see me, was developed in 2002. It aims to equip organisations that have direct links to sufferers of poor mental health with the skills to detect suicidal tendencies and to offer appropriate assistance. By training a proportion of the population, it will ensure that more skilled and confident helpers are available to explore thoughts of suicide and to intervene. In that connection, I note the recommendation of SAMH that suicide prevention training should be expanded beyond the statutory sector to encompass people who work in the community. In its “Foundation Stone” document, SAMH makes the important comment that a mental health strategy should not be located solely within the health department, because mental health is fundamental to wellbeing, to the ability to remain in employment, to criminal justice, to social work and to many other areas. What appeared to me to be a slight weakness of the Government’s draft strategy as I moved to outcome 2 is that, although a great deal of work is being done and is proposed for the early years, none of it is joined up with the CAMHS focus of that section. The CAMHS work is essential for those who need intensive services, but it must be complemented by greater investment in early intervention across communities. I warmly welcome the £500 million for preventative spend that was announced last week, but I would have preferred that the majority of that money be spent on the early years, particularly nought to three, rather than being spread too thinly across a range of areas. As Dr Philip Wilson told the Health and Sport Committee in 2009, work in America suggests that it is possible to predict by the age of three as many as 70 per cent of the children who will end up as in-patients in psychiatric hospitals or in prison. On the detail of outcome 2, I note the reference to the very important standards for integrated care pathways, but there is no mention of implementation support, whereas question 13, which refers to adult services, asks: “What support do NHS Boards and key partners need to put Integrated Care Pathways into practice?” If integrated care pathways were implemented in CAMHS and adult services, many of the other questions that are asked in the document would be answered. I note, too, that although the overarching improvement challenge 2 refers to “developmental disorders”, no definition is given. The implication seems to be that it refers to such disorders in adulthood. It is certainly the case that no mention is made under outcome 2 of important disorders that affect children, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, developmental co-ordination disorder and autistic spectrum disorders. It is not clear, either, why £10 million has been set aside for autistic spectrum disorders alone, rather than for developmental disorders more generally. As I said earlier, there are some great community projects based in my constituency, which I now want to mention. The stress centre in West Pilton is an outstanding example of a project that is user led and which keeps services in the community. Along in Royston is women supporting women—another superb project that, unfortunately, has had its budget decimated over the past few years. I fully understand the financial problems of local authorities, but I remind them of their duties under sections 25 and 31 of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, which require them to provide care and support for, and to promote the wellbeing of, people with mental health problems. In Leith, there is the crisis centre where the minister launched the strategy a couple of weeks ago, which was campaigned for by the Edinburgh Users Forum over many years. AdvoCard on Leith Walk does individual and collective advocacy work. At this point, I should mention the concerns of advocacy organisations that the strategy contains nothing on advocacy, even though advocacy is essential, as well as being a requirement of the 2003 act. Also in Leith is the Junction—a superb base for young people which, over and above the wider health work that it does, offers a safe and friendly environment for young people to talk about difficulties that they may be experiencing. I should also mention Saheliya, which is an outstanding example of a community-based organisation that recognises the specific issues that affect the wellbeing of ethnic minority communities and is therefore directly relevant to outcome 9.

I pay tribute to all those excellent voluntary sector organisations in my constituency. Without them, the work of the statutory sector would be far more difficult than it already is.

I congratulate James Dornan on securing the debate in a week in which there has been an amazing concentration of health debates and meetings, including the one last night to which members have referred, which I shall mention in a moment. The reason why I have become increasingly concerned about the issue was shown on the graph to which Fiona McLeod referred, which Peter Rice used last night. It showed a 700 per cent increase in chronic liver disease in Scotland over the past 25 years and, in particular, a steep rise over the past six or seven years, demonstrating that alcohol is an even greater public health issue now than it was a decade or so ago. We ought also to remember the association between violence and alcohol. I recently visited the Scottish violence reduction unit and asked the experts there, whom I greatly admire, what percentage of violent crimes were associated with alcohol. With a straight face, the wonderful Karyn McCluskey said, “All violent crimes.” I feel that must be a slight exaggeration, but the point stands. We need a range—a jigsaw—of measures to deal with our serious problems with alcohol abuse, and I hope that the forthcoming alcohol bill will allow a range of actions to be taken. I believe that minimum pricing is the necessary glue to hold the pieces of the jigsaw together. Some interesting additional evidence was provided by Professor Tim Stockwell at the meeting last night. I accept that the situation in Canada is different—Richard Simpson pointed to the fact that the Government has a monopoly of alcohol sales in Canada—but that does not alter the effect that minimum pricing has. I also accept that, as Kezia Dugdale said, there are differences in the detail, some of which are quite interesting. For example, in Canada there has been a much bigger increase in the minimum price of strong beers than in the minimum price of light beers, which has led to an astonishing 52 per cent reduction in the consumption of strong beers in Saskatchewan. That reinforces the general point rather than weakening it. Professor Stockwell started with the general point that hundreds of studies link price, consumption and harm. As Fiona McLeod said, his final words were, “Never doubt that evidence.” I do not imagine that anyone in the chamber doubts the generality of that evidence, to which he added recent research that he has conducted in Canada on the effect of minimum pricing, particularly in British Columbia and Saskatchewan. I should point out that the man is a world expert in his field. I had to stop reading his curriculum vitae before I got to the end, or I would still be reading it. He has worked for the World Health Organization and for various health bodies in Canada and Australia. He made it absolutely clear that the research that he has done in Canada not only substantiates the general point about the link between price, consumption and harm but shows that raising the minimum price has a direct effect on consumption. For example, raising the minimum price by 10 per cent in Saskatchewan produced a 5 per cent reduction in consumption. A body of evidence shows that those who drink harmfully tend to gravitate towards cheaper forms of alcohol, so the effect is even greater among such groups. In the debate in June 2010, I referred to a study by Dr Jonathan Chick and others at the Royal Edinburgh hospital that showed that the lower the price a patient who was a harmful drinker paid per unit, the more units of alcohol they consumed.

I do not know whether I have time.

I have only 10 seconds left. My last point is about culture, to which the motion refers. I argue that price is a part of culture. Cheap alcohol affects the culture, as was said last night. To change the culture, we must do something about the price.

I want to concentrate on energy from a constituency point of view. There are wider agendas in achieving a low-carbon Scotland, including a step change in housing insulation and a serious drive towards a green transport strategy. I want to ask what should be included in a definition of green energy, and to ask that question in the context of Forth Ports Ltd’s plans for Leith docks. At a recent meeting with the chief executive of Forth Ports, I was told that the company—which has recently been taken over by Arcus—was abandoning its housing plans for the Leith docks area in order to develop a renewable energy hub based on offshore wind and large-scale biomass, the latter as Forth Energy in partnership with Scottish and Southern Energy. For Forth Ports, these two go hand in hand, but I want to challenge the green credentials of large-scale biomass while welcoming the prospect of Leith docks as a site for the manufacture and assembly of wind turbines, as envisaged in Scottish Enterprise’s national renewables infrastructure plan. There have been massive campaigns in Leith over the past year or more against the proposed large-scale biomass plant at Leith docks. This action has been spearheaded by the formidable and admirable no Leith biomass group. I have submitted detailed objections that cover the many specifically local implications as well as the wider climate change consequences. Given the subject of our debate, I want to concentrate on the latter, although visual, traffic and local environmental concerns are all covered in my submission, which is on my website and the Scottish Government’s website—I thank the Scottish Government for that. Greener Leith is a key organisation that opposes the proposal, and its website refers to many important reports that question the green credentials of large-scale biomass. For example, it refers to a new report that has been produced by a coalition of European non-governmental organisations, which raises a host of environmental concerns about the growth and use of biomass for electricity generation, and includes a startling graph that shows that a biomass plant that uses a typical European-managed forest would result in increased carbon emissions for the first two and a half centuries. Perhaps that is not too surprising if we consider that burning wood emits more carbon in the short run than burning coal. The scenario could be even worse if unsustainable plantations are used, and stopping that would be impossible in the future, despite the current guarantees from Forth Energy. On its website, Greener Leith highlights a key quote from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, which has said: “In particular, we are concerned that the methodology deployed to calculate the lifetime green house gas savings” of the scheme—that is, the Leith biomass plant proposal— “includes an assumption of zero emissions from land within the growing cycle of the fuels ... This is likely to be incorrect and therefore leads to a potentially significant underestimate of green house gas emissions from the fuel. The calculation of green house gas savings from transport may also be underestimated.” Forth Energy has consistently promoted the idea that burning wood fuel and replenishing crops after harvest limits the levels of carbon that are released into the atmosphere, but an increasing number of environmental organisations have stated that that position is too simplistic. The long-term effects of biomass combustion on the atmosphere and on climate change depend on the type of feedstock that is used, how sustainable the source is, and the alternative energy sources that are displaced by investment in such plants. It is remarkable that Forth Energy continues to categorise biomass energy as carbon neutral, as a large body of evidence has been produced by groups such as Friends of the Earth to demonstrate that biomass is not anywhere near as efficient as alternative clean energy sources, which represent far more effective use of Government funding and deliver instant carbon reduction. Biomass would not only displace traditional fossil fuel sources; it would affect the ability of wind and tidal power to distribute clean carbon-neutral energy throughout Scotland. The moving planet march that will take place in Edinburgh this weekend will aim to highlight the fact that moving from fossil fuels to clean energy sources is essential in tackling climate change and poverty. As outlined in Friends of the Earth’s recent briefing on the event, that means that policy must be directed to ensuring investment in appropriate sustainable technologies.

I was going to come on to that issue, although I may not have time to cover everything that I wanted to cover. Small-scale biomass—particularly for combined heat and power—is exactly what we need, rather than large-scale biomass. I was going to refer to an earlier Friends of the Earth publication entitled “Energy from Biomass: Straw Man or Future Fuel?” which made that particular point. It supported small-scale biomass plants and highlighted the issue of transportation of biomass material. That is, of course, a major concern for the proposed Leith plant, because the wood would be brought in from thousands of miles away. We must take all such factors into account. I am seriously concerned that the plant that has been proposed for Leith docks is not small scale, that the proposal would involve intensive harvesting overseas and long-distance transport, and that no concrete plans have been provided to date on how the heat by-product of combustion would be effectively distributed to the wider city. I realise that there is a live application, but I do not see why the Government should not have a policy against large-scale biomass. It has a policy against nuclear power stations that does not rule out submission of individual applications. The Government should therefore have a policy against large-scale biomass. If it will not go that far, it should at least have a moratorium, pending further research on its climate change implications.

I congratulate Jamie Hepburn on securing this important debate. When I saw the report from Save the Children and the Daycare Trust, I was reminded of another report from the Daycare Trust that came out nearly 20 years ago, in 1993. That report recommended that income spent on childcare should be substantially disregarded in calculating income support or family credit entitlement—something that did not happen at the time. I remember the report well because I asked the Prime Minister of the day, John Major, about it at Prime Minister’s question time. When he did not answer my question I asked a written question, to which he answered, among other things, that low-income families do not use paid childcare. That was not one of John Major’s cleverer answers because that was precisely the problem. Tragically, it is increasingly becoming the problem again today. To be fair to the Conservatives, they introduced such a disregard in due course, and that was built upon by the Labour Government at Westminster until eventually, in 2004, 80 per cent of childcare costs were met through child tax credits. It is deeply regrettable that the current UK Government has cut that back to 70 per cent. That is what is exacerbating the problems of the affordability of childcare in Scotland and throughout the UK. Jamie Hepburn’s motion refers to a quarter of parents on low incomes having given up work because of childcare costs and a third having turned down a job on the same basis. The survey specifically asked Scottish parents; we are told that 30 per cent of Scottish parents said that they had cut back spending on food and 62 per cent had cut back spending on clothes in the past year in order to afford childcare. The tragedy is that because of the actions of the UK Government, that situation is set to get worse, with the introduction of universal credit. Two options have been put forward for universal credit. However, Save the Children tells us that a single parent earning £15,000 a year and paying £230 a week for childcare would be £60 a week worse off under either option. The situation is very depressing, with the Westminster Government rolling back the advances that we have seen in childcare support over the past 15 years or so. Turning to a devolved context for today’s debate, I accept and understand the difficult budgetary situation that the Scottish Government faces and I therefore realise that action will not be as ambitious as we would ideally wish. However, the Scottish Government should look very seriously at the recommendations from Save the Children. I think that some reference was made in the announcement a couple of weeks ago to extending childcare provision to some two-year-olds, which I certainly welcome, but I hope that the Government will also look at the other recommendations, particularly with regard to out-of-school support for families on low incomes. I know that the minister has visited North Edinburgh Childcare in my constituency, which has always been an outstanding example of a childcare centre. In fact, one of my earliest campaigns 20 years ago was to support all the local parents who wanted to set up that centre. That example illustrates how childcare centres in more disadvantaged areas have been able to draw in funding—at present from the fairer Scotland fund and previously from the community regeneration fund—to subsidise childcare to a greater extent. I am not saying that places in that childcare centre are cheap by any means, but they are a bit cheaper because of that subsidy. I hope that the Government will also look to use funding streams such as the fairer Scotland fund to support childcare centres such as North Edinburgh Childcare, which I always very genuinely say is the best childcare centre in Scotland and which I think has received widespread recognition through several awards—indeed, it currently runs the Scottish Government crèche at Victoria Quay. I think that my time is up, so I congratulate Jamie Hepburn once again on introducing this very timely and important debate.

12. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on some students from England having to pay £36,000 for an honours degree course at certain Scottish universities. (S4O-00165)

In view of the cabinet secretary’s obvious unease on the issue, will he ensure that no students from England pay more for a degree in a Scottish university than they would in England by introducing a cap at £27,000? More generally, will he ensure—whether by using the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council mechanism that I suggested in a debate last week or some other method—that no university has a financial incentive to recruit more English students and fewer Scottish ones?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the changes that she has brought about, particularly in relation to the frequency of inspections and the requirement that they be unannounced for care homes. However, although the care inspectorate has generally done excellent and reliable work over the past 10 years, will she continue to look at the scope and nature of inspections and, indeed, the content of the care standards? In particular, will she see what more can be done to ensure that the views, feelings and experience of users of services are taken fully into account?

Is the minister aware that, according to calculations by Shelter, only 1,500 of the 6,000 affordable homes to be built this year are social rented homes? Is the minister concerned about that, and will he ensure that via the spending review far more social rented houses will be built in subsequent years?

Today, as has been the case over the past 12 years, there is broad consensus between Labour and the SNP on a great deal of the legislation that is proposed. Personally, I do not object in principle to any of the bills that have been announced. In addition, there is a broadly shared economic stance. I do not have a problem with Joseph Stiglitz, whom the First Minister eulogised, but I do not have a problem with Ed Balls either, and both present very similar economic analyses. Of course we need to stimulate growth; of course the scale and the speed of the cuts are counterproductive from the point of view of growth as well as of deficit reduction; and of course we must do everything that we can to promote infrastructure investment. I welcome the debate about extra powers—I would like the Parliament to have quite a few more, even beyond those that are contained in the Scotland Bill—but it was a bit odd to hear quite so much about that in a statement on the legislative programme. Whatever we think about extra powers, talking about them must never be a substitute for making full use of the powers that we have. In that regard, I agree entirely with what Richard Baker said about the green new deal, the living wage and procurement. I particularly welcome the consultation on the draft early years bill, the task force that is referred to in the document that the Government brought out today to ensure that spending on the early years is prioritised across the public sector—as long as that is ensured—and the document’s emphasis on family centres and a parenting strategy. Last week, I visited the violence reduction unit in Glasgow and talked to two of the most inspiring people in Scotland—Karyn McCluskey and John Carnochan. Recently, journalists have rightly praised their work in successfully combating gang violence, but the supreme importance that they attach to investment in the first three years of life in particular as a way of preventing crime and many other future ills has been ignored. Indeed, John Carnochan, who is a senior police officer, has famously said that he would rather have 1,000 extra health visitors than 1,000 extra police officers. In emphasising the early years, it is important to focus not just on families but on the wider social context. In that regard, I agree entirely with what Jenny Marra said about child poverty and childcare. I am sure that we were all alarmed by the Daycare Trust’s report that came out this morning, which highlighted the increasing cost of childcare and how that is increasing poverty in Scotland. It is very important that in emphasising the early years, we take action on child poverty and childcare. The violence reduction unit was also highly instructive on alcohol. It emphasised the incredibly strong association between alcohol and violence, which—combined with the recent steep increase in health problems that are associated with alcohol—means that a range of measures is required to combat alcohol abuse. I agree entirely with Iain Gray’s request for the bill on alcohol not to be narrowly drawn, because no one single measure can deal with this increasingly serious problem. However, as is well known, I believe that one of the measures should be minimum pricing. From what was said today, it is unclear whether primary or secondary legislation is required for higher and further education changes. It is really important that, at the end of the review of further education, democratic accountability of further education colleges is increased. I ask the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, who is in his seat, to reconsider his proposals for tuition-fee payment by English students. Of course I accept the need for such fees to be paid, but I am sure that I was not the only MSP—I feel it particularly as an Edinburgh MSP—to be shocked by the announcement this week that the University of Edinburgh would charge English students £36,000 for an honours degree. It is unacceptable that more should be paid in Scotland than in England, so I ask the cabinet secretary to look at that again and perhaps to consider the more radical proposal that all tuition fees from English students would be paid to the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and distributed equitably as part of the grant distribution to universities. One disappointment in the legislative programme concerns housing. That relates crucially to what I said about capital investment—I have previously expressed disappointment that housing is not being prioritised for capital investment. I am disappointed that the legislative programme contains little about housing. I support the bill on council tax on empty homes and on housing support grant, because it is good to incentivise the bringing into use of empty homes. However, it is disappointing that the only other measure is scrapping housing support grant; that should be looked at again. I welcome whole-heartedly many of the other bills that have been announced, such as the self-directed support bill, the rights of children and young people bill and the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission bill, which—strangely—no one, including the First Minister, has mentioned after four hours of debate. I look forward to constructive discussions on all those bills in the next few months.

In my last speech on capital expenditure before the election, I said that housing should be our number 1 priority for capital expenditure. I hope that the cabinet secretary will argue for that in the forthcoming spending review. Unfortunately, that will not be the case for this year’s budget. I am particularly concerned about the declining number of social rented houses that will be built in this and subsequent years if the current trend continues. In Edinburgh, for example, according to the council we require 1,600 new social rented houses a year in order to meet the demand for such accommodation. In the last financial year, 600 such houses were built and the prediction this year is that only 300 will be built. Apart from the general budget cuts, the main reason for that is the restriction on the housing association grant to £40,000 per property. The result is that the mix in any new development is changing. In the past, typically 70 per cent of housing might have been social rented and 30 per cent mid market. Now in Edinburgh, it will have to be 50 per cent mid market and 50 per cent social rented. In fact, I was told by the director of a housing association that if the trend continues, he will not be able to build any social rented houses in a few years’ time because he will have to borrow so much more because of the reduced HAG levels. I fully acknowledge that mid-market housing is important for Edinburgh, but social rented housing is even more crucial for the thousands on waiting lists who cannot afford home ownership, shared equity or mid-market housing. In the discussions on the spending review, I hope that the cabinet secretary will make the case for housing in general, but for social rented housing in particular. It is a matter of great concern that the SNP commitment in its election manifesto to build 6,000 social rented houses has now become 6,000 affordable houses.

I welcome any form of social rented housing in Edinburgh. I welcome the council houses that are already planned, but my last point on housing is to make a plea to the minister to support the bid from Edinburgh to the £20 million council house part of the innovation and investment fund. The main part of Edinburgh’s bid is for the demolition and rebuilding of Fort house in my constituency, which has had enormous problems attached to it for some time. We desperately need it to be rebuilt on the current site, so I hope that the minister will look sympathetically on the bid. I have one remaining minute, and how can I talk about the tram in one minute? The whole debate on the tram is coming to a head this week, so I want to say four things—if I have time. First, I support the call for a public inquiry that my colleague Kezia Dugdale made last week. I think that, as far as possible, we should suspend the blame game. I know that that will not be totally possible, but I think that we should do that as far as possible and let the public inquiry determine who is to blame for what. Secondly, there has been a debate in the Edinburgh Evening News every night this week on whether we should go on with the trams or cancel the project. What the public are not hearing is the cost of cancellation, which is enormous. Cancelling the project would cost £700 million overall, and we cannot borrow to cover a shortfall for cancellation. Therefore, cancellation in the short run will be a lot more expensive than going ahead with the project. I am glad that the Government agrees with that point. One of my constituents received a letter today from Transport Scotland, which states: “Given the significant level of public investment to date, it would be unacceptable to leave the tram project unfinished.” That view was also expressed by John Swinney when I last questioned him about it before the election. I hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment can take the same position today. Finally, let us work together to find solutions, financial and otherwise, that benefit the environment and economy of Edinburgh and Scotland, and let us not do irreparable and expensive damage to Edinburgh and Scotland by cancelling the tram project.

Does the member acknowledge that cancelling the project would be more expensive, because it would still cost £700 million and there would be £100 million that could not be borrowed, which would have to come straight out of the City of Edinburgh Council’s budget very quickly? It would cost far more to cancel the project, aside from the other disadvantages of doing so.

I recognise the minister’s personal commitment to the early years agenda. She will acknowledge that, just before the election, considerable momentum built up in the Parliament with regard to preventative spending, particularly in the first three years of life, but how will she ensure that the priority that the Government and Parliament have attached to the agenda is translated into action by local authorities throughout Scotland? Does she think that there needs to be more central direction to ensure that the priority is implemented throughout Scotland?

I will raise the issue of the regulation of care homes, specifically in the context of our older people in Scotland. The failures that have been identified from the recent case of the Elsie Inglis nursing home, in addition to the fact that one in 10 care homes in Edinburgh is now identified as being weak, raise serious wider questions over the regulation of care homes in this country and about how we provide the right standard of care for our older people. First, there is the issue of inspection frequency. Under the new SCSWIS inspection rules, if a care home has previously received good ratings and a regulatory support assessment has deemed it low risk, the maximum frequency of inspection is 24 months. However, 24 months is simply too long. As members will agree, a great deal can change in any establishment in a 24-month period. In October 2010, the Elsie Inglis nursing home received a good rating in the category of quality of care and support so, without complaints, the home might not have been inspected again until October 2012. More fundamentally, questions must be asked about why it took the death of a 59-year-old woman as a consequence of the care that she received to close the home. Three complaints were made after October, the details of which, plus the details of action that was subsequently taken, I should obtain in due course following a freedom of information request. The First Minister was certainly not right at First Minister’s questions to mention only a complaint that was made on 25 March and not two complaints that were made in November. Although action has now been taken regarding the Elsie Inglis nursing home, concerns remain about how a care home could plummet from being rated as good to being the worst in the country in so short a time. The case raises serious questions about the inspection regime and the dangers of leaving a home that has been labelled good to its own devices. I question how a care home could be rated good in October 2010 yet be rated unsatisfactory across the board six months later, in April 2011. That clearly brings into question the inspection procedures that are employed by SCSWIS. There are four quality themes according to which each care home is assessed. An inspection of a service with a low risk assessment score and grades of 4 or more may examine only one theme, so a holistic picture of the care home is not delivered on each inspection. If we look back at the Elsie Inglis reports of last year, we see that several themes were described as not assessed. It seems that, if inspectors do not know that it is bad, they are unable to look, and if they do not look, they do not know that it is bad. It is imperative that we query the detail of the themes that are being used for inspection. It is wrong that SCSWIS inspections state: “typically we ... talk to people who use the service”. It should not be typical; it must be mandatory that inspectors talk to residents. Residents’ views on how they feel about living in a care home must be compiled if actionable lessons are to be learned. Their emotional care and stimulation, and not just their physical care, should be explored. That was a fundamental part of the care standards of which we were all so proud when they were first compiled in the early years of the Parliament. SCSWIS stated that, from April 2011, there would be “Even greater emphasis on user focus.” How that is to be implemented needs to be set out in detail. In the October 2010 inspection of the Elsie Inglis care home, SCSWIS reported that it spoke to three service users, all with communication difficulties. Some information was therefore gained through non-verbal responses such as nodding the head. Moreover, the report states that conversations were to confirm that service users had a care file and were involved in its compilation. That is clearly not evidence of user focus. It is not even evidence of consultation. There must be transparency in how inspections are conducted. SCSWIS states: “Unannounced inspections will be the norm. We will announce inspections only when it is necessary to do so for practical reasons.” What constitutes “practical reasons”? Announced inspections were acceptable when all care homes received two inspections a year, but I believe that all inspections should now be unannounced to ensure a more accurate assessment of the home. SCSWIS, through its inspections, should be a driving force for change. The challenge is to change the image and culture of care homes so that they focus on holistic quality of life rather than simple physical care. Another key issue to be raised specifically regarding the Elsie Inglis care home is that it was defined as providing care for older people who fell into the categories of Alzheimer’s or frail elderly. Why, then, was a 59-year-old woman with learning difficulties residing in that care home? I have asked, in a written question, how many of the residents had learning difficulties and how many were under 60 years of age. The cuts to the funding of SCSWIS raise questions about the future quality of inspections. Forcing it to make cuts of 7.6 per cent in 2011-12 and a total of 25 per cent in the next four years is putting care home residents at further risk. I hope that the Government will look at that again. Finally, we must challenge wider societal attitudes towards older people. The voices of older people are generally ignored, and care homes are largely detached from society. Older people are important citizens, though, and it is of fundamental importance that their voices are heard. I therefore urge the Parliament to take rapid action to improve and protect the quality of life of care home residents throughout Scotland and to set an example for the rest of the UK to follow.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive for how long a care home will be able to operate without being subject to inspection under the recently revised inspection procedures. (S4O-00018)

Is the cabinet secretary concerned that, if relatives had not complained, the next inspection of the Elsie Inglis nursing home might have been in October 2012, two years after the previous routine inspection? Will she look again at the maximum interval between inspections as well as at other aspects of the inspection system that I and others raised in the debate earlier this morning?

I originally applied to speak in the debate so that I could consider the issues to do with care home inspection that have been thrown up by recent revelations at the Elsie Inglis nursing home in Edinburgh. However, that is clearly more appropriate for tomorrow’s debate, but since I still have the slot in this debate, I shall try to cover a few other health issues. The first half of the cabinet secretary’s speech was on issues to do with the care of the elderly that are quite apart from the issue of care home inspection. I believe, on reflection, that my party’s front-bench members, and all of us, should agree with the analysis that she gave of the demography of Scotland and the way in which we ought to respond to that challenge. The analysis and solutions that she presented were identical to the analysis and solutions that were given in the David Kerr report six years ago. We all know that too much money is spent in acute and institutional care and that the ideal should be continuous integrated care in the community in order to reduce emergency admissions. We all know that that is the way in which we will have to deal with the increasing number of older people with complex needs and conditions. Shifting the balance of care in that way has been the holy grail of health policy for most of the time for which the Parliament has sat, but it has proved to be an intractable problem, as the increasing number of emergency admissions—which Mary Scanlon mentioned in her intervention—has highlighted. One of the biggest challenges in health and community care policy and, indeed, in the current session of Parliament, is for us to work together to address that fundamental problem and to come up with solutions to it. Community health partnerships were devised as a mechanism to deal with that but, as we know from last week’s report, they have not been entirely successful, although we should acknowledge their achievements in many cases. As members, including Jim Eadie, have said in the debate, health and social care integration is absolutely fundamental, and we need to work together on it. Labour proposes to use CHPs for a national care service, and the Scottish Government has a proposal on lead commissioning. There are differences between those solutions, but there is some overlap, so we urgently need to work together in Parliament to reach a solution to the integration issue. We should remember that CHPs were also set up to bridge the divide between primary and secondary care. If primary and secondary care commissioners do not work together more collaboratively, we will not shift the balance of care. Again, there has been progress on that, and we must not be negative. There are wonderful examples of that shift, such as at the Leith community treatment centre in my constituency. We set up an integrated system, on which we all agreed, a few years ago. Unlike the situation in England—for this I think we can all be grateful—the challenge for us in this Parliament is to make that integrated system more integrated. Nicola Sturgeon acknowledged in her speech the significant progress that has been made under the current Administration and previous Administrations, and we agree with that. A big area in which there has been a lot of progress over the past 12 years is the quality of care and the monitoring and inspection of that quality. Problems have been thrown up in relation to the care home inspection regime, which we will deal with tomorrow, but we should be grateful that we have such an inspection system, which never existed before this Parliament was created. Inspection is fundamental to quality, but I am sure that we all agree that staffing is, too; Jackie Baillie highlighted important workforce issues. We recognise the financial difficulties, but we must make the wisest choices to protect the quality of care. The Royal College of Nursing sent in a briefing for this debate, and I met its representatives last week. It has several concerns; for example, around the skill mix in care settings and around the end of the one-year guarantee, which members may not know is being replaced by a 22-hour internship programme. That is very disappointing, although we understand the financial pressures that have led to it. Let us value the whole health workforce, especially nurses in the settings in which they are required, and let us not go too far down the skill-mix route if it is not appropriate. The financial pressures and the demography that the cabinet secretary described could easily lead us to the conclusion that all the health money should be spent on older people. However, with due respect to older people, that cannot be the case. The cabinet secretary highlighted in the second half of her speech the importance of prioritising preventative spend and supporting parenting and the early years, which was the conclusion that the whole Parliament was reaching before the election. I was on the Finance Committee, which highlighted the importance of preventative spending. The reality is that even in the very difficult financial situation that we face, we must think long term and ensure that we invest in particular in the first three years of life. Some of that is a health issue; the Conservatives have understandably emphasised the importance of health visitors. We must ensure that we invest in the early years because it is, apart from anything else, an important way of dealing with inequalities. The “Growing Up in Scotland” report that was published this week contained an important section on parenting and children’s health, which emphasised not only the importance of parenting but the wider societal issues that underlie inequality. I am being told to wind up by the Presiding Officer. I have not been able to use my peroration on the Royal hospital for sick children in Edinburgh, but I think that the cabinet secretary can anticipate what I was going to say about it. Perhaps we will find out in her winding-up speech how quickly it will be built.

I congratulate Marco Biagi on securing this important debate. I apologise to him and the minister for leaving soon; I am chairing a meeting of the cross-party group on cancer, which was supposed to start four minutes ago. Like Marco Biagi, I will “shamelessly plagiarise” the excellent report by Grant Thornton and the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce, which is an important report in terms of winning the arguments in London—I imagine that there is not really any need to win the arguments in this chamber. Before I turn to some points made in the report, I will quote Friends of the Earth, which is always worth quoting on these matters. It stated not only that “A properly funded Green Investment Bank with real borrowing powers could play a really positive proactive role in speeding transition to a low carbon future”, but that locating the bank in Edinburgh will serve to “exploit an impressive concentration of skills and expertise in clean energy and finance.” In a way, that sums up the whole case, but it is clear that the matter has to be gone into in more detail. The case for locating the UK green investment bank in Edinburgh centres on the city’s unique position in the development of the clean energy and renewables sector combined with the fact that it is ranked as the fourth largest financial centre in Europe. I am sure that we all agree that it is essential that we succeed in commercialising the sector in order to deliver on our climate change objectives, and Edinburgh is ideally placed to advance an effective collaboration between industry and finance. I would like to highlight some of the arguments that are made in the report. It says: “Edinburgh is the only location in the UK which can bring finance and the clean energy industry together in a single location.” The industrial hinterland of the area, in oil and gas as well as clean energy, supplies an unrivalled source of experience and skill, which may be harnessed in support of effective commercialisation. It may be surprising to some people that oil and gas are mentioned in the report, but many skills from the oil and gas industries can be transferred to renewable energy. All the offshore sources of renewable energy illustrate that most obviously. A location outside London will also provide all the benefits of achieving the geographical spread of a successful clean energy sector across the UK while maintaining the benefits of integration with a flourishing financial sector. We should remember that the financial services that are provided in Edinburgh are essential in assessing risk and dealing with high-return investment and commoditised asset lending. Such intelligence will be indispensable in facilitating a safe route to commercialisation. That is further supported by the fact that Edinburgh has world-leading academic and research centres and, in particular, courses that are supplied by educational institutions. Those resources effectively provide a base of expertise specifically suited to the needs of the green investment bank. Edinburgh is, of course, already the location of a large number of businesses that are involved in the low-carbon sector. However, we should remember that it is not just about Edinburgh; it is about the super-region across a large part of Scotland of clean energy activity. Others have mentioned Glasgow and other locations. As the MSP for Edinburgh Northern and Leith, I should, of course, refer to Edinburgh and Leith, as we are looking to Leith for many of the developments in renewable energy in the next few years. In particular, Scottish Enterprise has identified the docks as a very suitable location for the development of wind turbine technology. As I have only 20 seconds left, it would be remiss of me not to mention the application for a biomass plant at Leith docks, which I know the minister cannot comment on. That is not what we in Leith mean by positive green renewable energy. I am sure that I will be able to put the case against that in other debates and discussions. Let us support genuinely green and renewable energy and a green investment bank in Edinburgh to promote it.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive how many submissions concerning the proposed Leith biomass plant it had received by the 11 March consultation deadline and how many were objections. (S3O-13414)

I accept that the minister cannot give a view on the proposal, but I am sure that, if the future energy minister is sitting in the chamber, he or she will recognise the massive local opposition to the proposal. However, the current minister could give a view on a policy on large-scale biomass plants. Will he support, as a policy, a moratorium on developing such plants, on the ground that they will contribute nothing towards meeting our vital 2050 climate change objectives?

One of my favourite quotes from the economist Keynes is: “Take care of employment and the budget will take care of itself.” That is an oversimplification, but it is a lesson that could be well learned by the United Kingdom Government and the Scottish Government. However, even more important than the effect of unemployment on the budget deficit is its effect on unemployed people. The combination of the effect of unemployment on individuals and its effect on the wider economy should mean that employment and job creation are at the heart of our concerns here in the Scottish Parliament, as they ought to be in the Westminster Parliament. That is of particular concern to Edinburgh MSPs. Not only is youth unemployment rising in the city, but we have the highest rate of unemployment among school leavers anywhere in Scotland. Against that background, we were all astonished to hear about the enormous cut to employability funding that the Scottish Government provides to the city of Edinburgh, which was announced by the Government just before Christmas, on 23 December. That cut amounted to 43 per cent of the employability funding for the city. I heard about it soon afterwards. Many people wrote about it, although I think that I was the first to write to the Minister for Housing and Communities, in early January. My reply from Alex Neil was negative. However, there have been many twists and turns since then. Margaret Smith asked John Swinney a question on the matter during the budget debate last month, and the cabinet secretary’s response raised our hopes. I hope that that is followed up by an announcement from the minister today. Sarah Boyack asked a different minister about it, and Angela Constance’s argument was that it was a matter of short-term funding. In case that argument is repeated by the Minister for Housing and Communities today, I point out that the money can be traced back 20 years in Edinburgh. To say that money is being allocated for the next two or three years is absolutely routine for all Government grants—it does not mean that it is short-term funding. The effect of the cut is on individual projects, and it is also on the wider joined up for jobs strategy, which has been widely admired by people from across Scotland. Many projects are affected in my constituency. The City of Edinburgh Council has taken some action to cushion the effect of the 43 per cent cut that has been announced, but the majority of that cushioning amounts to the use of reserves and underspends. Therefore, it will cushion the blow for only one year, unless further central Government action is taken. The city council produced a report on the matter for its meeting on 10 February, and projects were put into five categories. Only the first category was absolutely secure as regards funding for the future. Even the magnificent North Edinburgh Childcare in my constituency—the best child care centre in Scotland—was placed in priority 2. In priority 4—which means that it has no hope of being funded in the future unless there is extra funding—was Barnardo’s NETworks, which works with young people in the Pilton-Granton area of my constituency. In priority 5, which has even less hope of future funding, was the training that is provided in the Out of the Blue cafe in Leith, as well as the magnificent training opportunities in Lothian programme, which is run by the Port of Leith Housing Association to provide construction apprenticeships. All the people who go through that programme get into work. No funding at all is given to the North Edinburgh News, the North Edinburgh Trust or to Women Onto Work, which is based in Leith. According to the council’s report, a higher proportion of Women Onto Work’s clients move on to positive outcomes than do clients with other projects. Those are the consequences that face such projects this year, and which will face them even more in subsequent years if no action is taken. Some of us were given a presentation within the last hour by people who have been lobbying the Parliament on this subject. A short video was produced, part of which showed comments that people have posted online in relation to the announced funding cut. Sarah Boyack has already given one of the quotes, but it is worth repeating: “Save the jobs that save jobs!” Two others also struck me: “Why target the less privileged again?” and “another blow to the young people of Edinburgh.” We all recognise that we have difficult budget choices to make, and we must all participate in debates and discussions about where budgets should be cut, but I hope that we can all agree that young unemployed people—and indeed other unemployed people, as it is not just young people who are affected—are not the groups to target. I say emphatically that the proposed cut is not the choice that we should be making. I hope that the minister will reconsider the matter and will give a better answer in his speech today than he gave in his letter to me in January.

I start by paying tribute to Andrew Welsh for chairing the Finance Committee in a model, non-partisan way for the past four years, and for the contribution that he has made to his constituents and in public life more generally for four decades. This is an important report from the Finance Committee, and a significant development of our work. The Parliament knows a great deal about what we spend—in fact, we on the Finance Committee know everything about what we spend—but we know very little about what we save. We need to become very good very quickly at the science of preventative economics and I hope that the Finance Committee report makes a small contribution to that. Preventative spending goes much wider than the early years and health and social care, but there are good reasons for concentrating on them in the report. Briefly, in relation to health and social care, we have talked about the issues with a growing elderly population for many years, and we have also talked about shifting the balance of care and, in particular, trying to cut escalating emergency admissions to hospital through preventative and continuous care in the community. Indeed, that was the central theme of the David Kerr report. However, the fact is that, despite great progress in health over the past decade, we have not got anywhere with that agenda. It is important to flag up both that point and the various issues that are connected with it in the report. It is a big challenge for the next parliamentary session. I believe—if I can be slightly partisan for five seconds—that Labour’s proposal for a national care service will help on that agenda, but the issue is wider. We will need more than that to shift the balance of care and balance of spending. The most important evidence and recommendations in the report are on the early years. That theme was repeated in a conference in this chamber on Friday morning. I recommend in particular the words and wisdom of Dr Suzanne Zeedyk and Detective Chief Superintendent John Carnochan. Their evidence was given on 26 October and 2 November 2010, and members can also read their speeches in the transcript of last Friday’s conference. I will start with a brief quotation from John Carnochan to the committee: “the most important four years of a child’s life are those up to age three.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 26 October 2010; c 2555.] I wish that that was written up on the Canongate wall. We know that it is not just somebody’s opinion. Other members have quoted some of Dr Zeedyk’s evidence, and she explained the neuroscience behind the truth that we all know that “Children’s brains develop more quickly between birth—really conception—and the age of three than they ever will again.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 2 November 2010; c 2614.] The brains are in place at age three, which is why we need to refocus on the years nought to three—or, we should rather say, conception to three. We were told that the quality of early interactions is particularly crucial. People say that if we concentrate on the early years agenda we will get results only in the long term. We will get results in the long term—we know that investing in the early years, particularly nought to three, will have implications in improved mental health, reduced crime and so on—but we should also point out that there would be benefits in the short term, too. Suzanne Zeedyk was particularly strong on that point. I do not have time to read out the quotation that I planned to read from column 2614 of the Official Report of the meeting on 2 November, but she made that point. That is important for politicians. It is difficult for us to invest now for benefits in 20 years’ time but, as she points out, we will have benefits within a very short timeframe—within one year—if we invest in the agenda. Another theme was the tension between universal and targeted services. Derek Brownlee mentioned that with reference to health visiting, but—to mention a third witness—I was struck by the evidence from Dr Philip Wilson, who answered the conundrum by saying that we need universal services for screening and identifying the families and children who have problems, whom we then target. That is the key insight into the tension between targeted and universal services. Let us refocus on nought to three. Let us build consensus around that, starting with the committees of the Parliament. I want also to say—this is a bit more controversial—that we need concerted central direction. As has been said, a lot of the evidence pointed in that direction. Again, I was going to read a quotation from Detective Chief Superintendent Carnochan at column 2574 of the Official Report of the Finance Committee meeting on 26 October, but I am in my last minute so I had better not. He said, controversially, that we may have to reconsider ring fencing money for the early years and ensuring that all local authorities prioritise that work. I realise that that suggestion is controversial and anathema to many people in the chamber. What is not controversial is the fact that we need to lead on preventative spending. Whichever way we think that leadership should be given, the Parliament has to lead on the agenda. Recognising the strength of the evidence that we receive, we must shift investment as far as we can to nought to three. I say “as far as we can” as I recognise the financial difficulties of the time that we live in, but if we shift investment to the early years we will save in the short term as well as in the long term. If the next Government—whoever it is—will not lead on the agenda, I hope that the Finance Committee and the Parliament as a whole will do so.

I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on successfully piloting this important bill through Parliament. I know that factoring has been a long-standing issue in Glasgow, which is no doubt why Patricia Ferguson has taken an interest in it for so long, but it is a far more recent issue in Edinburgh. Although the city’s traditional tenements have not had factors, the new-build properties do. It is now a massive issue in my constituency, and I have had many meetings about it, most recently this week about insurance, which is certainly one of the issues that require to be dealt with in the code of conduct. Sometimes factors have legitimate grievances—for example, if people do not pay when they should—and I am pleased that there is something in the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill that will help factors in that regard. More often, however, it is the residents who have the grievances, which is why the hundreds of residents in my constituency whom I have consulted about the bill overwhelmingly support it. I have come to believe that this is not a matter of a few rogue factors; it is about the systemic problems related to the lack of regulation and the lack of required standards, which are the precise issues that the bill addresses. Today marks the end of part 1, but there is still a great deal to do. Alex Neil spoke about the tasks ahead of us, but the most important task is to formulate a strong code of conduct. I am pleased, therefore, that amendment 17 was agreed to today, as it requires the code to be brought to the Parliament under the affirmative resolution procedure. The code of conduct is dealt with in section 13 of the bill. I mentioned in committee a slight concern with regard to the words “minimum standards”. I did not lodge an amendment, because I think that the wording is adequate; what concerns me is the connotation that some people—including, at times, the Government—put on the word “minimum”. Some have suggested that the word “minimum” means that the standards cannot be very demanding, and it has even been submitted that those standards that have already been consulted on as part of the voluntary accreditation scheme a few months ago would not be suitable as “minimum standards”. I strongly disagree. “Minimum” means what it says: those are the required standards below which factors cannot operate, but on which they can build further. The standards that formed part of the voluntary process are a good starting point for further work on the code of conduct, but there must be genuine consultation so that residents can have an input into the final form of the code. The success of the bill will be determined by the effectiveness and rigour of the code of conduct. If I am re-elected to the Parliament, I will pay a great deal of attention to that issue in the coming months. One other important matter that needs to be further addressed is the issue of switching, which relates to the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. The committee recommended that the Government should commission further research on that and I hope that whoever forms the new Government will do so in the not-too-distant future. Today is the end of the beginning, but it is a very important beginning, for which I once again thank Patricia Ferguson.

I support the many local objections to the proposed Leith plant. As the minister with responsibility for climate change, has the minister carried out any assessment of the implications of large-scale biomass plants for our 2050 climate change targets? Does she accept that they would incur a large carbon debt, which would not be helpful for those targets? If the Scottish Government has done no such work, will she undertake to carry out research so that the Government understands fully the implications of large-scale biomass plants for climate change before making a judgment on any individual application?

Given the short time that we have for speeches, I will limit my remarks to the scourge of human trafficking, which is, according the UN Office on Drugs and Crime, the fastest-growing international crime. Because of its covert nature, we can often only guess at its true scale, but it has been estimated that between 600,000 and 800,000 men, women and children are trafficked across international borders each year. The number of those people who end up in or passing through Scotland is unclear. One of the key concerns that was raised in the inquiry was the paucity of data across the UK and for Scotland in particular, so I welcome the news that the new Scottish intelligence and co-ordination unit is due to complete its strategic assessment of the scale of human trafficking in Scotland some time next month. I hope that we hear more about the results of that research then. I also welcome the multi-agency working of that unit and of the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, of which it is part. I hope that they can find a way to work with front-line specialist support agencies on data collection issues and service delivery more generally. Specialist support agencies are vital in identifying victims of human trafficking and ensuring that they are provided with the right type and quality of support to meet their needs. It is essential that they are adequately financed. In Scotland, the TARA project has been hailed by organisations such as Amnesty International and the Poppy Project for its commitment to providing a quality, victim-centred approach for women trafficked for sexual exploitation. We heard evidence, however, that although in theory TARA now offers Scotland-wide support, in practice it is not resourced at a level that enables it to provide a high level of support to people throughout Scotland. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice told the committee that negotiations on funding were still under way but that the Scottish Government hoped to be able to offer funding to allow for further expansion of TARA’s services across Scotland and to address problems with access to mental health support. Investment in initiatives to map and prevent trafficking and to bring to justice the perpetrators through the human trafficking unit of the SCDEA is important, but it is vital to maintain a victim-centred approach through adequate funding of front-line support services. The report by the anti-trafficking monitoring group, “Wrong Kind of Victim?”, which provides a fairly comprehensive review of measures to implement the European convention against trafficking since its ratification in the UK, states that the national referral mechanism is “not fit for purpose” and is not working as an effective means of identifying and providing support to potential victims of trafficking. A key concern highlighted in evidence is that the immigration status of any referral appears to be a key factor in deciding whether that person will be found to be a credible victim of trafficking. We heard that in the first nine months of itS being in place, 76 per cent of UK nationals referred to the national referral mechanism were officially recognised as being trafficked. In stark contrast, only 29 per cent of non-British EU nationals and a mere 12 per cent of third country nationals were officially recognised as being trafficked. People are getting negative asylum decisions in the same letter as that which tells them that they are not believed to be trafficking victims. That process is clearly discriminatory and the committee recommended that the Scottish Government should consider setting up a localised multi-agency NRM alongside a local infrastructure of support. Decisions on the trafficking status of victims could be made in isolation from asylum decisions and the welfare of the potential victim should be the primary concern. I therefore urge the Scottish Government to reconsider the recommendation. Although the committee was pleased to hear that traffickers are being convicted for charges including brothel keeping and illegal earnings, we remain concerned that, to date, there have still been no convictions for trafficking offences in Scotland, despite there having been more than 100 convictions south of the border. It is imperative that we fully understand the reasons for that, whether it is due to problems with legislation, the difference in burden of evidence, knowledge gaps within the police or judiciary, or something else. I had a lot more to say about that, but my time is up. I welcome the shared commitment around the chamber to a strong and positive response to human trafficking in Scotland and feel confident that we are making good progress in beginning to tackle this heinous crime.

I am pleased to support the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill. I believe that it has successfully addressed the problems that were highlighted when legislation on the issue was last considered in Scotland. In 2005, in conjunction with the Westminster Government, I launched the joint consultation “Forced Marriage—A Wrong Not a Right”, to examine whether legislation to create a specific criminal offence would help to combat forced marriage. At that time, the majority of respondents felt that making forced marriage a criminal offence could be counterproductive because it might deter victims from seeking help for fear of the legal repercussions for their families. Consequently, the proposals in the consultation were dropped for the time being. I am pleased to say that the forced marriage bill that has come before the Equal Opportunities Committee achieves the right balance between categorically setting out Scotland’s opposition to this breach of an individual’s human rights and providing realistic and sensitive access to protection for its victims. The forced marriage protection order creates a simple and understandable legal recourse that will enable a court to both prevent and require certain actions on the part of the perpetrator, thereby ensuring that an appropriate response is tailored to the individual circumstances of each case. Unlike south of the border, where breach of a protection order is classed only as contempt of court, in Scotland, breach will constitute a criminal offence, with penalties of up to two years in prison for the most serious offences and/or a fine. Together, the provisions will create a strong deterrent to potential perpetrators and send out a clear signal that forced marriage will not be tolerated in Scotland. That message came through strongly in the evidence that was presented to the committee. However, witnesses were also clear that the bill will live up to its potential only if it is accompanied by a strong public awareness and education campaign. As Assistant Chief Constable lain Livingstone of ACPOS told the committee: “The bill’s ... value lies in its public message. We need to bring the matter into the open and to secure an absolute consensus that forced marriage will not be tolerated”.—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 23 November 2010; c 2175.] The committee strongly supports that view and agrees that legislation needs to be supplemented by a strong public awareness raising campaign. Another strength of the bill is the provision that allows forced marriage protection orders to be sought by third parties including a local authority, the Lord Advocate, or a person specified by Scottish ministers. That will ensure that we have a victim-centred approach by reducing the burden of responsibility on the victim and—at least in theory—by ensuring that the victim receives continuing support through monitoring and aftercare. However, the committee seeks clarification on a number of points, including which roles or sectors within a local authority will be able to make third-party requests, whether specialist support agencies will also be granted third-party status and, if so, what criteria will be used to decide which organisations qualify, and whether further information will be provided about the continuing responsibilities of third parties to monitor and implement aftercare services. That detail is vital because, as the joint submission from Scottish Women’s Aid, Shakti Women’s Aid and Hemat Gryffe Women’s Aid states, “it is absolutely crucial that those directly involved in applying for Orders do not simply have this responsibility ‘bolted on’ to their other duties and that care and attention will be taken to ensure that this work is regarded as a specialised support area.” I am pleased that the Scottish Government has committed to providing statutory guidance to support the legislation and I look forward to consultation on the guidance in the near future. I hope that it will provide essential information for third parties, the police, the judiciary and so on about the practical implementation of the bill, and that it will provide strategies for wider public education campaigns for, for example, health and education providers and local communities. I wanted to say something about the interrelation with immigration issues, but I see that time is running out, so I will merely conclude by saying that, although the scale of forced marriage in Scotland might be relatively small, the impact is extremely big and it cannot and must not be tolerated. The bill and its accompanying guidance will provide some much-needed relief for those who have nowhere else to turn.

Now, more than at any other time in the 12 years of the Scottish Parliament, Scotland requires a budget for jobs and growth—a budget that reflects the serious concerns of the Scottish people when confronted with yesterday’s appalling negative growth figures, for example, as well as the cuts that are coming from the UK Government, which, as most of us know, are far too fast and deep. Instead, as many witnesses to the Finance Committee said in their own way, we have a rhetorical commitment from the Government to jobs and growth, but it is a commitment that is often not matched by the relevant budget lines. Of course, I accept that the room for manoeuvre is limited, so we are not going to see enormous changes in the next two weeks. However, we need there to be changes that make this a budget for jobs and growth. I suggest two main areas in which changes can be made: in the revenue area, there must be changes to address the problem of youth unemployment; and, in the capital area, there must be changes to address the massive cuts to the housing and regeneration budgets. On youth unemployment, Andy Kerr mentioned the appalling figure of a 338 per cent increase over the course of this parliamentary session in the number of people aged between 18 and 24 who are out of work for more than a year. In my constituency, unemployment has gone up in the past year and half of that increase is in the 18 to 24-year-old age group. Indeed, in Edinburgh as a whole, there are more school leavers out of work than is the case in any other part of Scotland. What does the Scottish Government propose to do when confronted with that problem? To start with the local angle, two days before Christmas, we had the astonishing letter from Alex Neil that said that, over and above the cuts to the fairer Scotland fund for Edinburgh, there would be an additional £2.3 million cut to the budget for the capital city partnership that funds getting into work services in Edinburgh. That will decimate local projects in the most disadvantaged areas of the city, including a community employability project in west Pilton in my constituency, and will devastate the joined up for jobs initiative in Edinburgh, which has been widely praised in the past few years.

There should be some adjustments to the revenue budget and the capital budget for housing, which I will mention in a moment. Obviously, Shirley-Anne Somerville never makes a speech without mentioning the trams, but most people will realise that that is not actually relevant to the particular subject that I am addressing. We need the wider measures that Andy Kerr was proposing in relation to the future jobs fund and a guaranteed apprenticeship for all, with the relevant qualifications. I accept that we cannot deliver all of that in this budget, but we need to take the first steps towards that. With particular reference to my local situation, there must be a reversal of that appalling cut, which will affect the most disadvantaged areas of the city. The issue of housing came up quite a lot in the Finance Committee’s meetings and is dealt with in paragraph 96 of its report, which says that there could be an “immediate impact” on economic growth if something was done in relation to the housing budgets. As Mary Taylor, director of the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, pointed out in a letter to the committee, the cut to the housing budget this year amounts to more than 30 per cent, if we take account of the capital acceleration, which means that it is beyond the average cut to capital budgets. She also pointed out that the amount that is available for new housing next year is of the order of £50 million, which might fund fewer than 1,000 additional houses, depending on the subsidy rate. As I suggested to John Swinney in the committee, there must be some adjustment of the capital budget, because spending on housing would be of immediate benefit to the economy. I must refer to the description of the Government’s tax proposal as an out-of-town tax. As the member who has Princes Street in his constituency, I can tell the cabinet secretary that at least 10 stores in the street would be covered by the proposal and that, as far as I know, Princes Street is not out of town. This week, I had a meeting with people from John Lewis about the issue, and they pointed out that one of the consequences would be the withdrawal of large stores from the business improvement district initiative, which would be, in effect, town-centre regeneration in reverse. I support the need for extra taxation on big businesses, but the cabinet secretary needs to spread it over a much wider range of businesses. Members of the public must not believe what some SNP members say about our general attitude to the issue. We are concerned not about taxing big business, but about the narrow focus of the policy, which would damage town centres. Paragraph 122 in the Finance Committee’s report refers to the preservation of core places in FE and HE. I hope that, in winding up, the cabinet secretary or the minister will explain what that means, because—this is also a constituency point—many FE students have written to me in the past few days about bursaries and pointed out that even in the past year many people could not go to FE colleges because of the unavailability of bursaries. That is a situation that will get worse into next year, and it is another issue that is of great economic relevance as well as being relevant to the lives of particular individuals.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the detailed answer that she gave me when I asked her about the sick children's hospital during a previous question time. She talked about revenue support for the annual charges that will be required for the new privately built hospital, but she did not say whether there would be 100 per cent revenue support or something short of that. Does she accept that if support is short of 100 per cent there will be further pressure on the revenue budgets of NHS Lothian, which are already under strain because, as she knows, the board is not yet receiving the full share that it is due under the funding formula?

To ask the First Minister what assessment the Scottish Government has made of the impact of large-scale biomass plants on its climate change objectives. (S3F-2808)

I commend the First Minister's enthusiasm for renewable energy in general. However, does he agree that large-scale biomass plants such as the one that is proposed for Leith docks, in my constituency, emit a substantial amount of greenhouse gases—more than coal-fired plants, according to a recent study—and incur a massive carbon debt that can be repaid only after decades, if ever? Will he support the call from Greener Leith, No Leith Biomass, the Leith Links residents association, me and several of his back-bench colleagues for a moratorium on the construction of such large-scale biomass plants pending further research into their consequences for climate change?

This year's debate on violence against women is perhaps the most important since the Parliament's early efforts set in motion Scotland's approach to tackling the on-going scourge of violence against women. It is especially important because experience consistently shows us that during periods of financial restraint prevention services and support for victims of such violence are frequently the first and hardest hit. I therefore start by welcoming the Scottish Government's commitment to maintaining the dedicated funding streams for the violence against women fund, the Rape Crisis specific fund and the children's services women's aid fund. That sends out an important message at this time. Gender-based violence is rooted in inequality between women and men in our society, and both must be challenged through the type of preventive work that was highlighted by Jenny Kemp of Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust, which is based in my constituency, and by Detective Chief Superintendent Carnochan, during the Finance Committee's recent inquiry into preventive spending. However, in 21st century Scotland, equality should not be a bonus to be awarded at times of plenty and should not suit a particular public or political mood or agenda. It is a basic human right both morally and in the laws of the country. That is why it is so vital at this time that we ensure that all policy and budget allocation decisions at national and local levels are subject to rigorous gender impact assessments to ensure  that the equality gap is not directly or inadvertently widened, thereby perpetuating and strengthening a cultural attitude that condones violence against women. For example, a recent study of young people's attitudes to gendered violence found that a third of young men and a sixth of young women aged between 14 and 18 believe that using violence in intimate relationships is acceptable in some circumstances. Another recent report, "Hidden Marks" by the National Union of Students, found that one female student in seven had been the victim of a serious sexual or physical assault while at university or college, but that fewer than 10 per cent had reported the attack from a belief that they were somehow culpable in what had happened to them. The attitudes and commitment that we show today will directly affect the attitudes to and experiences of violence of the generation of tomorrow. Although I welcome the national announcements that were made today, it is essential that the political commitment that is displayed in the Parliament is directly translated into local planning. Good analysis of single outcome agreements by various organisations, including the Scottish women's budget group, has shown that far too frequently that is not the case. In evidence to the Finance Committee, Zero Tolerance said: "As far as violence against women is concerned, there is a mismatch between strategising at national level and what happens on the ground. Single outcome agreements do not reflect the priority that has been given politically to tackling violence against women over the past 10 years. Services have been cut and withdrawn. As soon as ring-fenced funding for tackling violence against women is removed, it is one of the easiest things to go."—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 26 October 2010; c 2570.] I have seen evidence of that in my constituency, where local authority funding for Edinburgh Women's Aid has dropped by £113,000 in the past three years. Further reductions are expected this year. I heard about that serious concern when I attended Edinburgh Women's Aid's recent annual general meeting. At that meeting we heard a moving speech from a woman who has been the victim of domestic abuse over many years and who, as well as emphasising the funding issues, emphasised the need for further action in the realm of protection. Rhoda Grant's Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill will carry that matter forward significantly. The speaker also highlighted problems to do with the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981, about which I have written to the cabinet secretary. I am reminded of the old adage about the three Ps that are needed for work to tackle violence against women: provision, which we have talked about; protection, which I mentioned; and prevention, which I mentioned in the context of  Zero Tolerance. All three Ps demand our attention and resourcing. I commend Scottish Women's Aid and GMB Scotland's new together we can stop it campaign, which encourages everyone to take some of the small actions that are needed to fight gender-based violence—actions that can, collectively, have such a powerful effect. I join members in congratulating Scottish Women's Aid on its 35th anniversary and I acknowledge the sterling and invaluable work that it has done over three and a half decades. I will finish by mentioning a far more recent campaign—white ribbon Scotland. Ultimately, violence against women has to be a men's issue. Until men start challenging other men on how they speak about gender issues, and until men speak out against the gender-based violence that goes on around them, it will be hard to achieve the cultural shift that is necessary to stamp out violence against women for good.

This has been an important debate because post-legislative scrutiny is all too rare in the Scottish Parliament and the equalities dimension of legislation is always worthy of our attention. I am particularly pleased that the Equal Opportunities Committee decided to examine the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. As the minister said, the act was a groundbreaking piece of legislation, but we must ensure that we are living up to the principles that were its foundation. As the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee said at the beginning of the debate, post-legislative scrutiny is important because it lets us know whether an act has done what it set out to do. We heard in the debate that the committee's inquiry highlighted several of the same issues as the independent McManus review of the 2003 act. Since the conclusion of the committee's inquiry in June, the Scottish Government has published its response to the McManus review and has indicated how it will take forward changes to the act. In response to our report, the Scottish Government for the most part simply noted our findings. I hope that as its work in the area progresses, further detail will be provided to the committee. The debate has covered in some detail the committee's concern about the gaps in baseline data, the availability of which is essential for comprehensive and meaningful scrutiny of whether the 2003 act is adhering to its equalities principle. The absence of ethnic monitoring in particular was highlighted in evidence to the committee. We welcome the Scottish Government's statement that, with the Mental Welfare Commission, it will consider how best to address those issues. The committee's inquiry highlighted the importance of early intervention services, and other inquiries by the Health and Sport Committee and the Public Audit Committee sent out the same message. It may well be that the Finance Committee will say something similar in its report on its inquiry into preventive spending. The Equal Opportunities Committee received evidence from several witnesses, including from the Association of Directors of Social Work, about  the importance of investing in preventive work, funding for which could sometimes suffer because of the focus on crisis care. I agree with and welcome what Richard Simpson said about Place2Be, which I know has benefited Forthview primary school in my constituency. I spoke to the people involved in the work there a few months ago. Investment in early intervention services is vital, as it has the potential to prevent admissions to hospital further down the line, thereby saving money in the long term. Consideration should be given to finding more ways of strengthening such provision and ensuring that appropriate resources are directed towards preventive work as well as crisis care. The committee highlighted sections 25 to 31 of the act, which elaborate on the contribution that local government is expected to make in that regard. I re-emphasise our convener's point about the need for clarification of which body will monitor the implementation of those sections. One aspect that the committee is particularly keen to see progress on is the provision of access to advocacy. We are keen to ensure that advocacy provision is available to all groups, and not just to people who present as crisis cases. The committee received a lot of evidence that there is a concentration on crisis cases. As the minister highlighted, the wording of the act is paramount. As I well remember, one of the major debates that took place when the matter was being considered seven years ago was about the right to independent advocacy, not just for those in crisis, but for everyone who had mental health problems. We are pleased that the Scottish Government has looked at issues of advocacy as part of the McManus review, and we welcome its commitment to developing a national plan of action to improve advocacy support for children and young people. However, as the committee emphasised, there is also a need to address the difficulties that other groups face. One group that was highlighted is offenders with mental disorders, whose legal entitlement to advocacy services is not being met. That needs to be addressed. In the deputy convener's absence, I stepped in at the last moment to wind up for the committee. I had intended to speak in the general debate and to highlight a particular local issue—the commissioning of advocacy services in Edinburgh. I realise that, as I am speaking on behalf of the committee, it is not appropriate that I go into that in any great detail, but I think that members will forgive me if I mention briefly that there is a live controversy in Edinburgh about whether there is a requirement to put advocacy services out to competitive tender. I refer the minister, in particular, but other members as well, to  "Independent Advocacy: A Guide for Commissioners", which has a foreword by the minister. On page 36, it expresses the clear view that European rules do not require tendering for advocacy services. It goes on to point out several negative consequences of tendering for people who use advocacy services. I simply ask the minister whether she supports what is stated on page 36 of that document and, if she does, I ask her to draw it to the attention of the City of Edinburgh Council. Finally, it is vital that we get right the provision of mental health services for children and young people. Although the committee received evidence that changes to provision of age-appropriate services for children and young people had been positive, the alarming figures that show an increase in admissions of children to adult wards highlight the fact that further steps still need to be taken. Moreover, the committee believes that there is an inequality in that children who are under the age of 16 cannot appoint a named person even if they are competent to do so. The committee welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment, which was reiterated in its response to the independent McManus review, to considering how a young person might have more of a say as to their named person, while still protecting those who are most vulnerable. In conclusion, I welcome the opportunity to debate this important issue, following on from the committee's report. We look forward to seeing how the Scottish Government will take forward our recommendations and those of the McManus review.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it will provide for the building of the new Royal hospital for sick children in Edinburgh. (S3O-12372)

The cabinet secretary will know of widespread concern in Edinburgh that the new sick children's hospital will not receive the direct Scottish Government funding that the sick children's hospital in Glasgow and the Southern general in Glasgow have received. However, will she guarantee that there will be no undue delay in  building the hospital and that the Scottish Government will provide on-going revenue support to meet the annual charges arising from a privately funded hospital, especially given that NHS Lothian already receives £69 million less than it should receive according to the distribution formula? On that point, how quickly does the cabinet secretary plan to close the funding gap between what NHS Lothian should receive and what it actually receives?

At the recent meeting that I referred to, it seemed that a large number of people were paying 35 per cent commission to factors for their insurance.

Factoring is an enormous issue in the new-build flats in my constituency, albeit not in the traditional tenements, which in Edinburgh have never had factors. As I have received the same kind of complaints from a large number of housing developments about a considerable number of factors, I have come to the conclusion that there is a systemic failure related to a lack of regulation and the absence of required standards. At a recent meeting of representatives of many housing developments in my constituency, we set up an online arrangement to share factoring experiences and make the best of the current bad system. When I consulted them and hundreds of other constituents about Patricia Ferguson's bill, there was only support and not one objection. I am therefore not in any doubt about the principles of the bill, and I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on introducing it.  For me, the key issues are, first, getting the detail of the bill right, including the dispute resolution procedure; secondly, having a strong and effective code of conduct; and, thirdly, looking beyond the bill to other actions that may be required, such as amendment of the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. At the heart of the bill is a requirement that all factors should adhere to required standards embodied in a statutory code of conduct. In that sense, section 13 is the pivot of the bill, and I am glad that the code of conduct will be consulted on in a separate process. In that sense, passing the bill is part 1 of a two-stage process. I believe that the core standards that have already been consulted on are a reasonable starting point, but I do not think that we should regard them as the final word. People must be consulted on the detail of the code of conduct, which will be at the heart of the legislation. The standards must address the common complaints with which so many of us are familiar—the lack of transparency around billing and accounts; poor value for money; failure to arrange repairs; inadequate complaints handling; and the many issues that we have heard about in relation to insurance, such as the large commission that factors often gain from arranging insurance. The bill will succeed or fail in accordance with the quality of the standards and the effectiveness of their enforcement. Some people have raised fears about the consequences of deregistering a factor, but that must exist as the ultimate sanction. Without it, the bill simply would not work. It is, however, intended to be a last resort, and intermediate steps such as mediation and enforcement notices are of more immediate importance. That is why we must get the dispute resolution procedure right. As we move to stage 2, that will be one of the key points of discussion. I note the minister's enthusiasm for an ombudsman system, but I have doubts as to whether the typical ombudsman function is appropriate for the factoring industry. There is a quote from Mike Dailly at the bottom of page 23 of the committee's report, which I think I have time to read out. He stated: "The nature of factoring disputes is that there are technical issues about the state of the premises, factually complex issues to resolve and complicated issues of contract law. Given that nature, such disputes lend themselves more to being determined by a quasi-judicial forum such as that proposed in the bill. An ombudsman scheme is not designed for that type of dispute resolution."— [Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 29 September 2010; c 3526.] Moreover, Patricia Ferguson's suggestion that we use the existing infrastructure of the committee that was set up by the Rent (Scotland) Act 1984 is  a useful one. I was responsible for the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006, which used that infrastructure to set up the private rented housing committee, and the reports and research that I have seen in relation to that suggest that it has been successful as a mechanism for not only driving up standards in the private rented sector, but mediation. As mediation will be important for the successful implementation of the bill, the experience of the private rented housing committee in mediation is another plus factor in support of that suggestion for a dispute resolution procedure. As the committee suggests, switching is important to the debate. As Bob Doris said, if we could get a more effective switching mechanism, that would supplement the standards and mechanisms that are being set up in the bill. There would perhaps develop an effective market in which factors might compete with each other on the basis of quality. The problem at the moment is that it is very difficult to switch. As I highlighted in the factoring debate in March, when one housing development in my constituency switched it ran into certain problems. That whole area needs to be investigated. I therefore support the committee's recommendation that the Government should commission further research on that complex issue. That will involve looking at the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. I was pleased to hear the minister say that we may even be able to address some of that in the context of the bill. A further amendment of that act will be required in the next parliamentary session. We also need to publicise some of the provisions in the 2003 act. At least one housing development in my constituency has it in its title deeds that it cannot change factor until the selling of the last house; yet section 63 of the 2003 act makes it absolutely clear that anyone has the right to change factor after five years and that that provision overrides any individual title conditions. Let us publicise the 2003 act and amend it in due course.

What effect will the cabinet secretary's announcement have on the capacity and staffing levels of the excellent 24-hour drug service in Edinburgh? That service allows charging within the required time period, a rapid turnaround for test purchasing and other purposes, and analysis of the percentage purity of drugs in all seizures of more than 1g, compared with 250g in Strathclyde. In a recent letter to me, the cabinet secretary referred to a national services standard agreement. What are the principles of that agreement? Will it limit the number of cases that are sent for analysis?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the violence against women fund, the Rape Crisis specific fund and the children's services Women's Aid fund will be maintained in 2011-12 and, if so, at what level. (S3O-12179)

I thank the minister for that answer, although it is regrettable that he could not say anything more definite today. Will he assure us and, more important, those who work in the field that, given that the budget line has not been cut in cash terms, the funding levels for violence against women work will also not be cut in cash terms? Will he remember that important violence against women work is also done by local authorities? Will he try to raise with his colleagues the issue of ensuring that violence against women work and funding are built into the concordat with local government? Unfortunately, at present, that is not the case.

The cabinet secretary has said repeatedly that the Barnett health consequentials would be passed on in Scotland. How has the 0.5 per cent real-terms increase in the English health budget become a £33 million real-terms cut in the Scotland health budget, according to table 8.02 on page 117 of the budget document? How has the £2 billion of health money for adult social care in England translated into £70 million in Scotland, which is only one third of the Barnett consequentials?

Will the member give way?

My main theme today is the way in which the cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government have been playing politics with the public finances and making the wrong choices. However, lest I seem to be too negative, I will start by praising the cabinet secretary—briefly, in case I alarm my colleagues—in relation to two constituency issues. First, I commend the responsible way in which he has responded to the tram crisis by setting party politics aside and calling for the project to be completed, given that it cannot possibly be in the interests of Edinburgh or Scotland for it to fail. Secondly, I commend the approval that the cabinet secretary has given to £84 million of borrowing by the City of Edinburgh Council for developments at the waterfront in my constituency being paid for by the retention there of new business rates income. In the summer, I called for some of this tax increment money to be used to complete the tramline to Newhaven, and I am pleased that Jenny Dawe, the council leader, and Charles Hammond, the chief executive of Forth Ports plc, have supported that proposal this week. Unfortunately, when it comes to public finances more generally, party politics come to the fore. We can see that in the wording of the SNP amendment, which talks of "the dire condition of the United Kingdom's finances due to years of Labour economic mismanagement".  That ignores the low levels of debt in 2008, before the recession, which—I remind Derek Brownlee—were much lower than those in 1997. It ignores the banking rescue and the international financial crisis; it ignores the way in which Labour prevented recession becoming depression and saved thousands of jobs in the process; it ignores the fact that the cabinet secretary and the SNP supported the spending decisions of the Labour Government and—as far as I can remember—repeatedly called for more spending; and it ignores the way in which the cabinet secretary admitted at the Finance Committee that a period of fiscal consolidation must occur. As far as I can see, while believing, like us, that what is proposed by the current UK Government is going too fast and too far, the cabinet secretary has agreed with most, if not all, of the economic and financial measures that were taken by the previous Labour Government, yet we still have the party-political nonsense that is evident in the motion. [Laughter.]

The second example of the Government playing party politics with the public finances is seen in the lack of leadership in the budget discussions. That leadership was called for by the Finance Committee's report in June, but most, if not all, of the recommendations of that report were simply ignored by the cabinet secretary. We did not need a full detailed budget, but there should have been an outline to kick-start debate and avoid the paralysis that we have seen over the summer and autumn months. That evasion for party-political purposes has now been compounded by the astonishing news that we are to get a budget for only one year—news that has not just astonished but has alarmed public bodies throughout Scotland. The rhetoric is all about the defence of front-line services, but how on earth can front-line services be protected without planning on a three-year basis? Once again, supposed party-political advantage is to the fore and the sensible planning of public services is very much in the background. When it comes to choices, there is the same conflict between rhetoric and reality. Sustainable economic growth is supposed to be the number 1 priority of the Scottish Government, but as the Finance Committee, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and many outside commentators have pointed out, the main areas that were cut in this year's budget were the capital and revenue areas that are usually linked to economic development. Several examples of that are referred to in the motion, but I will give a local dimension to it. Ron Hewitt, chief executive of the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce, wrote to me in  the late summer about the decision to remove transitional rates relief, pointing out that "many businesses have faced rates increases of 50%, 100% and even 200% this year." The UK Labour Government's transitional relief scheme limited annual increases to 12.5 per cent. When I took the matter up with the cabinet secretary, I received the same negative response as some of my colleagues. It is, however, not too late for the cabinet secretary to do some good. The motion flags up the coming crisis for young people—a crisis that has already arrived for those who are not in employment, education or training. We have already seen the largest annual increase in that group since the establishment of the Scottish Parliament. That is why Labour's announcement of a Scottish future jobs fund, which would provide 10,000 jobs or training places for young people, is so important. That pledge, coupled with the commitment that we have given to the provision of apprenticeships for everyone who leaves school with the relevant qualifications, shows our determination to avoid the mistakes of the Thatcher years, when unemployment was a price worth paying and young unemployed people were a group worth ignoring. I hope that the cabinet secretary will take up those suggestions, so that I can praise him on a future occasion, just as I did briefly at the start of my speech.

To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration has been given by it and Creative Scotland to the future of the Edinburgh Sculpture Workshop. (S3O-11725)

I thank the minister for her answer and her congratulations to the workshop. I also thank her for the helpful letter that she sent me when I wrote to her about the matter some weeks ago. I join her in congratulating the Edinburgh Sculpture Workshop—which, as it happens, is based in my constituency—first because this week it won the prestigious arts funding prize for Edinburgh, as the minister said,  and secondly because it has almost completed the long process of fundraising that will enable it to build a new sculpture workshop to replace the existing one on the same site. Does the minister agree that the new centre, enhanced by the creative laboratories to be funded by the arts funding prize, will make the Edinburgh Sculpture Workshop an international destination for culture?

Does the cabinet secretary recognise that the completion of the tram project is vital for developments on Edinburgh's waterfront, and in west Edinburgh as Tesco Bank acknowledged in a statement last week? Will he consider the use of TIF as an important tool for  plugging any funding shortfall that may arise in completing the route to Newhaven?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to ensure that people traffickers are prosecuted and that their victims are protected and supported. (S3O-11583)

I take this opportunity to thank the Lord Advocate for all the superb work that she has done over the past few years and to say how sorry we are that she is leaving her post. Will the Lord Advocate confirm that, in the new trafficking guidance, which I believe is to be issued soon, there will be a presumption against prosecuting the victims of trafficking? Can she say why there have been several successful prosecutions of people trafficking in England but none in Scotland? Is there anything that the prosecution service or other public services could do to help to rectify that situation?

I, too, congratulate Jackie Baillie on bringing this important debate to the Parliament. Even more, I congratulate the see me campaign on all its work during the past eight years to fight the stigma and discrimination that have, for centuries, been associated with mental ill health and which make mental health problems so much worse than they already are. It is appropriate to pay particular tribute to Linda Dunion, who was the campaign's first director and who led and championed it for many years. She has been ably succeeded by Suzie Vestri. Members talked about the successes that can be attributed to the campaign. More people are open about mental health problems and there has been improvement in some of the media handling of the issue. However, we know that we still have a long way to go to spread understanding of  mental ill health and encourage the empathy that is so often lacking. Like Hugh Henry, I mention Anne McLaughlin's speech. It was exceptional in its totality, but I pick out what she said towards the end about fault, which goes near to the heart of the problem. Historically, many people have regarded people with mental health problems as being at fault and somehow to blame. If that attitude can be undermined, that will be an important step forward, and the see me campaign has contributed to that. However, there are no grounds for complacency. I welcome SAMH's new campaign, dismiss, which highlights the seriousness of the problem. At a time when people are looking to reduce the workforce in all sorts of areas, there is a danger that employers might regard people with mental health problems as easier to lay off. We must be careful in relation to employment, so I welcome the campaign. A related issue is benefit changes. Many people with mental health problems are worried that they might not be regarded as having a genuine problem. Problems to do with people's potential to take up employment, which can be obvious and apparent in people who have physical disabilities, are just as real for people with mental health problems, in some cases. The campaign can be seen as being part of two wider movements. First, it was part of a big initiative on mental health improvement, which was led by Gregor Henderson in the early years of the Parliament. Campaigns such as the one on suicide prevention and many other initiatives, such as mental health first aid and the Scottish recovery network, developed as part of the mental health improvement initiative. I always think that it is unfortunate that, in all the excellent work that the Parliament has done on health improvement, some of which is recognised far afield, the mental health improvement work has not been generally recognised. It is appropriate to set the see me campaign in that context. The other context is the wider mental health users movement. The key thing about see me is to treat people with mental health problems with dignity and respect. The idea of allowing people with mental health problems to be involved in decisions about their care and to be listened to with respect in relation to their care is important. That should be acknowledged. I have a particular interest in the matter this week because, on Friday, "Oor Mad History: A Community History of the Lothian Mental Health Service User Movement" is being launched in my constituency. I was honoured to be asked to write a foreword and I will speak at the launch. I am certainly aware from the work that people have  done in Lothian that significant progress has been made on the wider front in relation to respecting people with mental health problems. It is appropriate to mention that and to see the see me campaign as part of a wider movement for change and improvement.

I learned everything I know about the  issue from constituents who work at either Howden Hall or Fettes. I hope that the cabinet secretary will also meet his constituents who work in the local forensic service as that is not inconsistent with his position and responsibilities. I welcome his and my constituents and others to the public gallery today. We all know that we have to make hard decisions about saving money in the next few weeks and do that in a way that is consistent with not having a serious adverse effect on services, but what is strange about the subject before us is not only that striking adverse effects would result from centralisation but that centralisation does not even save very much money. In the official costings in the options paper, there is very little difference between options one and three or between options two and four. Also, questions have been asked about some of the costings. To give one of several examples, the stated transport costs of centralisation are questionably low, at £160,000, and there is no allowance for the initial capital cost of vehicles for transporting samples around Scotland. Moreover, the hidden costs to customers are not addressed at all. I will go on to talk about that, but before I do, I want to mention a general concern about the lack of detail in options three and four and the lack of detail on the views of stakeholders. An e-mail from Tom Nelson to staff said that no unanimous view has come from stakeholders. We would not expect that, but was there a clear majority view? We need to know how the selection was arrived at. There has to be a clear presentation of the selection process, with documents, to show how customers' views were taken into account. If that is not released, I am sure that it will be asked for in a freedom of information request. Of course we need modernisation and savings, but whichever option is chosen, we already have a common IT system and a five-year transformation plan. Moreover, option two includes provision for centralising less-used services, standardising procedures and systems and integrating the four sites into one management system although, strangely, the use of automated disclosure processes is applied only to options three and four.

I will if I have time, but I will see whether I can get through my material first. Turning to Edinburgh, my main concern is that the excellent facility in the city should not be closed or radically downgraded. It is a highly respected facility and its closure would lead to results not being obtained fast enough and to  investigations being jeopardised. Only yesterday, the forensic service in Edinburgh had a key role to play in a massive drugs operation in my constituency, on which I congratulate the police and the forensic service. Without the forensic service, it simply would not have been possible. The 24-hour drugs service that we have in Edinburgh allows the charging within six hours that various members have mentioned, but it also allows a rapid turnaround for test purchasing and other purposes.

I listen to my constituents, and I am sure that Brian Adam listens to his constituents. Those who have put views to me are in favour of option two. Over and above the drugs service to which I have referred, the service is important for many other types of investigation. For example, it provides crucial DNA analysis and fingerprint identifications in many cases. Local scientific experts are also able to attend major scenes quickly. Fast responses in all such areas are vital for the police and the procurator fiscal, but speed is not the only issue. I will give just one example. I have been told that, in Edinburgh, the percentage purity of drugs in all seizures over 1g is analysed, whereas the figure in Strathclyde is over 250g. Therefore, if there was centralisation in Glasgow, there would be either a greatly increased workload there or a significant loss of an element of the service for Lothian and the Borders. Finally, there are some strange assumptions about a reducing workload in the options paper. For example, it mentions having two or three gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, or GCMS, machines for the whole of Scotland, but I have been told that control samples have not been factored into the calculations. A second example is Cozart testing. The paper assumes that that will reduce the workload, but I have been told that there has been no significant drop in demand for laboratory analysis in Edinburgh. That is the chemistry side. There has also been a big increase in biology cases and in the demand for DNA analysis. I will conclude, as my time is up. Options three and four are full of risks. There are cost risks, but more important, risks that perpetrators will not be identified and that insufficient evidence will be generated to secure convictions. Members should  therefore reject options three and four and support option two.   Nanette Milne (North East Scotland) (Con):  >I, too, acknowledge the invaluable service that Scotland's forensic services provide to our justice system and communities. As the director of the SPSA said: "forensic science is the key to unlocking many investigations which in turn can save thousands of hours of expensive police time." He said that it can also play an increasingly important role that could ultimately help prevent crime. There is no doubt that, in the past, there have been inconsistencies in forensic service provision throughout Scotland, and there is no disagreement about the need to modernise. If crime is to be dealt with swiftly and effectively, speedy and efficient forensic services that can produce fast results for all crimes, from murder right down to robberies and housebreakings, are needed. It is accepted that that requires a national forensic service that recognises the needs of local communities, the police and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. There is ready acceptance that modernisation is required and that the status quo is not an option. It is also recognised that on-going efficiency savings have to be made, given the inevitable impact of the current financial strictures on our public services. The consultation that the SPSA embarked on last year was welcome, as it followed what was widely seen as a flawed and biased original consultation process. I found the words of the SPSA's director in July to be quite encouraging. He said that he and his colleagues, together with customers and stakeholders, wanted to ensure that, within the available financial resources, forensic science made the best possible contribution to delivering safer communities in Scotland. As we know, four options were presented for consideration, and the SPSA board's recommendation has now been decided. It is deeply disturbing and frustrating to many people that the chosen option is not being made public. It is clear that members across the chamber believe that we should be told what future structure for the national forensic service has been recommended. We feel very let down by the cabinet secretary.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what issues it and Transport Scotland raised with the City of Edinburgh Council before handing over each instalment of funding for the Edinburgh trams project. (S3O-11356)

Does the minister accept that there will have to be an inquiry into the tram project in due course, covering problems with the 2008 contract, mismanagement by the council, the extent of any monitoring by the Scottish Government and other matters? Does he agree that there are two more urgent and immediate  priorities: first, to drive as hard a bargain as possible with Bilfinger Berger, the company that is holding up the work and is trying to extract as much as possible from the public purse; and secondly, to ensure that the whole line, from the airport to Newhaven, is completed without extra cost to council tax payers, but using, if necessary, innovative funding methods such as tax increment financing, which I suggested in a recent letter to the minister?

One of the most worrying housing statistics that I have seen recently is that the number of people in temporary accommodation has risen to almost 11,000, which is an 8 per cent increase on last year.  As 2012 approaches, I have a great concern that more and more people might be spending longer and longer in temporary accommodation. It says in the "Code of Guidance on Homelessness" that "Homeless people should not be placed in temporary accommodation unnecessarily, and their time there should be as short as possible", but there is nothing in our historic homelessness legislation that says that an offer of permanent accommodation must be made within a specified period. Our 2012 homelessness objective has been internationally acclaimed and we must not make a mockery of it by letting temporary accommodation take the strain. It should be a matter of national pride to deliver on the 2012 objective that everyone who is unintentionally homeless should be made an offer of permanent accommodation. I urge the minister to use the imminence of that historic target to argue the case and fight for housing in the coming weeks. That means that we have to make hard choices, because we all know that budget cuts are on the way. In the debate on the independent budget review last week, I said that housing must be our number 1 priority for capital expenditure. It is obvious that that means that other things have to be regulated, so I say quite openly that, yes, housing has to have precedence over transport and other capital budgets in the next year or two. Other sources of funding must be explored, of course, and I welcome what the minister said, particularly in relation to pension funds. The approach is certainly worth exploring, but it will not deliver in the short term. I caution the minister against reducing HAG further. I had a conversation recently with representatives of Port of Leith Housing Association, who pointed out that if they have to borrow more and more to make up for HAG reductions, it means that the other work that they want to do, for example on mid-market rent, which is crucial in Edinburgh, will simply not be possible. That reference takes me to Leith and Edinburgh, where every Saturday morning, at my surgeries, I hear one or more people complaining about their difficulty in obtaining a social rented house. In Edinburgh, 150 people or more apply for every house that becomes available, yet the number of new builds, which was 460 last year, is down to 300 this year, at a time when we need 800 a year. Distribution is especially crucial as we approach 2012. I urge the minister to direct whatever resources he can obtain, particularly over the next two years, towards councils with the greatest supply shortages.  It is not just supply that is important as we approach 2012. The homelessness task force emphasised the prevention of homelessness. A great deal of work from 2003 onwards was carried out on prevention. Councils tend to think, in the first instance, of crisis-driven reactive work, but it is also important to engage in longer-term proactive work. I discussed that recently with representatives of Move On, an organisation that is based in my constituency but which also operates in Glasgow and elsewhere. It has become increasingly aware of the importance of proactive work and is doing excellent work in that field, such as a housing education project in schools, visitor support services and homelessness and employability activity. Over the years, supporting people money has also been important for prevention work. I have expressed concerns previously about the ending of the ring fencing of that money. Over and above that, the Government has failed to put in place a means of recording how housing support is being implemented across Scotland. It was recommended in the 2007 evaluation of homelessness prevention activity in Scotland that there should be more recording of prevention work by councils throughout Scotland. I would welcome any information that the minister has about how those recommendations have been implemented since then. The minister referred to another statutory housing obligation, the fuel poverty target, which is the abolition of fuel poverty by 2016. I accept it when the minister says that he does not possess all the levers to deliver that objective, but I point out that slashing the energy assistance package budget by 10 per cent last year took us in absolutely the wrong direction. I hope that the minister will use the fuel poverty target in his arguments with the finance secretary over the coming weeks. In fact, as I listened to the minister's speech, I thought that it was, to some extent, addressed to the finance secretary. I am therefore confident that the minister will fight for housing. I urge him again to use all our statutory targets relating to housing to argue the case for housing over the next few weeks. Action on housing supply and fuel poverty would show a willingness to protect the vulnerable at this time of cuts. We must follow that underlying principle as we make difficult spending decisions over the next few months. If we act to protect the vulnerable, we will be acting in exactly the opposite way from the UK Government. It is something that we should be determined to do. I do not have time to refer to the housing benefit cuts—

I could speak at great length about the fact that the UK Government is cutting too far and too fast, but I will stick to housing benefit because that will have implications for the subject that we are discussing today. Like our Westminster colleagues, we must take up those arguments. The many different effects of those cuts have not really sunk in. However, one that was mentioned to me by an official in Edinburgh this week is that, although most of what is available for single people in Edinburgh is two-bedroom accommodation, under the new housing benefit rules rent for a single person will be paid only for one-bedroom accommodation. That is one of many changes that will have a devastating effect on the supply of housing. We need to fight on housing, and against the scale of the cuts, at the Westminster front. In Scotland, however, I urge the minister once again to fight for housing and argue that housing should be the number 1 priority for capital expenditure.

I, too, congratulate Gavin Brown on securing the debate. I also commend the energy and determination that he showed over the summer in spearheading the campaign. Someone said that he was fiddling while Rome burns, but the fact that we face much bigger problems does not mean that we should disregard the issue that has arisen at Edinburgh airport. The fundamental question that has been put is why Edinburgh should be different. None of the other BAA airports has such a charge. Also, as the motion reminded us, BAA failed to consult, in spite of the impression that was given in June that there would be consultation. As other speakers have said, the primary aim of the charge—perhaps its sole aim—is to make money. If the intention is to deter drivers, a charge is certainly not the way to do it. As the motion says, public transport is not a viable option for many people. That includes some of the elderly and those with mobility difficulties who have been mentioned. I also recognise that there are particular problems for people in the Linlithgow constituency, as highlighted by Mary Mulligan. However, it is appropriate to say that public transport will become a more viable option for a large number of people once the trams are up and running. That will deter many drivers more effectively than charging them for going to the airport. As Margaret Smith also reminded us, the trams will help BAA. I hope that the campaign in which Margaret Smith and Gavin Brown have been so energetically involved this summer will spill over into the wider campaign to get the trams up and running. I should say that, over the summer, I received far more letters, e-mails and other representations about that issue than I did about the airport issue. In saying that, in no way do I mean to show disrespect to the campaign. It is not appropriate to speak in great detail about the trams on this occasion, but I will make one point about them. I hope that we will unite across party divisions in the campaign to get the trams up and running as soon as possible, and I hope that we can allow our party-political differences on the issue to be left in the past. In  due course, there will be an inquiry into all that has gone on. Some will want to blame the council, some the Scottish Government and some the people who voted for the decision in the first place. That will obviously go on for a considerable period of time, and eventually it will be the subject of an inquiry. However, we should unite to make sure that we get the trams up and running. No one can possibly believe that the failure of the trams project would in any way be in the interests of Edinburgh or Scotland. I hope that this campaign will spill over into that campaign but, for the time being, we must all resist the airport charge.

I raised the issue in my speech, too, but the cabinet secretary was not in the chamber when I spoke. Given that the biggest cash cut will take place next year, will he tell us any of the costed options that will help next year's budget? I said in my speech that even if the Government goes with the draconian option 3 for pay, which involves paying everybody the same next year as they are paid this year, no cash will be saved. Where are the options to save cash for 2011-12?

I apologise for being unable to be present for the start of the debate this morning. I welcome the report for spelling out the scale of the problem that we face and for presenting some of the options that are before us. I will not spend too long on the background to the report. I hope that members of other parties will note the analysis on page 22, which reminds us of the worldwide recession that began in the US and points out that the deficits that were built up in a range of countries were due to fiscal stimulus, higher social payments and falling tax revenues. It also reminds us that the UK entered the recession with a low level of public debt, and I hope that the Conservatives in particular will take note of that comment. The report does not express a view on the actions of the UK Government, but it would be right to do so briefly, as they are relevant to the underlying situation. The cuts from the Westminster Government are coming far too fast and they go far too far. The International Monetary Fund has joined many economists in criticising the self-defeating nature of the cuts, which are already leading to lower levels of growth.  I will not concentrate on the cuts that have already taken place under the present Scottish Government during the good times—although I am sure that we will hear a lot about those in the weeks to come. Instead, I will focus on the future, in particular on the alarming table on page 27 of the report, which encapsulates the particular problem that we face, as the cash cuts going into next year are £1.2 billion. That figure is bigger, in cash terms, than the total cash cut over the next four years. We have a particular problem there, and it is regrettable that the Scottish Government has failed to bring forward any proposals to deal with it. It is disappointing that the report does not include costed options to deal with that immediate problem. Where there are costings, in table 5.2 on page 101, for example, there is a lack of clarity and transparency in what is being presented. There are options, for example, for concessionary travel—a matter that I raised at the Finance Committee—but they are not very helpful. There is a further serious problem with the report, as it does not analyse the budget in terms of fairness and equality—that was another point that I raised with the budget advisers at the Finance Committee on Tuesday. We know what a serious problem we have at UK level, not just with the level of cuts but with how they are being dealt with, with particular discrimination against the low paid and women. As for the Scottish budget, we have no analysis that would allow us to take those matters into account. There are some further equality dimensions concerning younger people, older people and the other equality groups. We urgently need the Government to do some work on that. Pay is central to all this. We have to make decisions on pay, taking account of the fairness principle. I hope we all agree that the low paid have to get some preferential treatment. It is quite mistaken, however, to think that pay in itself can deal with our problems. Option 3 on pay, as it is presented in the report, is to me the most drastic and unpalatable option. It basically suggests that everybody should get paid the same next year as this year, and it would result in no cash savings whatever. Even if the draconian pay option was taken, we would still have to find £1.2 billion of cash cuts for next year. The fact is that we have to make unpalatable choices, and I suggest that the ending of the council tax freeze has to be one of them. I do not make that suggestion with any pleasure, but it seems unavoidable, although nobody, at this time of increasing taxes, would want the council tax to go up by an excessive amount. In this situation, we need to decide what our priorities are and ensure that we have mechanisms for delivering them. I would make  school budgets a priority, but the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, who is sitting not far from me, has abolished all the mechanisms for ensuring that school budgets are priorities. That is now left entirely to local authorities. It is possible to protect health. Having always championed health, I will not stop doing so now. It is self-evident that health does not equal the NHS, as Jackie Baillie and other members have reminded us. There are particularly steep drops next year in capital budgets—in fact, about half of the cash cut is in capital budgets. There, too, we have to choose. I would make housing my number 1 priority, particularly given the imminence of the 2012 homelessness commitment. That is the kind of choice that we have to make—we have to decide what we have to prioritise, and we have to make unpalatable choices. That is what people find particularly difficult. There is an urgent need for the Government to produce costed options to deal with the £1.2 billion cash cut that we face next year. It would be ideal if it made its own proposals, but even providing a menu of costed options would help the debate because, at the moment, much of it takes place in the dark. We urgently need to start a real discussion about next year's budget that transcends political positioning and knee-jerk responses to any proposal that is made. In that context, I was disappointed that Nicola Sturgeon latched on to something that Iain Gray said on "Newsnight". He used, I think, exactly the same words as the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, but she immediately tried to make a party-political point about it. We really must try to suspend such activity for a week or two, although I realise that that is unlikely to happen.

Like Linda Fabiani, I would like to spend a bit of time dealing with some of the interesting and relevant evidence that was given to the committee, but I must start by disagreeing with her fundamental point that Labour's amendment is not consistent with the report. The report's central theme was to ask the Government to get specific about what it proposes. Other members have quoted some of the report's recommendations. It recommended that consideration be given to the impact of keeping universal benefits; that the Government should set out the impact of protecting health and the principles that will inform its approach to developing spending proposals; and that the options should be discussed in an open and realistic way. In addition, to quote the CPPR: "The Scottish Government needs to start to outline where it envisages making upcoming cuts across services over the summer". The main thrust of the committee's report was to say to the Government that we cannot wait until November and that some proposals must be produced now. Although Linda Fabiani should reflect on that aspect of the report, I agree with what she said. In the short time that is available, we do not have time to look at all the evidence that we received, but it will be worth our while considering much of it as we debate the issues over the summer. I will pick out two examples. Alan Sinclair and others gave extremely strong evidence on the importance of investment in the early years, which  is an area that might be vulnerable. He pointed out that early years support was the "most efficient and effective use of public money".—[ Official Report, Finance Committee , 13 April 2010; c 2019.] We should reflect on that evidence because, in my view, we must be extremely careful to protect that area. For me, the most interesting aspect of the committee's report was the perhaps unlikely coalition in favour of systems thinking, which embraced Professor John Seddon—who, at one level, seemed to be quite extreme, although he was interesting—and Unison. We must take on board the idea of systems thinking, which involves looking at the interdependencies within Government expenditure. If we do not do that, savings in one area will just impact somewhere else in the budget. The other key aspect of systems thinking is ensuring that we involve the workforce at the sharp end in finding solutions. Much of the committee's evidence points to how best to deal with budget strategy. However, we cannot forget the context in which we are operating. It would be remiss of us to look only at the situation that Scotland faces. We must never forget the wider context of why we are here. As he always does, Joe FitzPatrick waxed strongly about Labour's financial mismanagement, but I must remind him that the SNP supported all Labour's spending commitments until 2008; in fact, I seem to remember it asking for more to be spent. It also supported the action that Labour took to defend the economy against depression from 2008 onwards. For months I have been mystified about where the SNP disagrees with the spending decisions of the Labour Government. I understand why Conservative and Liberal Democrat members do not want to deal with the wider context. Their view, as expressed by Danny Alexander on Tuesday, is that there is no choice at a UK level, but that is patent nonsense. We should remember that there is no sound economic rationale for making cuts so deeply and so fast. The action that the Tories and the Lib Dems are taking may well be counterproductive not just for growth, but from the point of view of its effect on the markets, which are already getting spooked by the impact on growth of the European deficit reduction programmes. The distributional effect of the budget is quite calamitous, too. We must bear that in mind in the decisions that we take in Scotland. One of the key principles that we must follow is that we must mitigate the effects of the appalling budget decisions of the UK Government on the most disadvantaged people in Scotland. The key point is that the debate must start now. We cannot wait until November. The Scottish  Government must show some leadership; we cannot wait another day.

To ask the Scottish Executive what statements concerning biomass plants have been made recently by the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment and the Minister for Environment. (S3O-11160)

I agree that small-scale biomass for heat or combined heat and power is acceptable. Will the minister urge her ministerial colleagues to reconsider their enthusiasm for large-scale biomass electricity plants such as the one that is proposed for Leith docks, in my constituency? Is the minister aware of recent American research by the Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences, which shows that electricity from biomass would result in even more greenhouse gas emissions than coal-fired electricity would do  by 2050? Will she ensure that the summary of the research, which I have sent to the Scottish Government, is read by all her colleagues who have responsibility for energy and by the First Minister?

I congratulate Aileen Campbell on securing such an important debate, and I welcome the report "Perspectives of Children and Young People With a Parent in Prison", which found that the impact on children of a parent's imprisonment is severe. For example, it states that the effects on a child are the same as the child's experience of  bereavement, that children are more likely to be moved between different homes, schools and care givers at a time when stability in their lives is essential, and that they often experience "deterioration in behaviour, in physical and mental health, and in social and financial circumstances." Those effects can often be long term and impact on family and future relationships, can reduce coping mechanisms and can induce mental health problems. No child should be left to experience that without proper support, but 16,500 children are affected by parental imprisonment every year in Scotland. As the former children's commissioner, Kathleen Marshall, said, children are the invisible victims of crime and we must do more to ensure that their rights and best interests are protected. In her report, "Not Seen. Not Heard. Not Guilty.", Marshall called for the use of child or family impact assessments to be provided during sentencing. Evidence that was presented to the Equal Opportunities Committee during its work on female offenders was clear that the impact of family imprisonment is not addressed by the criminal justice system as it currently stands. As Anne McLaughlin said, social inquiry reports focus on the offender, information about the offender's caring responsibilities is not always included, and social inquiry reports are not always requested by the judge. Although an offender should never escape punishment just because they are a parent, taking account of the needs of the child on a case-by-case basis would, in some cases, be more beneficial to society by preventing some of the knock-on effects of parental imprisonment. For example, during the Equal Opportunities Committee inquiry we were presented with evidence that women are often given custodial sentences for relatively trivial crimes because community sentences are not designed for them. Because women are often the primary carer, children are far more likely to be taken from their homes and put into alternative care arrangements, with all the problems and turmoil that that causes for the child. A key recommendation of the Equal Opportunities Committee's report on female offenders concerned children's visiting rights. Cornton Vale has lots to be proud of in its efforts to support relationships between offenders and their children, with family contact officers assisting extended visiting for children in the informal and more comfortable setting of the little cherubs facility outside normal visiting hours, but a key criterion for a prisoner to be eligible for that service is proof that they are managing their addiction programme. That means that they need to show three negative blood tests before they can enjoy  extended and informal visits with their children. Although that might seem like a good incentive to reduce drug use in prison, it punishes children again for their parent's behaviour, and it is directly in contravention of their rights under the United Nations convention on the rights of the child. Although the Scottish Government was supportive of the majority of the committee's recommendations, its response omitted any mention of children's visiting rights. We will never stop some parents going to prison, so it is vital that we do all that we can to ensure that children have as normal a family life as we can possibly give them. Superb work is being done in West Pilton in my constituency by the Circle project, which Margaret Mitchell mentioned. Circle is a charity that provides intensive community-based support to marginalised children and their families. Since August 2008, Circle has been working with female offenders in prison and when they return home to enable them to maintain and rebuild their family lives. Many women who enter Cornton Vale have no idea what happens to their children from the point at which they enter custody. There is a real breakdown in communication at that point, and Circle provides an important bridge in passing on information about care arrangements, facilitating parent-child visits and ensuring that the offending parent is aware of and can participate in their children's hearings sessions. After release, Circle helps to rebuild family trust, re-establishes relations between parent and child and, when it is in the child's best interests, helps parents to get their children back. It also helps families with a range of issues such as housing, finances, and support for mental health and substance abuse problems. It is vital, therefore, that we keep up funding support for that organisation's excellent work. I end by congratulating Circle as well as, once again, congratulating Aileen Campbell.

In supporting the amendment in the name of Johann Lamont, I agree that violence against anyone is deeply wrong and that the emotional and physical pain and trauma caused by domestic abuse blight the lives of men, women and children throughout Scotland and the United Kingdom. Services and support should be available to all victims of domestic abuse and, of course, the male victims may be in gay, as well as heterosexual, relationships. However, we need to recognise that the experiences and needs of men and women may be different. That is why a gendered analysis of domestic abuse that seeks to understand the context, meaning and impact of violence and how it affects men and women differently is vital in ensuring that the right support is available to all who need it.  That is consistent with the gender equality duty, which requires that we recognise the different needs and experiences of men and women in all aspects of life. Therefore, a gender-neutral approach to domestic abuse would be to the detriment of all victims. Crucially, as our amendment states, that means recognising that domestic abuse "is rooted in gender inequality". It is reflective of the unequal power relations that continue to exist between men and women, the unequal pay structures and working conditions that exist and the value, or lack of value, that we place on women's roles in every way in everyday life. Male violence against women is a profound societal and cultural problem that is rooted in social relations, rather than just the psychopathology of individual men. It is not possible to give a similar analysis of female violence against men.

That is certainly a problem—I do not deny that. What depresses me about many of the speeches is that, although we all support the helpline, some members, although not all, emphasise female violence against men as a way of rejecting the analysis that I have outlined. That analysis has been central to my politics for the past 20 years, starting with the zero tolerance campaign, which began in Edinburgh. That campaign taught many men and reminded many women—and perhaps taught some women who had not realised it—that the inequalities and power relations between men and women are the underlying reasons that drive male violence against women. As our amendment says, we must recognise that pattern of violence. There is a depressing pattern of male violence against women, which is reflected in, and in some cases encouraged by, many cultural portrayals. I note for example the recent spate of films about violence against women, including the appalling "The Killer Inside Me", which I certainly will not go and see. It represents profound societal forces that explain male violence against women and do not in any way cover the different issue of female violence against men. Because of all that, the level and severity of violence against women is disproportionate to that experienced by men. Despite a small increase in the number of cases of reported female  perpetrators, the vast majority of recorded cases—a figure of 85 per cent was agreed by John Lamont—still involve a male perpetrator and a female victim. According to Scottish Women's Aid, at least one in five women in Scotland will experience domestic violence in their lifetime. Not only that but, as Professor Marianne Hester of the University of Bristol recently showed in her important study that I hope all members will read entitled "Who Does What to Whom: Gender and Domestic Violence Perpetrators", the intensity and severity of violent and abusive behaviour that is perpetrated by men is "much more extreme". She found that men are "significantly more likely than women to use physical violence, threats, and harassment" and that that is frequently used to create an atmosphere of fear and of control over their victim. Professor Hester also refers to other studies. That is relevant to what Mike Rumbles said, so I will briefly quote two bits. She states: "In addition, a systematic review of the literature"— so this is not based only on Professor Hester's study— "has found that men may be over-reporting instances of being victims of domestic violence while at the same time being perpetrators of domestic violence." Neither Professor Hester nor I say that that explains all the figures by any means, but it explains some of them. The report also states: "Within this context it has been found that women, in particular, may use 'violent resistance' against violent male partners. Echoing this, women's use of violence has been found in a number of studies to be defensive or retaliatory rather than initiating." That is not to deny the cases in which that is not the case, but we must see the issue in context. Several members have taken the issue out of context and are getting it out of proportion. Research from Canada that can be found on the White Ribbon Scotland website compared violence that is committed by women and men and showed that victims of male violence are five times more likely to require medical attention. Members will find many more examples if they go to that website. Women are also far more likely than men are to be subject to multiple incidents of abuse and to be victims of sexual violence. According to research that was commissioned by the Home Office, 32 per cent of women who had ever experienced domestic violence did so at least four or five times, compared with 11 per cent of men. Moreover, 54 per cent of rapes in the UK are committed by a woman's current or former partner. That is not to trivialise the horrific experience that some men go through at the hands of a  partner, but it exemplifies why a gendered approach to domestic abuse continues to be important. As Scottish Women's Aid has pointed out, such an approach is necessary to meet our obligations under international agreements, including the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women. I support the amendment in Johann Lamont's name.

My starting point for this subject is the health graph that I saw in a presentation from the chief medical officer a few months ago. The graph showed that chronic liver disease has increased by 500 per cent in Scotland over the past 25 years and, even more alarmingly, there has been an incredibly steep rise in the number of deaths over the past six or seven years. In response to that, there is no doubt that a range of measures is required. In that context, I welcome the proposals that have come forward from Labour's alcohol commission. Where I differ from my colleagues, however, while respecting their views, is that I believe that  minimum unit pricing must be part of the mix of measures and, indeed, is the glue that holds that mix together. Some people have highlighted culture as the problem, but price is a key part of culture. I do not believe that culture can be effectively changed without dealing with the dirt-cheap prices that are a roadblock to culture change. There may well be public resistance when we talk about minimum unit pricing in the abstract but, when we make the issue concrete by talking about the cheaper-than-water offers in supermarkets, the public acknowledge the problem and agree that something must be done about price. The fact is that no alternative effective measures to deal with the price problem have been suggested this morning—although I accept that Labour's commission's proposals on price have still to be submitted. I am as concerned as anyone about the potential effect on low-income drinkers, which is an issue that I certainly take very seriously, but let me make two points in response. First, as others have said, poorer communities suffer the most from alcohol. Indeed, the death rate in such communities is 13.5 times greater than in the most affluent communities.

I will come on to precisely those points. My second point is that analysis of the Scottish health survey indicates that people in the poorest quintile are most likely to drink nothing, to drink little or to drink very heavily. In fact, 80 per cent of people in that quintile are in the first two categories and would be minimally affected. There is, of course, a significant minority of low-income drinkers who drink very heavily. Minimum unit pricing would impact on that group and would, all the evidence suggests, lead to a reduction in their alcohol consumption. Low-income heavy drinkers would not be the only ones whose health would benefit, given that only 9 per cent of alcohol at 40p per unit or less is sold to moderate drinkers. As Professor Anne Ludbrook shows in her study, low-income groups are not the main purchasers of cheap alcohol, because so many of them drink moderately or do not drink at all.  A wealth of evidence shows that individuals with alcohol dependence are as price sensitive as the general population. Specific as well as general evidence for that is given by Dr Bruce Ritson at column 2840 in the Official Report of the Health and Sport Committee meeting of 3 March 2010. A recent, very interesting study—by Black, Gill and Chick—of 377 drinkers with severe harm who attended the Royal Edinburgh hospital concluded in its key findings: "The lower the price that a patient paid per unit, the more units he/she consumed." The Canadian experience is also relevant, although there was of course a different context in that country. The witnesses from Canada were extremely interesting because they backed minimum pricing as part of a basket of measures. They gave the interesting and very specific example of how, when the minimum price for 10 per cent alcohol beer was raised, its share of the market went down from 10 per cent to 2 per cent. Crucially, there was a reduction in alcohol harm and alcohol problems. Therefore, today's debate is not just dependent on the University of Sheffield study. However, we should not rubbish that study, given that so much public health policy is based on modelling. Indeed, we in the Labour Party put forward the minimum wage, quite correctly, on the basis of modelling. Arguments have been made, particularly by Murdo Fraser, about the effect on jobs that was cited in the evidence of the Scotch Whisky Association. In reply to that, I believe that we should consider the hundreds of jobs that have recently been lost in Scotland because of the problem of cheap supermarket drink. I think of the closure of the Threshers chain, which was attributed exclusively to that problem. When Cockburns of Leith in my constituency had to close, it also cited the supermarket booze problem. By the week, pubs are closing for the same reason. That is why the on-trade in general supports the policy. The bill also contains other measures that I certainly support, such as the provisions on drinks promotions that will bring the off-trade into line with the requirements that were placed on the on-trade under the 2005 act. I also support the provisions for a social responsibility levy, which could offset any increase in supermarket profits. However, I rather feel that the increase in profits has been exaggerated, given that supermarkets have not exactly rushed to support the policy, which one might expect if the policy would boost their profits by hundreds of millions of pounds. Minimum unit pricing is the glue that holds the mix of policies together. We should definitely consider the range of expert opinion that supports  the policy: the World Health Organization, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, the police and health experts by the hundred. I could have spent the six minutes of my speech listing the eminent people who support the policy—some people might have preferred it if I had done that—and I could take another hour to cite the international studies that have been done over the years that show the link between price and consumption. No effective alternative pricing mechanism has been proposed today, so we must support the bill with the inclusion of minimum unit pricing.

When I last raised the issue of NHS Lothian not getting the share of health money to which it is entitled, the cabinet secretary said that she recognised the problem and was taking action. However, how can such action be effective when each year the gap between what Lothian gets and what it is entitled to gets bigger rather than smaller? Surely, given the big challenges that the cabinet secretary rightly emphasised in her previous answer, it is more critical than ever that boards get their full entitlement as quickly as possible. Will the cabinet secretary start to narrow  the gap for Lothian instead of seeing it increase year by year?

I congratulate Ian McKee on lodging this important motion. I also congratulate NHS Lothian and the Scottish Government on their willingness to participate in and support such an exciting project. They have, to their credit, been very open-minded and willing to learn from other countries. Many people will say that, given the current financial difficulties, it is not the right time to spend extra money on new initiatives. However, it is important that we examine the evidence and do not take a short-term view of public expenditure. The issue has come up regularly in the Finance Committee's current work on budget scrutiny, and we have heard a lot of evidence that investment in the early years will, in the long run, save a lot of money. The work of Professor David Olds presents a wealth of evidence. For example, follow-up studies in the United States indicated that children in vulnerable families who received intensive home visiting from health visitors up to the age of two were, by the age of 15, half as likely to have psychological problems and half as likely to have been involved in the criminal justice system as similar children who were not in the programme. We simply cannot afford to ignore such powerful evidence. As we enter our budget discussions in the next few months, we need to think about the long term and recognise that investment in the early years benefits society in the long term. The key words are "vulnerable families". People may question whether the full spread of vulnerable families have been involved in the Lothian pilot. It is a pilot, so obviously it involves a limited number of people, but we recognise that teenage parents are only one part of the vulnerable category—many others could benefit from the programme. It will always be difficult to decide who participates, but the principle of giving additional, intensive support to vulnerable families is absolutely right. We will see from the evaluation of the Lothian pilot exactly how effective it is, but we can see from the experience in the US and England that the outcome is likely to be positive.  It is a great credit to the Government and NHS Lothian that they have been willing to get involved in this work. Obviously, I will take a particular interest in it as an MSP representing Edinburgh, and no doubt some of my constituents will benefit from it. We will all examine carefully this work as it evolves and the evaluation of it. We should be prepared to learn the lessons from it and, despite the difficult times that we are in with regard to public expenditure, to commit resources to the early years, because the future of society depends on that.

As members will know, lymphoedema is swelling that results from an accumulation of fluid in the tissues and is usually due to an inability in part of the lymph system to return fluid to the blood circulation. There can be many causes, not all of which are cancer related by any means, but I lodged the motion as part of Breakthrough Breast Cancer's current campaign on lymphoedema services. I pay tribute to its work on that and many other issues. It is estimated that at least one patient in five who undergoes surgery for breast cancer goes on to develop lymphoedema in their arm. Because of the good news that more women are surviving breast cancer, more women are now at risk of developing lymphoedema. However, the exact number is not known as information is not collected nationally and scientific estimates vary. It is also not clear how many people develop lymphoedema in other parts of the upper body after breast cancer surgery or other breast cancer treatments. As the motion states, lymphoedema impacts on quality of life in terms of movement, discomfort and appearance. That can be distressing and can make it difficult to perform everyday tasks, while the complications of lymphoedema such as skin damage can result in serious infections that lead to hospital admissions and long-term dependency on antibiotics. Appropriate treatment and support are vital, not just to avoid the complications but to minimise the impact of a condition that cannot yet be cured. As the Breakthrough Breast Cancer briefing for the debate emphasises, people with lymphoedema and health care professionals  report that lymphoedema services are not currently meeting the needs of all patients in Scotland. Where services exist, some patients still experience problems with being referred to them. Moreover, there are no national guidelines on lymphoedema management in Scotland. Some of the problems were illustrated for me when Breakthrough Breast Cancer introduced me to a women with lymphoedema. She comes from elsewhere in Scotland and not my health board area. She described to me the practical consequences—for example, she cannot lift her grandchild and she has had to give up her job—and she also emphasised the psychological issues and her concerns about treatment. She emphasised the importance of 10-day intensive bandaging, which should be repeated every three to four months, and said that she had had much longer waits of six to seven months, even culminating in a projected wait of 10 months this year, although that was subsequently improved. As she said, if the next treatment is too far off, the increase in swelling between treatments can be greater than the reduction that is provided by the bandaging treatment. She also complained that there was no manual lymphatic drainage, or massage, as it is sometimes called, and no nurse-led support group, which she had experienced with her earlier treatment. The main problem in that example is staffing. Only one part-time specialist nurse ran the service. It is no criticism of that nurse to say that she quite simply could not cope with the demand on the service. We all recognise that the health service is facing great funding challenges, but the required investment in staff for a lymphoedema service is not very large in the scale of things. We are talking about one or two specialist nurses or physiotherapists, as the case may be. We all know that, in the development of the cancer strategy, there is now an emphasis on living with and beyond cancer. As part of that, the focus on lymphoedema is absolutely central. Other examples of problems could be given, but there is also plenty good practice. Hence, Breakthrough Breast Cancer emphasises inequity and ensuring that high-quality services exist everywhere. There is an example of recent excellent investment over the past 18 months in the NHS Lothian area, which is my health board area. A new primary-care-based lymphoedema clinic has been established in addition to the excellent services at the Western general cancer centre and St Columba's Hospice. Indeed, the only complaint that I have received recently about lymphoedema services relates to someone who was advised that she would benefit from liposuction surgery, which is available only in Dundee and only for women who live in Tayside. I am told and accept that only a very small number  of women would benefit from that surgery, but it is clear that there would be an issue if one of them did not live in Tayside. I was pleased to meet someone recently who used to work as a specialist nurse in Lothian, but is currently doing a PhD in lymphoedema services. She informed me that people with primary lymphoedema, which is an intrinsic problem that is not related to cancer treatment, can often wait for many years before they get a correct diagnosis, and she pointed out that those who undergo breast cancer treatment also experience delays in being referred to appropriate treatment and support. She emphasised that more clarity and consistency on referral and treatment pathways for patients with lymphoedema are needed. She also highlighted the importance of providing mainly nurse specialist support for self-management and the need for guidance in Scotland so that best practice is disseminated in an effective way and all relevant health professionals are fully informed.

Obviously, Margo MacDonald knows far more about the matter than I do. The patient whom I spoke to said that her husband performed that role. I should emphasise that the director of Breakthrough Breast Cancer in Scotland, Audrey Birt, is currently chairing a group that is considering guidance. I expect that the minister will mention that in her concluding remarks. In conclusion, I again pay tribute to Breakthrough Breast Cancer and fully support its campaign for equitable lymphoedema services throughout Scotland. All national health service boards should commit themselves to providing a high-quality lymphoedema service so that everyone who is diagnosed with it can access the care that they need. There should be guidance on best practice services, including on referral guidelines and systems, to ensure that patients can access the services that are appropriate for them.

I want to talk about the quality strategy because for many years I have believed that the quality agenda needs to be described in  detail to the public and the media, but first I will make a couple of points about funding, which is clearly relevant to the subject under discussion. Yesterday, Theresa Fyffe, who is the director of the Royal College of Nursing Scotland, said: "Recruitment freezes, cutting support for frontline staff and replacing registered nurses with non-registered support staff are guaranteed ways to damage patient care." It is clear that we face a funding challenge, but that means that there is all the more reason to ensure that genuine, high-impact efficiency and productivity approaches are implemented rather than cuts to front-line staff. We must take a hard and clear view of that distinction.

I will take the member's word for that. I am not here to rubbish that point; I am here to talk about what is happening now. As I said at question time—so I will not spend a lot of time on the point—it is far more important now than in the high-growth past that we ensure that NHS boards get the funding share to which they are entitled. It is self-evident that when there were big increases in the past, it did not matter if a board was not getting its share. When the boards are getting smaller, and presumably even smaller increases, it will matter a great deal. The gap between what Lothian gets and what it is entitled to is £69 million this year, which is £5 million more than last year. It is by far the biggest gap in Scotland. If that is not addressed, we will have particular problems in Lothian. I should point out that 700 jobs are already going. Turning to the quality strategy, I particularly like the phrase about not "pulling the plant up by the roots", because the quality plant has been growing over a period of many years. I pay tribute to the whole health care team for all the work that the staff have done over the years and to NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. For many years I have been a great admirer of that body and I have followed the way in which its work has evolved. It is regrettable that most people in Scotland know very little of what it does. A good example was at the recent reception that I hosted for the Neurological Alliance, when the new neurological standards were introduced. The lead clinician described how the work of NHS QIS had evolved and now, as he pointed out, it was going to work with clinicians on an on-going basis to improve the standards. That is typical of the work that NHS QIS is doing and we should pay tribute to it. I also like the quote from Don Berwick on page 17 of the document. As far as I am concerned, and  I think that Dr Richard Simpson agrees with me, he is the number one health care improvement person in the world and I was privileged to meet him on one occasion. It is great that his institute for health care improvement is closely involved with our patient safety programme, which began under the previous Administration and was pioneered successfully by NHS Tayside. I could go on about continuity, but I want to give three other examples. First, there is the whole issue of patient experience, which others have referred to. There is an important patient experience programme called better together, which is mentioned and described in the document; it was started under the previous Administration, along with related work. Using the experience of patients in a meaningful way is absolutely central to quality improvement. I believe—I am sure that the Government believes, too—that it needs to go a great deal further. I was a little concerned that only one of the 12 quality outcome measures listed on pages 37 and 38 of the document is a patient measure. To be fair, the document says that a second one will be developed in due course. Ross Finnie gave a very good example of patients feeding into quality improvement. Breakthrough Breast Cancer has had that service pledge over the past few months. As far as I know, it is an excellent and successful initiative whereby patients are central in forming an improvement pledge for each breast cancer unit in the country. Since we are talking of cancer, I should also mention, as I have done before, the outstanding work of the cancer care research centre at the University of Stirling, which has done an enormous amount of work on patient experience and, in my view, has been the Scottish leader in that field. It was led by Professor Nora Kearney, who has now moved to Dundee. The second example is the quality and outcomes framework of the, often and wrongly maligned, GP contract. That has led to enormous improvements in primary care, which many patients are probably not aware of. Issues such as heart disease and stroke have been greatly helped by the new requirements on GPs that are part of that framework. I was pleased to see in the document that the Government is committed to building on the principle of quality strategy to maximise quality and other service areas. My last example is anticipatory care. That, too, was started by the previous Administration but the strategy document talks about introducing and sharing anticipatory care plans for the 5 per cent of the population who are most at risk of hospital admission. That seems a really important development. For many years, we have been talking about the need to reduce emergency  admissions but they are still going up, for whatever reason. Clearly, more anticipatory care that is targeted on the group most at risk of those admissions would be very helpful. There are many positive features in the quality framework. It has to be seen in the light of the funding issues that many have described. In particular, we must emphasise the role and importance of front-line staff in delivering the quality improvements. At the end of the day, the front-line clinicians will do that and they must be at the centre of the quality agenda. We need to empower them to make the quality improvements that we all want. I hope that we can all be united in that objective.

In view of the funding challenges that the national health service faces, does the cabinet secretary think that it is particularly important that each NHS board should get the funding share to which it is entitled under the NHS Scotland resource allocation committee formula?  Is she concerned that, this year, NHS Lothian is getting 13.69 per cent of the cake although it is entitled to 14.61 per cent of it? That is a funding gap of £69 million. It is even more concerning that the gap is £5 million greater than it was last year.

Has the minister received my letter about my constituent who is over 60 and who has never had a central heating system but who withdrew from the programme because of the bureaucratic complexity to which Mary Mulligan referred? Will he ensure that a fast-track procedure applies to people who have never had a central heating system and who are therefore self-evidently entitled to one?

To ask the Scottish Executive on what basis the recently announced £31 million from Barnett consequentials for housing will be distributed. (S3O-10266)

As the minister is committed to delivering our internationally acclaimed homelessness obligations, which come into play in 2012, will he ensure that the £31 million and, indeed, housing allocations in general, are targeted at the local authorities—such as the City of Edinburgh Council—that will, because of shortages of affordable rented housing, find it difficult to meet and maintain their homelessness obligations as well as meet the needs of those on the waiting lists?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to address the decline in teacher numbers. (S3O-10176)

I thank the cabinet secretary for reminding us in the answer that he gave some moments ago of the massive expansion of teacher numbers between 2002 and 2007. I remind him that, in each of the past three years, certainly in Edinburgh, the number of teachers has declined. Indeed, that has been the case in many local authorities throughout Scotland. Will he work hard to find a mechanism to protect school budgets as we face increasing financial difficulties, rather than just standing by and allowing local authorities to reduce teacher numbers and, in some cases, to plan compulsory redundancies?

The debate is certainly the end of the beginning, and not just for the reason that Derek Brownlee gave, which was that public service reform will be a major theme of the next few years, but because regulations will assume a new importance under the bill. I will not go over the debates about part 2—I hope that there might not be too many regulations made under it—but there have not been many comments about how the rest of the bill depends to a new extent on regulation. I will concentrate on part 4. I regret that parts 4 and 5 have not in general attracted more discussion and amendment. To an extent, that is because members have a great deal of confidence in the existing bodies that those  parts deal with—the Social Work Inspection Agency and the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care, which will turn into social care and social work improvement Scotland, and Quality Improvement Scotland, which will turn into healthcare improvement Scotland. I pay tribute to their work. However, there are significant shifts in the inspection regime—for SCSWIS in particular—that merit discussion. I hope that we will have further discussion when the regulations come before the Parliament. I said in committee that we all accept the principle of a move towards risk-based inspection, but the detail of that merits more scrutiny. In committee, I raised the issue of the extent to which self-evaluation is beginning to take over from inspection. I had an amendment passed at stage 2 that I hope will modify that process to some extent. Inspection has to be reasserted as a key part of the scrutiny regime. There will be real dangers if we move too much towards self-evaluation. The second issue that I want to raise, which should also be discussed when regulations are laid, is to do with the timing and frequency of inspections. Some members in the chamber—certainly the Minister for Public Health and Sport—will remember that nine years ago a major feature of debate about the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill was that there should be two inspections a year for all 24-hour services. That has disappeared from the new legislative regime without any discussion whatever. People might have different views on that—they might see it as being part of risk-based inspection—but it has served us well for nine years. When the regulations are introduced, we should think carefully and decide whether there is merit in having regular inspections as well as additional inspections for services that are in difficulty. We will need to pay particularly close attention to the regulations under section 47 when they are introduced. The regulations under section 97, which pertain to joint inspection, will also be important. There is a particular concern, which I raised in the stage 1 debate, about access to medical records. I know that there will be work and consultation on that, but we need to look seriously at the British Medical Association's suggestion that there should be such access only with consent and that, if consent is not given, there should be anonymisation.

I welcome the Scottish Government's amendments to include people with mental health problems and carers in the membership of the Mental Welfare Commission, and the provision that commission visitors must include people with mental health problems and carers of those with mental health problems. The amendments follow a debate on an amendment that I lodged to that effect at stage 2. The Scottish Government's amendments will bring an inclusive approach, and the experience of such members will be extremely valuable in helping the commission to carry out its functions. However, mental health organisations have several concerns about the current wording of proposed new subparagraph 2D(d) of schedule 1 to the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003—on page 160 of the bill—which relates to the removal of commission members. The wording in question is that ministers can remove a member if "the member is otherwise unfit or unable to discharge the functions of a member." Mental health organisations have made the case that that could be seen as stigmatising people with a mental health problem as being unable to carry out the functions of a member. Given that mental health can fluctuate, people who have been mentally unwell previously might be concerned that if their condition deteriorated they would be removed from office. That could also discourage people who have had mental health problems from becoming a member of the commission or a visitor. The threat of dismissal on health grounds could also cause members or visitors who become mentally unwell to hide their condition and not seek help. Deeming someone "unfit" is a loose and subjective definition, not to mention a loaded term. The suggested alternative wording in my amendment 98 is that a member could be removed if they "breached the terms and conditions of the member's appointment". That is a much fairer approach. I hear the concerns that the minister expressed, but ways of dealing with the difficulties that she spoke about could be built into the wording of the terms and conditions of the member's  appointment. It would be preferable to do that specifically for the Mental Welfare Commission, rather than run the risks that I highlighted, which might apply, given that there will be people with mental health problems on the commission and acting as visitors.

I support the amendments that Dave Whitton has lodged, because of my experience of the existing pay and negotiating system. I am sure that I am not the only member whose constituents have been annoyed and frustrated by protracted negotiations that have led to long delays before pay settlements were agreed. In one recent example, people had to wait for three years to get the pay that they deserved. The proposals in Dave Whitton's amendments would streamline the pay process and avoid the time-consuming and expensive charade of local negotiations on matters that are really decided in the centre. It was absurd that John Swinney objected to these amendments in the Finance Committee on the ground that they would involve the Government. The Government is involved up to its neck in the current approach to these negotiations, which is precisely why they are so time consuming, costly and inefficient. The objective of the amendments is very much in keeping with the Government's wish to streamline government and make it more efficient. The suggested approach would reduce costs and bureaucracy and help to deliver better public  services in Scotland. I strongly support the framework agreement approach that the amendments outline.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I was talking not about three-year settlements but about taking three years to arrive at a settlement for one year. That happened about one year ago, which is well within the current Government's time.

It was regrettable that the amendments on the Mental Welfare Commission were introduced so late that the provisions could not be subject to stage 1 scrutiny. However, having said that, I welcome the various changes that the minister has proposed, the most substantive of which will come forward this afternoon. Amendment 49, in my name, relates to charging for advice. It is helpful that the bill will contain an explicit power for the Mental Welfare Commission to give advice, but I share the concerns that others have expressed that the commission is also to be given a power to charge for its services. The commission's advice and information line is widely used by health professionals, social workers, service users and carers. Research by the commission shows that the service is highly valued. Therefore, it would be a matter of great concern if people were inhibited from calling the commission because they were concerned that they might be charged a fee. It should be clear that the commission's services are free at the point of delivery. Amendment 76, in the name of Derek Brownlee, repeats concerns that I raised at stage 2. As he indicated, we have since had a meeting with the commission, with which I have also had further discussions. We should bear in mind the fact that the commission is content with the Government's proposals, as Derek Brownlee acknowledged, because they represent a description of the work that the commission actually does at present. However, the question for the minister is: if the commission is not to monitor the operation of the whole of the 2003 act, who will monitor the other parts of it? For example, at the Equal Opportunities Committee meeting on Tuesday, issues were raised about the duties of local authorities in terms of sections 25 to 31 of that act. It would be helpful if the minister could say something about that in her speech. I commend amendment 49 to the Parliament.

During the past five years, the Scottish health council has played an important role in driving forward the patient focus and public involvement agenda by monitoring health boards' performance and engaging in a great deal of development work around that agenda. Over that time, it has been part of NHS Quality Improvement Scotland but has had a distinct identity and operational autonomy within that body. For example, it has its own chair, who is appointed by the minister, and its own national council. I well remember the debates about the Scottish health council during the progress of the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill in 2004, when many members of the then Health Committee, including Shona Robison, were unconvinced about placing the council within NHS QIS. I was adamant that it should have independence within NHS QIS, which is partly why I feel so strongly about the matter today. Therefore, when the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill was introduced, I was surprised to see that it gave NHS QIS discretion over whether to continue to have a Scottish health council. I am a great admirer of NHS QIS's work—it has shown great leadership in clinical areas—but I do not believe that it should have control of the patient focus and public involvement agenda. I am pleased that, following the debate in the committee, Shona Robison accepted that "may" in proposed new section 10Z10, which section 90 would insert into the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978, should become "must", albeit with an addendum. I will not go over that aspect, as that would simply replay the arguments that we had during stage 2. I have one final question for the minister. Since the debate in the committee, I have become aware of some dispute about the meaning of proposed new section 10Z10(2)(b). The chair of the Scottish health council has always become a member of  the board of NHS QIS, but I ask the minister to confirm that the cabinet secretary will still have the freedom to appoint the best person to that position irrespective of whether he or she is already a member of health improvement Scotland at the time that the post is advertised. I move amendment 47.

We all know that we face an enormous challenge, given that, if there are no changes to the EU emissions trading scheme, a 47 per cent reduction in emissions will probably be required in the non-traded sector. As a result, we must be very bold in the positive actions that we take and avoid the negatives at all costs. In that respect, I totally agree with Patrick Harvie that we should reject the largely unabated coal-fired power station proposal for Hunterston. Of course, good things are happening. For example, I was very pleased by this week's leasing announcement, particularly as it included Pelamis Wave Power, which is based in Leith. However, the announcement was put into perspective by comments from Professor Stephen Salter of the University of Edinburgh, a key figure in the development of wave power, who said that all that was given was a licence and none of the necessary financial support. A month ago today, I visited Pelamis and heard about the issues that it faces. For example, although it does not use a large part of the building in which it is based, the size and height of the building are still taken into account in the rates bill. I have written to the minister on the matter but I believe that, if something cannot be done about such issues, other kinds of financial support must be given to Pelamis and other such companies. The previous Administration's wave and tidal energy support scheme is now closed to new applicants. I know that money is tight but in such times we must look to the long term and few things are more important to Scotland's future than the development of renewable energy. In any case, the issue is not always money; will is also an issue, and that is certainly the case with regard to cycling. A couple of weeks ago, I praised the tackling obesity action plan's commitment to creating "environments that make walking and cycling part of everyday life for everyone". However, when a day or two later I received at my house the bulletin from the cycling organisation Spokes, I was alarmed to read on its front page that "the SNP government could end up the only Scottish administration" since devolution "with total cycle investment lower in every year of office."  Simply moving a small part of the enormous roads budget could make an enormous difference to cycling. I point out that at the moment very little cycle training is available for young people. Indeed, an article in the Edinburgh Evening News suggested that only one in six children in Edinburgh primary schools receive such training. The motion refers to public procurement, including public sector vehicle procurement, which is highlighted in the climate change delivery plan. Five years ago, when I was a minister, I was driven around in a hybrid car, which the driver took great pleasure in, and I am astonished to hear that the majority of cars bought by the present Administration have been traditional vehicles. The Government must do something about that, and it must put something about low-carbon procurement in the guidance to local authorities that it must issue under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. The built environment is obviously key. We must get a move on with universal home insulation and with the council tax rebate for energy efficiency and microgeneration measures. The scheme that was announced in Edinburgh this week is inadequate. It comes to only £60, and people have to use Scottish Gas for the work. It is a start, I admit, but much more is needed. We must also get on with permitted development rights for microgeneration. I am sorry to mention my own time in office again, but despite my consulting on the matter in 2006, there is still a proposal on requiring microturbines to be 100m away from the nearest building. Can we do something about listed building and planning consent for double glazing and similar measures, applications for which are often rejected? The whole Government needs to work across departments on the climate change agenda. Finally, we must get on with the public engagement strategy. >09:56

Is it the case that the money that was distributed by the town centre regeneration fund was supposed to be spent within this financial year? Given that that is certainly not the case for at least one project that I know of, will the cabinet secretary use any underspends in the fund for excellent bids that were not successful, including the bid from Leith that was ready to deliver in total in this financial year?

I speak in the debate because of the large number of concerns that constituents have expressed to me about factoring services. Those concerns have not come from the large number of people who live in traditional tenements in my constituency, because traditional tenements in Edinburgh have never had factors; they come from residents in the large number of new-build flats that are being built in various parts of my constituency, particularly—but by no means exclusively—at the waterfront. Like other speakers, I will concentrate on the problems that have been raised with me. However, I will make two other points to start with. First, we are not talking about all factors. Various speakers have recognised that there are good factors. To give an example, I had a meeting two months ago with one factor who supports Patricia Ferguson's proposed bill. I recently spoke to another—and will meet him later this month—who  has complained about the fact that no independent body regulates his profession. My second point is that not all constituent concerns have been about factors. Quite a large number of residents from one development have complained about people not paying because they are concerned that the factor may walk away from their development. I believe that that has happened at Kingston quay in Glasgow and in one or two places in my constituency. I have written to the minister about that issue, which we must recognise as well. As Patricia Ferguson said at the beginning of her speech, there are sometimes good reasons why people do not pay but, in most cases, people clearly ought to pay. There are issues with absentee landlords who do not live in the UK and do not pay. I make those points at the beginning of my speech to put the rest of it in perspective. The concerns that have been expressed to me overlap to a considerable extent with those that the OFT research highlighted. It highlighted significant dissatisfaction in relation to many issues, including lack of information, poor value for money, inadequate complaints handling and frequent failure to arrange repairs or supervise them adequately when they are arranged. I spoke a few days ago to a constituent who complained about a continuing repair problem that had not been dealt with, although, interestingly, he pointed out one repair that the factor had done and for which the residents had been billed that ought, in fact, to have been done by the builder. That feature—the relationship between what factors are responsible for and what builders are responsible for—has not come out in the debate. The other enormous issue in the new builds in my constituency is snagging problems, some of which can be dealt with only by the Westminster Parliament rather than this Parliament. The OFT report also highlighted the low level of switching. David McLetchie referred to that, but there are significant difficulties with switching. First, there are problems with title conditions. Perhaps we need to revisit the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003, because residents often cannot change their factor for five years or until the last house in a development is built and sold, which may be nearer to 10 years in the current economic circumstances. Secondly, there are often enormous problems when residents change their factor. In another horrific recent example that was brought to my attention, residents have changed their factor following persistent overbilling and other incompetence on the factor's part but the sacked factor is refusing to deal with refunds or any of the other outstanding issues. That factor also refuses  to return the float, which makes the handover to the new factor difficult because people are understandably reluctant to pay a second float. All those issues must be addressed, too. Other residents perhaps foresee those problems, cannot switch anyway because of the title deeds, or suspect that a new factor may not be much different and, therefore, try to come to the best arrangement that they can with their existing factor. However, I should mention that another residents association—obviously, I am referring to a large number of such associations without naming them—has kept its factor but has taken over many of the factor's activities, thereby greatly reducing the residents' bill. That is an interesting model that is open to others to use, although it presents some difficulties. The residents involved decided to get new quotations for insurance and have ended up with a premium that is half what it used to be and with an excess of only £100 rather than £1,000. The issue of insurance highlights an on-going concern whereby the higher the premium, the higher the commission for the factor. That insurance example highlights the issue of costs, and many of the complaints that we receive are about the escalation of costs and lack of information about what the costs are. One of my constituents from another development suggested that there should be independent annual auditing and even an independent auditing authority. Independence is a key concept, which contrasts with relying only on the Property Managers Association Scotland. There is also an argument for independence in complaints handling, because the only recourse at present is—again—to the PMAS. A key demand is independent redress as part of a quality control system with auditable standards. Patricia Ferguson's proposed bill offers many elements that are at the heart of my constituents' demands. It proposes a dispute resolution mechanism, using the quasi-judicial infrastructure that we already have through the private rented housing committee. In addition, and crucially, it proposes a registration system that is based on a fit-and-proper person test and adherence to set standards. Although that is an excellent foundation, I would probably add things to the bill; it will be possible to propose additions, given the procedure for members' bills. I certainly do not believe that a purely voluntary system will address the serious problems that should be clear to all from the debate.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his positive response to most of the recommendations in the Equal Opportunities Committee report on female offenders in the criminal justice system. Will he respond to the one recommendation that he ignored, namely that if female prisoners with children continue to take drugs, any subsequent punishment should not impact on their children? Does he believe that, in determining visits by children, the rights and interests of the child should be paramount?

My constituency has so many listed buildings—more than anywhere else in Scotland—that I could not possibly invite the minister to them all. I acknowledge Historic Scotland's excellent work, but does the minister share my concern about the inflexibility that has often been shown when environmentally friendly adaptations—particularly the installation of double glazing—are made? I am dealing with an example of that, in which the minister obviously cannot become involved, but will she urge Historic Scotland to be more in tune with her Government's laudable climate change objectives?

I am not an expert on the curriculum for excellence, as will fast become obvious, but I am an enthusiast for it, not least from talking to several headteachers in my constituency, one of whom, for example, described the creativity and flexibility that were already being unleashed in her primary school. I am an enthusiast also because I remember how it all began. I recognise the continuity between what the cabinet secretary is seeking to achieve and the national debate on education that took place eight years ago. I was interested in a comment by Don Ledingham, who is a leading director of education in Scotland. He wrote recently that "the most remarkable thing about Curriculum for Excellence in 2010 is that it does so closely match our aspirations identified from the 2002 National Debate on Education, informed—as it was—by unions, headteachers, local authorities, parents and academics." In that debate, people argued for a range of changes, such as reducing overcrowding in the curriculum and making learning more enjoyable, better connecting the various stages of the curriculum from three to 18, and equipping young people with the skills that they will need in tomorrow's workforce. It is important to  communicate to parents and the wider population not only that enthusiasm but some of the detail of the curriculum, because people are crying out for that. It is also important to address the concerns that exist. I raised a concern a few months ago following representations from the Royal Society of Edinburgh—I am sure that the cabinet secretary always takes its views seriously. It may be that some of the issues that it raised have been dealt with, but I will briefly repeat what I said in a debate a few months ago about its concerns, in particular that, without a common understanding of the structure of the curriculum, there is a danger of different agendas developing across Scotland. If the cabinet secretary has time, I would welcome a response to that. Other concerns are expressed in the Labour amendment, and are about the importance of continuing professional development, clarity about qualifications and, crucially, greater consultation and involvement of parents. I am glad that the cabinet secretary said that, in principle, he accepts those demands. The biggest problem, however, is the financial environment in which the curriculum for excellence is being introduced, and it is relevant to touch on the issues that have come up in other recent debates. Margaret Smith talked about how the City of Edinburgh Council has minimised the cuts, and I pay tribute to the great campaign waged by parents and teachers in achieving some improvements in that regard. However, it would be wrong of me not to remind members, on behalf of my constituents, that we still face cuts of £2.44 million in devolved school budgets in Edinburgh, of £655,000 in community high schools and of a further £1.355 million through unspecified savings in school budgets that are still to be announced. It is crucial for the curriculum for excellence in particular that we have an adequate number of teachers—Margaret Smith emphasised that. We must be concerned about the introduction of the curriculum for excellence in an environment in which, as we know, we have lost 2,000 teachers in Scotland in the past two or three years. That leads to the key theme that I have been advocating in the past few weeks. Particularly with the new spending review coming up and the difficult budgets that we all face, we must decide to prioritise school budgets and find a mechanism to make that possible. As we know, the Scottish Government has no levers to ensure that school budgets are prioritised. While I am enthusiastic for the curriculum for excellence, I think that it needs to be supported by the prioritisation of school budgets in the next three years.

Obesity is, along with climate change, one of the major challenges that face us as a society. In some respects, obesity and climate change are very similar. First, obesity is the outcome of numerous societal and industrial development forces. Secondly, immediate action is essential, although obesity is exceptionally difficult to reverse. Thirdly, no single remedy will suffice. Fourthly, we require co-ordinated action involving central Government, local government, manufacturers, retailers and many other relevant stakeholders. Fifthly, major societal changes are needed, rather than just advice to individuals to change our lifestyle. Of course I recognise "the role of individual responsibility and choice", and I am perfectly happy, in that respect, to vote for the Liberal Democrat amendment. However, it is far more important that we consider the comprehensive portfolio of interventions that is necessary to support that individual responsibility and choice. Anyone who says that one or two interventions are enough is clearly wrong. In that regard, it was regrettable to see the coverage on the front page of The Herald yesterday, when one of a panoply of measures was selected and highlighted. That was obviously a complete distortion of what is presented in this very comprehensive report. The other problem that arises from placing too much emphasis on individual responsibility is that that can easily lead to a blame culture, and none of us wants to go down that route, particularly given that we know about the many obesogenic forces in society and about the additional, profound factors for women that are described in that landmark book, Susie Orbach's "Fat is a Feminist Issue". I welcome the Government's strong focus on obesity, just as I welcome its strong focus on alcohol. Both were big issues six or seven years ago, but they are even bigger now as the trends in both accelerate in a most alarming way. People often think of obesity in terms of appearance, but we must focus on health and we must inform people of the facts, which are not universally known and which people have to face up to. Many people know of a connection with cardiovascular disease and diabetes but, for example, the connection with cancer is not so widely known. I recently attended a cancer conference organised by the Scottish Cancer  Foundation at which Dr Walter Willett, an international expert from the Harvard School of Public Health, said that within the next decade obesity would be a bigger contributory factor to cancer than smoking. We must listen to the experts when it comes to the consequences of obesity and action to deal with it. We are lucky that we have experts such as Mike Lean and Annie Anderson in Scotland, but I am pleased that the Government paid such attention to the Foresight report "Tackling Obesities: Future Choices" from the Government Office for Science in Whitehall. I welcome the focus on the workplace and the early years. That approach replicates two themes of "Improving Health in Scotland—The Challenge", which came out in 2003. One additional area that I want to emphasise a bit more is action in the community. The Foresight report gives the example of an initiative that has been successful on the basis of the evidence: the EPODE initiative in France, which is based on a methodology that is designed to involve all relevant local stakeholders in an integrated and concrete prevention programme. I am particularly interested in that model because it is being used on a small scale by an initiative that is starting now in the Pilton health project in my constituency. I will follow that initiative with great interest. The key issue is to involve local people in deciding what the solutions are. That is a key insight and it is perhaps the one dimension that is missing from "Preventing overweight and obesity in Scotland". Clearly, pages 17 to 20 of the report are central. That is where the issue of portion size comes in, but within a much wider context to do with labelling, marketing and the whole issue of how we reduce the intake of energy-dense foods. Richard Simpson's suggestion of listing calories is an important part of that—the report deals with labelling, which could be a basic and important part of activity and might well be a key way of dealing with portion sizes, which have attracted much attention this week. I like the next section, particularly when it talks about creating "environments that make walking and cycling part of everyday life for everyone". That is to do with energy expenditure rather than energy consumption. The wider perspective is important, but we all know that such environments are not necessarily being created in practice. As with other parts of the report, the principle is fine, but implementation is all. I certainly commend the report but, as I have said, I would have liked a bit more emphasis on action at a community level. One final little quibble is that the report contains too much at the beginning about action on obesity to promote the  Government's purpose of delivering sustainable economic growth. That is obviously an important element, but I found that a bit jarring. More important is promoting the health and wellbeing of the people of Scotland. That is about how long we live, how we live and reversing a trend that, without our concerted action, will cause untold damage to millions of individuals in the years to come.

I thank Richard Simpson for securing the debate and for arranging the reception last night, at which I was pleased to talk to quite a few GPs from across Scotland, including one from Leith, in my constituency. I also thank all the GPs and primary health care teams throughout Scotland for all the work they do—especially my GP in the Leith Walk surgery, who is simply the best and whom I would be very happy to nominate as GP of the year. However, I am sure that I am not the only person to feel that way about their GP, because the relationship between an individual and their GP is central to the NHS. Indeed, as the very great Don Berwick—I think Richard Simpson thought I was going to say "the very great Richard Simpson"—said in a recent article, it is the "jewel in the Crown of the NHS." It was very kind of Mary Scanlon to remind me of one of my better soundbites—one of my few soundbites, actually—when she quoted my  statement that "If it can be done in primary care, it should be done in primary care."— [ Official Report , 25 April 2002; c 11239.]  I think that that embodies an important truth. There have been developments that have moved the health service in that direction over the years, but I am sure that we all agree that it could go further. Mary Scanlon's second comment, about the contract, was not quite so kind. I want gently to challenge her on it, because I believe that what I said about giving "renewed focus to quality and outcomes"— [ Official Report , 25 September 2002; c 14104.]  was in fact one of the results of the GP contract. Both the consultants contract and the GP contract have been subject to quite a lot of criticism. I will not talk about the former in this debate, but I have always been pleased with the GP contract, not least because of the quality and outcomes framework and the idea of rewarding health professionals because of positive actions that they take. It is a shame that most of the public probably do not know about the quality and outcomes framework, but many thousands of people benefit from it every day of the year. It was also one of the subjects that came up at the reception last night. Notwithstanding GPs' particular criticism about the way in which the access points are arrived at, they recognise that it has brought enormous benefits to patients, particularly in respect of preventive health care—especially on issues to do with heart disease, stroke and diabetes. Obviously, the minister and the professionals will listen to some of the points that Ian McKee made, but the principle that was established is good and, fundamentally, it was a good contract. I accept that there are issues in rural areas that the Health and Sport Committee is considering but, in urban areas, such as the one that I represent, out-of-hours arrangements are working very satisfactorily. The BMA has produced a report in connection with general practice week. Most of us are happy to go along with a lot of the recommendations in the report, which goes with the general direction of travel on health in Scotland. I think that the minister recognises that there is some continuity on that between different Administrations. It was encouraging to have that general direction of travel, particularly the importance that continues to be attached to general practice in Scotland, endorsed by the health professionals last night. In fact, they contrasted the situation here with some developments in England. I know that the minister will look at the recommendations in the report and respond positively to them. I look forward to hearing her now.

After studying the issue for a short time and visiting Cornton Vale, two shocking and disturbing facts became clear to me. The first is the appalling extent of sexual and/or domestic abuse in the backgrounds of the women, and the prevalence of mental health and addiction problems, which are sometimes but not always related to that abuse; and the second is the large number of women who simply should not be in Cornton Vale but somewhere more appropriate. Obviously, sentencing is a matter for sheriffs, but the committee suggests that the Government consider the idea of having a separate sentencing framework for women. We certainly say that it is our responsibility to consider alternative provision. Clearly, there will be big debates about community sentences in coming weeks, and we must ensure that gender issues are recognised as part of those debates. Paragraph 137 of the report indicates that Government officials admit that such issues have not always been recognised. I have mentioned alternative provision, and we certainly highly commend the 218 centre. We say in the report that the Government should consider having similar centres in other parts of Scotland. I was pleased to visit Glasgow sheriff court as part of the inquiry. It was very encouraging to see, in relation to a woman for whom we all had a great deal of sympathy, the sheriff using the option of the 218 centre for the disposal rather than the option of Cornton Vale. Would that the 218 centre option were available to a larger number of women. Angela Constance, in a very important speech, referred to alternative provision for those with mental health problems. Mental health featured very strongly in the report, which has many important recommendations on that issue. For example, paragraph 51 says that there should be "a re-examination of the way that women with mental health problems are sentenced". Paragraph 119 makes the specific recommendation that medical reports should be available to sentencers. Mental health must be considered at the pre-sentencing stage. We also say, in paragraph 52, that "improvements must be made to the support that is provided both in prison and in the community to female offenders with mental health problems."  Obviously, I take on board what Angela Constance said about the limitations of what can be provided in prison. There are some necessary limitations, as the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service agreed. However, there are also areas in which improvements could be made. For example, there is an admission in the draft Scottish Prison Service women offender strategy that, at Cornton Vale, there is "limited psychologist input, and no individual clinical psychology." The recent inspectorate report on Cornton Vale talks about the health team there not being at full strength—it should include seven mental health nurses. Improvements can therefore be made in Cornton Vale, but it is clear that, often, alternative provision for people with mental health problems should be considered. The other issue that comes up in our report is what happens to women after they leave Cornton Vale. Ideally, they should be directed to community-based mental health services. However, important written evidence from the Scottish Association for Mental Health pointed out that such services "are often too rigid and place unrealistic demands on those who may be most vulnerable." That leads into the issue of throughcare and what happens to women once they leave Cornton Vale, to which we devoted a section of our report at paragraphs 158 to 161. One of the most interesting reports that I have read in relation to throughcare is by an organisation called Circle Scotland, which has been doing work with women in Cornton Vale over the past two years. A review of the first year has been published. I have a particular interest in the Circle organisation, since it is based in West Pilton in my constituency. It has done excellent work with families in many contexts. The report "Circle: Throughcare for Female Offenders" is interesting because it shows what can be done with women who have been in prison if they are given support when they leave. One of the most striking facts in the report is that there is virtually zero reoffending among the women with whom Circle has worked up till now. We refer to that in paragraph 169 of our report, and I hope that the Government will examine the Circle report and will consider that approach as an important part of the way forward. One issue for Circle is working with children, and there are important recommendations in our report with reference to children. In particular, I draw the attention of the cabinet secretary to the absence of a response to the first part of the recommendation in paragraph 67, which says:  "Where female prisoners with children continue to take drugs, the Committee has made clear its view that any subsequent punishment should not impact on the child in question." It would be interesting to hear a response to that point from the Government. I thank the Government for its response on the other recommendations. In general, its response was positive, although there are big issues about the implementation of many of the report's recommendations. On speech and language therapy, which is dealt with in paragraphs 72 to 74, our recommendation was to have "a pilot speech and language therapy programme". We received important evidence from the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists, which pointed out that "SLT interventions could help to prevent and reduce the female re-offending rate by increasing oral communication skills, by enabling the individual to access a wider range of rehabilitation programmes, thereby empowering them to change their offending behaviour." The Government's response to that was not entirely positive, although it has said that it will examine the evidence. I hope that it will do so soon and take that recommendation on board.

I thank the cabinet secretary for correctly distinguishing between what the Liberal Democrats and I have said, but does he accept my point that the floor on annual increases should be considered as budgets get tighter? As I have pointed out, that would benefit Glasgow City Council as well as the City of Edinburgh Council, as they are the only mainland authorities with increases of less than 2 per cent this year.

I will focus on two crucial issues—distribution and priorities—both of which are increasingly important as budgets get tighter. Michael McMahon spoke of that earlier. On 26 November, I asked the cabinet secretary why Edinburgh was getting a revenue increase of 1.76 per cent when the Scottish average was 2.9 per cent. He gave an impeccably technical answer, as he does. That kind of gap did not matter in years gone by. For example, five or six years ago, if the Scottish average was 6 per cent and Edinburgh got 5 per cent, it did not matter too much. That said, we have to accept that, as budgets get tighter, the floor arrangements for revenue distribution must be looked at again. Before Bob Doris gets to his feet, I say to him that the suggestion would also benefit Glasgow. Edinburgh and Glasgow are the only two mainland local authorities to get an increase of less than 2 per cent. The issue is serious and it will become even more critical as budgets get tighter. The issue is particularly important for Edinburgh, which has the fastest-growing population in Scotland. Of course, the problem is compounded by the council tax freeze. Edinburgh is getting a cash increase in revenue of £14 million this year, half of which—£7 million—is to cover the council tax freeze. In effect, the cash increase for Edinburgh is less than 1 per cent. The distributions have to be looked at again in light of the new financial circumstances. That has happened in the health budget. Under the new formula, NHS Lothian is owed many millions of pounds because the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has slowed down distribution to health boards to a crawl. She puts forward reasonable arguments for doing so, but the issue must be looked at again in the area of health and local government. Within the money that is allocated, the council has choices. I commend the budget that the Labour opposition in Edinburgh will present tomorrow, which is designed to protect schools and other front-line services. Many organisations in my constituency such as North Edinburgh Childcare, the Pilmeny Development Project,  Granton Information Centre, the North Edinburgh Trust and others would be protected by the Labour shadow budget; unfortunately, the Labour group is not in control, but it has made its priorities clear. The Scottish Government should also have a view on its priorities for local government and a mechanism for delivering them. During the budget process, we heard a great deal from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth about protecting front-line services, but talk of protecting such services without a mechanism to do so is meaningless. I want to focus on education, although that is not the only service that is affected. As all of us know, and as Iain Gray pointed out at First Minister's question time last week, many local authorities in Scotland face real-terms cuts in education spending. There has been a great campaign in Edinburgh, so the threatened cuts to school budgets next year of 2.5 per cent have been reduced to 1 per cent, but over the past few days I have spoken to parents and headteachers in my constituency who believe that those cuts will still have a profound effect on their schools. In fact, there are other hidden costs, such as the devolved budgets for heating, waste and maternity holiday pay, for which there are overspends at city-wide level that schools will have to pick up. The Government must find a mechanism to ensure that local government prioritises schools because, as I have said several times in the past few months, nothing is more important to the future of Scotland than the education of our young people. As budgets get tighter, it will become increasingly important for the Government to decide what its priorities are and to find a mechanism for delivering them. My time is nearly up, so I will make two final points. First, I know that the Scottish Government and the City of Edinburgh Council have discussed tax increment financing. I would welcome an update on those discussions, as such financing would help infrastructure development at the waterfront in my constituency. Secondly, two or three weeks ago, the City of Edinburgh Council raised with me the problem of private sector housing grant coming as capital. That has been resolved for this year, but it would be good if in future years private sector housing grant could come as revenue. It could then be used for the private sector leasing scheme that is essential for Edinburgh to meet its commitments on homelessness.

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S3W-28083 by Shona Robison on 29 October 2009, when it will issue its final guidance on social care procurement. (S3O-9363)

Does the minister agree that the guidance cannot come too soon following the fiasco of the recent social care retendering in Edinburgh? The retendering completely ignored service users' wishes and has resulted in great human and financial costs, including nearly £100,000 for the damning Deloitte report that analyses the fiasco in detail. Will the minister pay careful attention to that report before issuing the final guidance? Will she also make it clear in the guidance that retendering is not obligatory if service providers are performing well and to the satisfaction of their clients?

Can the cabinet secretary reassure  those parts of my constituency that are still benefiting from the fairer Scotland fund, albeit at a reduced rate, about what will happen to area-based regeneration funding in future? Is there anything in the single outcome agreements or the guidance to ensure that my council, which is a Scottish National Party coalition administration, will still have to dedicate money to area-based regeneration?

One advantage of the budget process is that we can hear a great deal of evidence from a range of stakeholders and experts before we come to the chamber to debate the budget. I am sure that members have surveyed much of the evidence. The key message that comes through from a vast number of people who gave evidence is that the budget is deficient in supporting economic recovery. That is why Labour's key demand is that there should be movement in the economic area. I could not list all the bodies that put forward that point of view, but they include the Centre for Public Policy for Regions, the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and many business organisations. The main areas that are cut in the budget are the capital and revenue areas that are most usually linked to economic development. Perhaps the most surprising point of all is that, although many budget lines contribute to economic activity, none of the budget lines that are directly related to economic development initiatives has risen compared to the 2010-11 plans that were set out in the draft budget for 2009-10. In other words, the budgets that were set more than a year ago have not been increased, despite all the difficult economic developments that have occurred in the past year. It would be difficult to find another Government in Europe that has not changed its budgets in response to the recession. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee encapsulates the evidence in its conclusion, which is on page 44 of volume 2 of the Finance Committee report on the budget. It states: "based on the near universal evidence we received from business organisations, trade associations, economic commentators and the trades unions, we do not believe that the budget proposed is the right one for the economic challenges ahead." That was supported by the Labour, Liberal Democrat and Conservative members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. It is regrettable that the Conservative party has withdrawn from that analysis of the budget today.

The most important speech to come will probably be that of Wendy Alexander, because it points a way forward for us in the next two weeks. When I say that Labour's key demand is some movement in the economic area, in practice that means in relation to capital spending. GARL has been flagged up by colleagues, as it will be by others to come. I will speak briefly about housing, which I am sure Mary Mulligan will also address. Those are the two areas of capital spending in which we are particularly interested. Until we have a clear statement of the timing of capital expenditure, we cannot make proper decisions about it. If we get such a statement in the next two weeks, we will be able to make significant adjustments to the budget that will boost economic recovery. As is well known, housing is an excellent candidate for that because of the strong multiplier effect of housing developments and because, as we all know, it also has an important social impact on individuals and communities. The third reason is to do with timing, which is of the essence when we make decisions about capital expenditure. I am concerned that we should meet the internationally recognised and admired homelessness target for 2012, which is only two years away.

We are putting both forward for consideration in the debate today. One of the Finance Committee's recommendations was that we should have a greater connection between outcomes and budget choices. We all want a certain outcome in relation to housing by 2012, so we must make choices about the overall allocation of expenditure and its distribution—if I can casually make my Edinburgh point—in order to achieve that objective. The Government's other stated objective in the budget, apart from supporting areas that boost economic recovery, was to protect front-line services. Indeed, the cabinet secretary spoke today about investment in education being at the heart of the budget bill. In Edinburgh, to which I return briefly, a 2.5 per cent cut to the education budget is proposed for next year. The cabinet secretary does not have the mechanisms to protect front-line services and he needs to address that question. I am not asking a question about overall allocations to local government although, following what David McLetchie said, I point out that Edinburgh's revenue increase is 1.76 per cent for next year compared with the Scottish average of 2.9 per cent. Half of that 1.76 per cent increase is for the council tax freeze, so we will have an  increase of less than 1 per cent, which is why so many cuts are looming. As finances get tighter, it is even more important that the distribution is looked at as well as the overall amounts. Supporting economic recovery and protecting front-line services are the right priorities for the budget. It is just unfortunate that the Government's actions do not follow its rhetoric.

As the committee's excellent report and the accompanying evidence make clear, there is a great deal of continuity in mental health policy from the previous Administration and from the Scottish Needs Assessment Programme report of 2003 in particular. Now, however, there is even stronger evidence about the supreme importance of the very early years for mental health, which is backed up by exciting new research about the effect of early family relationships on brain development. As we head towards more difficult times for public expenditure, it is more important than ever that we identify the areas that are most important for the future of society and ensure that they are prioritised. I believe that the early years, and the first three years of life in particular, are such an area. Evidence to the Health and Sport Committee certainly supported that point of view, especially the evidence given by Dr Philip Wilson on 25 March. He referred most strikingly to some work in the United States, which Mary Scanlon also mentioned, that suggested that it is possible to predict at the age of three as many as 70 per cent of children who will end up as in-patients in psychiatric hospitals or in prison. He also described the intensive home-visiting programme that was developed by David Olds in the United States, which I am pleased to say is now being taken up on a pilot basis by NHS Lothian, as the minister said. Follow-up studies in the US indicated that children in vulnerable families who had received intensive home visiting from health visitors up to the age of two were, by the age of 15, half as likely to have psychological problems and half as likely to have been involved in the criminal justice system as similar children who were not in the programme. There is no more graphic illustration of the potential importance of health visiting, which was a major feature of the committee's report.  We should remember, however, that the example that I gave was targeted on vulnerable families, and I remind members that that was the thinking behind Hall 4, which was issued while I was a minister, as was the SNAP report. A good impulse was behind that, because we must have intensive rather than occasional home visiting if we are to support vulnerable families. That said, a clear danger is that children will be missed if not enough health visiting is undertaken, and it is generally agreed that the approach has swung too far the other way. It is important to find the middle ground—the minister recognised that in her speech, although people might feel that the balance needs to be redressed even further. The committee's report and all members today have certainly acknowledged that health visitors are crucial in early identification. Equally, the report recognises that the task is not just for health visitors; we need a multi-agency strategy to address obstacles to early intervention. The committee made important recommendations about nursery schools and about training for the early years workforce across the board. However, none of that can be at the expense of specialist CAMHS staff, not least because those staff train the wider early years workforce. I will focus on the staffing recommendation because it is clear that for many other issues, such as waiting times, staffing is the most crucial—but not the only—relevant element. The spotlight in the report is on the NHS and the figure of 20 specialist staff per 100,000 population, but we should remember the role of local authorities. In Edinburgh, several jointly funded posts were the result of changing children's services fund money. There are great concerns about the continuance of the local authority's contribution to those posts, and the fact that many of those staff in Lothian have temporary contracts is a particular concern. A wider issue is council funding for mental health services in the voluntary sector. If we do not support the voluntary sector and other support services for mental health, the burden on CAMHS staff becomes all the greater. A superb project in my constituency that was funded by the fairer Scotland fund, called women supporting women, lost half its funding last year and is existing on a lesser service this year. That project has helped hundreds of women with young children in my constituency. Without that support, they and their children might well have had to access psychiatric services. We need to remember the wider funding situation, as well as the specific NHS money. Of course, I welcome what the minister said about increased NHS funding for specialist CAMHS staff and the announcement a few weeks ago about clinical psychologists, but psychiatrists have told me that expanding the psychiatric  workforce is an issue. The Government says that lots more psychiatrists are in training, but what guarantee do we have that they will obtain permanent posts? NHS boards must create the posts, which is a concern for some psychiatrists. The committee also raised the issue of research. I should not really be mentioning the next subject just in my last 20 seconds, but it is clear that a key issue is the mental health improvement agenda. I note that SNAP's former chair, Graham Bryce, highlighted the failure to step up that programme, which must be central in the work against stigma, to which I know that the Government is strongly committed.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the City of Edinburgh Council's proposals on alternative business models. (S3O-8870)

Does the cabinet secretary not feel slightly uneasy that the Scottish National Party coalition administration in Edinburgh is the vanguard administration in Scotland for privatising  council services and for refusing to consider alternative in-house ways of making savings? Given the debacle of Edinburgh's recent retendering of adult social care services, will he advise his SNP colleagues against a knee-jerk reaction to financial difficulties, gently reminding them that the SNP Scottish Government has been hostile to privatisation in many service areas?

I have great respect for the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, but he was talking illogical nonsense in his speech. He said that there had been no real-terms cut in the housing budget because the amount of money was the same over two years, only it was accelerated. However, he went on to stand that argument on its head by saying that there had been a real-terms cut in the overall budget because of that same capital acceleration. The fact is that without reprofiling, there is a 1.3 per cent real-terms increase in the budget for next year. That is not as much as we have been used to, but it is still significant and—unfortunately—better than what we will get in subsequent years. There are two additional factors that make the budget slightly better, other than that 1.3 per cent increase. First, as the Finance Committee points out on page 8 of its report, end-year flexibility to cover the £128 million reduction in the health capital budget will be added to the budget later on. Secondly, the inflation level is, at 1.5 per cent, less than was anticipated at the start of the spending review, when it was predicted that it would be 2.7 per cent. I accept that that 1.5 per cent does not cover all areas, but it is still better and—as the Finance Committee's convener reminded members—the committee has asked for the Scottish Government to analyse the inflationary pressures that are anticipated in different areas of the budget. Additional capital acceleration also featured in the cabinet secretary's speech. I will not repeat all the arguments that I and others used in yesterday's debate, although I remind members that I pointed out the rather large list of projects that the anticipated £300 million is going to pay for. I also pointed out that Alex Salmond had a rather different list from John Swinney's. The more important point in relation to today's debate, however, is that a great deal can be done to support the economy within the budget over which the cabinet secretary has control. At the Finance Committee on Tuesday, the cabinet secretary said that the £300 million that he wanted from capital acceleration would make the difference between growth and recession. If he really believes that, it is quite astonishing that he has not done more in his own budget to support areas that would boost economic recovery. The cabinet secretary says that that is one of the two main objectives of his budget, but it does not seem to be borne out by the evidence in the budget document. The Finance Committee, on page 12 of its report, states:  "the Centre for Public Policy for Regions stated that the main areas cut in this budget are the capital and revenue areas most usually linked to economic development. While many budget lines contribute to economic activity, none of the budget lines directly related to economic development initiatives have risen compared to the 2010-11 plans set out in Draft Budget 2009-10 ." I will make two points about that. First, it is amazing that after this year of economic turmoil, there have been no changes to the economic budget lines. Secondly, the point is made that the cuts are significant. The Finance Committee goes on to point out that, even after accelerated capital is stripped out, there is a real-terms reduction of £16.7 million in the enterprise agencies' budget line. The Scottish Council for Development and Industry's useful submission to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee states: "Every £1 million invested by Scottish Enterprise generates £5 million for the Scottish economy". The Skills Development Scotland budget is being cut by 4 per cent in real terms, which is a real concern. Labour emphasised modern apprenticeships in the budget last year, and we will do so again this year. There is no budget line for the 7,800 apprenticeship places that we secured last year, and that issue must be addressed before the budget bill reaches its final stages. I will not talk about GARL, as my colleagues have already done so. I will, however, mention in passing that the tourism budget has been cut by 11.5 per cent. I also remind members of the section that David Whitton quoted from page 44 of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's report, which is in volume 2 of the Finance Committee's report. The EETC says that, based on universal evidence, it does not believe that the proposed budget is the right one for the economic challenges ahead. The other main objective of the cabinet secretary's budget is protection of front-line services. When the cabinet secretary was asked about that at the Finance Committee's meeting in Glasgow, he said that "a front-line service is a service that has an impact on the lives of individuals".—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , Monday 9 November; c 1661.] That is a very broad definition, and, even more significantly, it is difficult to ensure that that happens, because of the massive budgets that are handed out to health and education authorities. Such an objective is very difficult to track: the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee was particularly concerned about that in relation to schools—a good example of an area in which the Scottish Government has no mechanism for protecting budgets. As I said to the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong  Learning, it needs to try to develop such a mechanism very quickly. Of course, schools are part of local government budgets, and the committee makes several observations about that, mainly pointing out that the headline 3.1 per cent real-terms increase in revenue for local authorities is not all that it seems because of budget transfers. It would be good if that was made more explicit in the budget documents. I am running out of time, but I want to comment on two other sections. On strategic budget issues, the committee makes many recommendations, including that the Government should prioritise its capital budgets. I support that. Finally, in the section on development of budgetary information, the committee says, among other things, that there should be a greater connection between outcomes and budgetary choices. That is true across a range of areas, but I highlight my particular concern about the 2012 homelessness target. The budget must be focused on delivering that outcome. Let us look at the housing budget and its distribution, particularly because Edinburgh has the greatest shortage of social rented housing.

I am interested in the cabinet secretary's argument about social housing. In  effect, he said that there is no cut in the social housing budget, because it is the same over three years. Surely if he uses that argument for social housing he must use exactly the same argument for the totality of the budget. He cannot then get away with talking about a real-terms cut.

Economically and financially, we are where we are, first because of the worldwide recession of 2008-09 and secondly, as Wendy Alexander has emphasised, because of the Government's correct action in borrowing during those two years to stimulate the economy and support the banks. The Conservatives have criticised Labour for borrowing too much both before and during the recession and are wrong on both counts. In 2007, before the recession, the level of debt was 36 per cent of gross domestic product, which was down 7 percentage points from the 43 per cent that we inherited from the Conservatives in 1997. As I said, the Conservatives also criticised Labour's borrowing during the recession; however, if it had not done so, we would have had a 1930s-style depression with, it has been estimated, the economy contracting this year by more than 6 per cent, or two percentage points beyond the actual figure. So the Conservatives have been wrong in the past about borrowing, and they are wrong when it comes to the future, which is why the forthcoming general election is so important. They want to cut the deficit too quickly, which runs the risk of causing a double-dip recession, and they want to make savage cuts to the current budget, which would put what the cabinet secretary described in his speech into the shade. Unlike the Tories, the SNP supported the UK Labour Government's borrowing during the recession, so it has to support paying it back. To be fair, it does support that in principle, and its main disagreement is about accelerated capital  expenditure, which I shall come to in a moment. I intervened on the cabinet secretary precisely to find out what other critique he had of the UK PBR, and he did not give us anything in reply to that question. My sense is that the SNP Government supports in principle what Labour is saying for the years 2011-14. There have to be some tax increases but, of course, the rich have to pay the most and the neediest have to be protected, which is what Labour is proposing. Equally, the deficit has to come down, but only when the economy is fully functioning once again, so it will start to come down from 2011 onwards. If the SNP accepts that general budget stance, it has to accept that Parliament will face some budgetary challenges in the years 2011-14, and so should not just use those difficulties as further ammunition against the UK Government. I note that the cabinet secretary quoted the Institute of Fiscal Studies, but we must exercise caution about that. We do not really know what the level of annually managed expenditure is calculated to be during those years. Unemployment is not going up by as much as people expected it would, so we cannot have absolute confidence in the kind of expenditure reductions that the cabinet secretary described.

I am not saying that AME will not increase, but that we do not know what the precise level will be because we do not know what the level of unemployment will be, and that it will not go up by as much as was expected. As we would expect, the cabinet secretary emphasised the bad news in the pre-budget report, but forgot the good. I hope that he welcomes the protection that has been given by the chancellor for health, schools and police in England, which will feed through into our budget. I hope that he and his cabinet colleagues will find a similar way to protect schools, as I said during Michael Russell's statement.

I do not think that I have time: four minutes has gone already. I will give way if I have time, but I must get on to talk about accelerated capital expenditure. The cabinet secretary also omitted to mention many other good measures, such as the job  guarantee for all 18 to 24-year-olds who have been out of work for six months, the new low 10 per cent tax on the profits from new patents—which is very good news for many hi-tech industries in Scotland—and the investment from the strategic investment fund to support life science companies in Edinburgh and a video games centre of excellence in Dundee. I must get on to the capital acceleration issue because it is the heart of the SNP's argument in the debate. I have four points to make. First, the issue has to be seen in the context of a budget that is still growing. The SNP has forgotten to mention that. Secondly, if there was to be accelerated borrowing, there would have to be 10 times as much in England, which would mean £3 billion at least going on to next year's budget deficit. The cabinet secretary flagged up £178 billion as a problem, so he must recognise that it would not have been very easy to increase that further in the way in which he suggested. Thirdly, we should observe the way in which the supposed £300 million of capital expenditure is being used by the Scottish Government. When the Finance Committee was meeting in Glasgow, I asked the cabinet secretary what he was going to spend it on, and he said social housing. What did we hear from the First Minister? I do not have time in my final minute to read out the list of projects that the First Minister gave for that £300 million, but it included transport, health, conference centres, the Scottish exhibition and conference centre, the Dundee waterfront. We should note that. If the cabinet secretary really believes, as he said to me in the Finance Committee yesterday, that the £300 million is the difference between the Scottish economy growing and remaining in recession, why on earth does he not do something with his budget to address the economic issues? I am trespassing on tomorrow's debate, but it is clear that he has let his economic growth budgets decline and that he has the power to address some of the issues. There will be more of that tomorrow, but my time is up for today.

I accept that the Government disagrees on the issue of capital acceleration; no doubt that point will dominate debate. However, does the cabinet secretary disagree with any other element of the pre-budget report?

Is the cabinet secretary aware that in the real world of Edinburgh, where his SNP colleagues are part of the council administration, there are proposals not to increase nursery hours, not to extend free school meals, not to reduce class sizes and—most of all—to cut school budgets for each of the next three years by 2.5 per cent per annum? If, with the same financial challenges, Labour in England can ensure that every school receives a real-terms funding increase of 0.7 per cent for each of the next three years, will the cabinet secretary find a Scottish way of achieving the same objective?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will reinstate a specific fund for flood prevention work. (S3O-8771)

Does the cabinet secretary understand the frustration and anger of my constituents in Bonnington and Stockbridge at the further delays to the Water of Leith flood prevention scheme because of the failure of the Scottish Government to meet the original commitment to fund 80 per cent of the work? In view of the increasing flooding that we are seeing because of climate change, is it not time to reconsider his decision on a specific fund? Will he give this area of work the priority it requires, particularly in a week in which we all are thinking about climate change?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will issue guidance on the tendering of community care services and the right to direct payments. (S3O-8687)

Service users in Edinburgh are extremely concerned and, indeed, angry about the recent retendering of adult social care services in the city. First, will the minister make it clear in her new guidance that there is no requirement to retender where service users are satisfied and content with the service that they are receiving? Secondly, if retendering takes place, will she confirm that service users should be involved fully from the earliest stage? Thirdly, when people ask for direct payments, will she ensure that they have a right to have the payments processed as quickly as possible and to receive a level of payment that makes it possible for them to exercise genuine choice?

Nothing is more important for the future of Scotland than the education of our young people. It is especially important to remember that in these increasingly difficult public expenditure times. That priority was reflected in Labour's 2007 manifesto. To be fair to the Government, there were some good education polices in the SNP manifesto as well, especially around teacher numbers. What we have seen, however, is a disastrous failure in relation to those commitments. Of course, we all know that that came to a head last Friday when we heard the shocking figure of 2,000 teachers having been lost and the pupil to teacher ratio increasing rather than going down. The most important question in today's debate is why the SNP failed to deliver on its promises. Clearly, it is not fundamentally because of Fiona Hyslop, who has some great qualities. I wish her well in her new position, which I have always regarded as one of the most attractive Government posts, particularly on the culture side.  The best explanation for the Government's failure came from Peter Peacock. His speech will certainly repay study by the new Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, whom I, too, welcome to his post. The fundamental problem is central Government's loss of levers. It has been unable to ensure that national priorities are delivered at local level. It seems to me that the new cabinet secretary needs to address that problem if he wishes to ensure that his and the Government's priorities are delivered. In the case of the City of Edinburgh Council, the policy failures are now compounded by the budgetary situation. I complained to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth about Edinburgh's settlement last week. The result of that settlement is that Edinburgh has already lost 140 teachers over the past few years but, unfortunately, we have not seen anything yet.

I will do so in a minute. The headline that is being put forward by the City of Edinburgh Council is a 2.5 per cent cut in front-line school budgets for each of the next three years. If the new cabinet secretary is looking for reading, I suggest that he read Edinburgh's department of children and families information pack for councillors. On the consequences of the cuts, it states: "Schools will be forced to concentrate on core service delivery and this will compromise key areas of the curriculum." It goes on to say: "Support for the delivery of the curriculum, including for curriculum for excellence, will inevitably be compromised."

Obviously, we need a review of local government expenditure. I think that Bob Doris would agree that it looked odd that the average increase for revenue budgets in Scotland's councils was 2.9 per cent, but the increase was only 1.7 per cent for Edinburgh. There are other interesting things in that council document that the cabinet secretary should look at. For example, free school meals and increased nursery hours will not be delivered, and there are worrying cuts to early intervention and positive action schools. Many parents have highlighted those concerns to me over the past week or two. I have been to several school councils in that time, as well. The situation has already created an enormous campaign from parents in Edinburgh. However, I  know that headteachers are also very concerned. A meeting of secondary heads yesterday regarded the cuts as virtually untenable. I know that primary heads feel the same. Further losses of teachers will be the main consequence of the budget cuts in Edinburgh, which is a tragedy not only for teachers but for pupils, too. Again, several teachers who have come to my surgeries recently have been desperately upset because they cannot put into practice their commitment to education. The cabinet secretary should pay serious regard to what Des McNulty's amendment proposes on action to retain outstanding young teachers. I hope that the Scottish Government will support that. It would be remiss of me in a debate on education not to mention the other big constituency education issue for me just now, which is the proposed closure of two primary schools: Fort and Royston. I am not against school closures in principle, but the council has failed to acknowledge the rising primary school rolls in Edinburgh—they will go up by 20 per cent in the next 10 years—particularly in Edinburgh North and Leith. I hope that, in the next two weeks, the council will reconsider; otherwise, the result will be larger classes and schools in my constituency bursting at the seams. It is a matter of particular concern that two thirds of the revenue savings from the proposed school closures will come from further staff cuts. In that sense, school closures are being used as a further mechanism for reducing staff numbers. I have concentrated mainly on schools, but some students from Edinburgh's Telford College came to see me last week. They are very concerned about late payment of bursaries. I know that there was an announcement about that this week, but even after that announcement, nobody who starts a course in January will receive a bursary. There are therefore still very serious problems around that. I am sure that my colleague Claire Baker will say more about that quite soon.

I congratulate Shirley-Anne Somerville on lodging this important motion. In its timing, it advertised the march in October and the exhibition that is still running in the museum of Edinburgh. Like her, I congratulate gude cause. I also thank a group from my constituency that was involved in the events at that time and whose  film can still be seen in the museum of Edinburgh. The ways of seeing group—a group of older women based in the Prentice centre in north Edinburgh—made a film that is based on the 100 th anniversary of the suffragettes and which highlights many features of women's lives over the past 100 years. We can see that progress has been made in some areas—for example, the film says that, even after the war, a nurse who got married had to leave her job—but some problems clearly remain. The film highlights the issue of equal pay, which we have debated recently in the Parliament and the Equal Opportunities Committee, and at the end there is a suffragette song, which says: "Votes for women, it's just a beginning You haven't seen anything yet." That is one of the themes of the debate. We should remember the great struggles of 100 years ago. I am pleased that Shirley-Anne Somerville mentioned two Edinburgh women, and I certainly endorse her call for either of their names to be used for one of the Parliament's committee rooms. I was thinking about which one it should be, and then thought, "Why should it not be both?" Chrystal Macmillan and Elsie Inglis would be highly appropriate names for two of the committee rooms, and we should certainly remember their contribution. Shirley-Anne Somerville has already covered much of the detail of their lives. Yesterday, we had a debate about Scotland's history, but how many of us learned at school about those women or the many other women who made such an important contribution to Scotland's history? Let me concentrate on Elsie Inglis for a moment. She did many different things. She was active in the suffrage movement and, from 1900 onwards, she spoke at four suffrage meetings a week, over and above being a doctor and establishing a maternity hospital for poor women in Edinburgh alongside a midwifery resource centre. That hospital developed into the hospital in which I was born. Later on, she also set up Scottish women's hospitals committee, which did such sterling work during the first world war. If I had to pick one of those two women, I would go for an Elsie Inglis room, but I hope that there can also be a Chrystal Macmillan room. It is highly appropriate that we remember the struggles of those women and many others, but we should also remember that, as the suffragette song that I quoted reminds us, the struggles are not over. There is still much to be done on equal pay, and I am sure that, in the debate next week on violence against women, members will highlight all the work that is needed on that. We clearly do not yet have equality between men and women. A great deal of progress has been made, but there is  a great deal more to do. The Scottish Parliament has made a contribution, and I hope that we will continue to do so. This debate has made a contribution, too.

Why is the cabinet secretary ripping off Edinburgh with a cash reduction of £36 million? Since he will mention capital in his answer, why is the revenue increase for Edinburgh approximately 1.7 per cent, when he said that the revenue increase for Scotland as a whole is 2.9 per cent?

The minister will agree that the care commission is central to addressing these problems. Is she satisfied that downgrading the second inspection of many care homes within any one year is risk free? Is she considering extending the care commission's powers to enforce the care standards using the legislative opportunity of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill? Will she address the problems of the care commission's information technology system, which are wasting the valuable time of many staff?

I, too, congratulate Shirley-Anne Somerville on lodging this important motion and taking the opportunity to emphasise the great contribution that Polish people make to Scotland today and which they made in the past. The motion emphasises in particular the Polish contribution during the war. It also refers to a fact that is perhaps lesser known among Scottish people today: very many Scots went to Poland,  particularly in the 17 th century. In fact, I am told that several Polish names are based on Scottish names. It is fitting that there is a war memorial in the Redbraes community garden in my constituency to the Poles who died in the war. I pay tribute to PC Simon Daley, whose idea the memorial was; it was one of several actions to help bring the Scottish and Polish communities together. I also pay tribute not only to the organisations that are mentioned in the motion but to the Polish Cultural Festival Association, which organised the superb Polish cultural festival earlier this year. An exhibition of photographs of that festival was on display earlier this month in Edinburgh and, if anybody missed it, some of it is currently on display in Fountainbridge library in Edinburgh. I was very pleased to speak at the launch of the festival and to attend several very enjoyable events, including a combined ceilidh and Polish dancing event in Leith back in April. That kind of intercultural event is very important for integration, which is the theme that we want to emphasise when it comes to talking about Polish or, indeed, many other ethnic minorities who come to Scotland—celebrating and recognising their distinct cultures but seeking integration. It is important that we ensure that there is adequate provision for English language teaching, which is another important aspect of integration. The Minister for Housing and Communities may want to cover that in his closing speech. I am conscious of quite a lot of such activity in my constituency. I am pleased to meet Polish people every Saturday morning when I do a surgery at Royston/Wardieburn community centre; a large number go there for English classes at that time. I have also been pleased to meet many Polish people at a weekly drop-in at the Fort community wing that is called a swietlica. Advice sessions are available, but it is also a social event at which Polish people can meet and talk to people who were born in Scotland. I pay tribute to the volunteers who run that drop-in, one of whom spent several days work shadowing with me earlier in the year. The main theme that we want to emphasise today is the contribution of Polish people to Scotland. We should remember all that they have done for Scotland, all that they continue to do and all the skills and cultural diversity that they bring to Scotland. In a speech that was useful from the historical point of view and for present issues, Christopher Harvie emphasised the importance of training and equivalency tests. A couple of weeks ago, a well-qualified Polish electrician came to one of the surgeries at Royston/Wardieburn community centre with a problem: his qualifications had not been properly recognised in  Scotland. It is important that such problems are ironed out. I end as I began—by congratulating Shirley-Anne Somerville on introducing this important debate.

It is good that we are considering today and again tomorrow the care of older people, but it is important to set it within the broader framework of the wider agenda about the contribution of older people, the opportunities for them and attacking all forms of ageism. It would be good to hear from the Government before too long about progress on that agenda. Sticking with care, we should remember that only a minority of older people require care services: 3 per cent of those between 65 and 74, and 40 per cent of those who are 85 plus. Of course, in relation to care, the welcome explosion in the number of over-85s in the next 20 years will be important. The key issue for care is of course quality, and central to quality is personalisation. In many ways,  we seem to be going in the wrong direction when it comes to that. Of course, we should acknowledge today the great deal of progress that there has been, from the setting up of the care commission a few years ago to the welcome initiatives that the minister described earlier. However, it is right that we should focus in this debate, as Johann Lamont did, on issues such as the "Panorama" programme, the articles in The Herald , the rising number of complaints to the care commission, the "Remember, I'm still me" report, and what is actually happening on the ground, which is often contrary to the stated policies and objectives. The "Remember, I'm still me" report has been referred to by several speakers. Sticking with the theme of personalisation, I refer members to a couple of examples in the report of an absence of personal plans that meet the individual needs and preferences of people, and an absence of activities that are tailored to people's individual needs. Those examples and others send out a very important message to care homes, the providers of home care services and councils involved in the commissioning process. That leads me on to an example of what is happening on the ground in my constituency. City of Edinburgh Council will soon introduce changes to home care services that I will come on to describe, but the council has already changed the tendering process for care-at-home services for people with learning disabilities, mental health problems and physical disabilities. In that process over the past few months, the views and wishes of those who receive the services have been ignored. A central feature of personalisation is putting the person at the centre as a participant in shaping the services that they receive, but the views of service users in Edinburgh have been ignored. Many service users have said that they will take out direct payments rather than accept the new providers, so what has City of Edinburgh Council done over the past few days? The council has frozen direct payments, which are an important dimension of the personalisation agenda. I believe that the minister should look closely at what is happening in Edinburgh, which seems to me to be contrary to legislation. On home care services, City of Edinburgh Council intends to move 75 per cent of provision into the private sector. Before the Conservatives leap to their feet to intervene, let me clarify that I am not saying that the private sector is necessarily worse. We need to look carefully at quality. In service reviews, the views of users of independent sector services contrast with those who use council services. On the basis of that evidence, it seems that the users seem to prefer council services, although that is not necessarily the case.  It is certainly wrong to award contracts solely on the basis of lowest cost—as appeared to happen in the evidence shown in the "Panorama" programme—but the changes in Edinburgh seem to be driven by the desire to make the services cost as little as possible. We should all be concerned about the implications of that for the quality of service.

I have only two minutes remaining. I shall give way if I have time, but I will first highlight two other issues. On the important subject of abuse, which we will also consider tomorrow morning, we should acknowledge the progress that has been made through the requirement for enhanced checks and through the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Act 2007. However, following a concerning incident in a council care home in my constituency—someone was convicted of sexual assault of the patient a few weeks ago—I wrote more than once to the minister about how the case raises serious issues about the effectiveness of checks when, as in this case, the member of staff comes from abroad. I know that the Government will try to deal with the issue to some extent in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, but there is still a wider issue about checks on agency staff. In the case in question, the member of staff was employed by an employment agency, which cannot be inspected by the care commission. More generally, I think that we need to look carefully at who is employed in care homes. As Johann Lamont said, continuity of staffing is important and part of the problem is that agency staff come and go. My last point is about the wider agenda. There has been a lot of progress on personal care, but some of the wider agenda is being ignored. Last week, I had a meeting with Care and Repair Edinburgh. I know that the Government supports such services in principle, but I must pass on the organisation's concerns about the loss of ring fencing, which obviously creates worries about funding. Another project in my constituency is the Pilton equalities project, which is trying to fill some of those gaps by using volunteers to provide a handyperson service. I will take Mary Scanlon's intervention.

We need to look at the reasons—wages, pension rights and so on—for those differentials.  I am glad to accept that intervention from Mary Scanlon, given that she hosted a recent meeting with clinical psychologists that I attended in the Parliament. Like her, I want to make a point that was raised at that meeting. Clinical psychologists have recommended the development of a national education programme that would target general practitioners and practice nurses to support better identification and management of depression in older people. They also propose more posts for psychologists with specialist skills in supporting older people. That is an important aspect of the care agenda for older people that we should remember.

Does the First Minister share my concern at the loss of 100 jobs in my constituency as a result of the decision of Johnston Press to print its titles in Sunderland and in the west of Scotland, without creating any additional jobs in those areas? Will he raise concerns with Johnston Press about the betrayal of its loyal Edinburgh workforce, the severing of the historic connection between The Scotsman and Edinburgh, and the folly of printing the Edinburgh  Evening News , with its tight deadlines, at the other end of a busy motorway?

The cabinet secretary mentioned Telford College in my constituency, and she will know that there have been several job losses among staff there, including compulsory redundancies in the business, information technology and finance departments. Given the importance of those areas to the Edinburgh economy, does she think that the decision of the management of the college was wise?

I know that the minister is a supporter of trams, so will he give full support to the City of Edinburgh Council in its difficult negotiations with Bilfinger Berger to secure the lowest possible price for the tram project? Will he try to restrain his party colleagues on the council and in this chamber, whose wild speculations encourage that company to inflate its demands by the day?

I, too, congratulate Rhona Brankin on securing this important debate. Like her, I am fondly remembering Margaret Ewing on this occasion. First, I must apologise for having to leave after my speech, but I will be chairing a meeting of the cross-party group on cancer at 5.30 pm in TG.20. I invite members to come to the meeting after the debate, and to hear about the work of Macmillan Cancer Support. It is appropriate to mention that organisation, as the  motion refers to the importance of the voluntary sector, particularly in relation to breast cancer. I am sure that we will all want this evening to pay tribute to Breakthrough Breast Cancer, Breast Cancer Care Scotland, the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign and other groups. We should also acknowledge the great progress that has been made in the treatment of breast cancer in the past few years and under different Governments. As Rhona Brankin pointed out, a higher percentage of women are surviving the condition. We should certainly pay tribute to all national health service staff. As an Edinburgh MSP, I pay tribute to the breast unit staff at the Western general hospital. That said, many women are still dying from breast cancer, so we clearly have a great deal to do and many improvements to make. Rhona Brankin referred to one of the mechanisms for improvement—the service pledge, which is being developed in Scotland by Breakthrough Breast Cancer. Central to the pledge is a partnership between clinicians and patients to identify areas for improvement. I am told that it is being developed through SCAN—the south east Scotland cancer network—and I look forward to hearing about the pledges that patients and clinicians develop with a view to improving the service. A similar partnership between patients and clinicians was evidenced in the "Standards of Care for people with secondary breast cancer" document, which was launched at the Scottish Parliament in June. I was very pleased to host the launch meeting. I would be interested to find out whether the Scottish Government has looked at, or has any comment to make on, those standards. They are designed to raise awareness of the care, treatment and support that a person who is diagnosed with secondary breast cancer should receive, and they stress the importance of co-ordination of care, access to a clinical nurse specialist, access to information and good psychosocial support. I find it interesting that when patients are involved in development service improvements, they always emphasise that broad agenda. Another demand that was made at that meeting related to the fact that we do not have accurate data on the number of women who are living with secondary breast cancer. An issue that I have recently been approached about at my surgeries is lymphoedema. I have written to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing on the matter on behalf of a constituent who wanted to access the liposuction service for the condition, which is available only in Dundee. It is not a national service, but clearly many women want to access it. I would welcome the minister's comments on what is certainly an area of concern.  I note that the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign expressed in its submission general concern that services for lymphoedema are available in some parts of Scotland but not in others. On research, Rhona Brankin mentioned the Breakthrough Breast Cancer research centre at the Western general hospital in Edinburgh. I was very pleased this summer to visit that outstanding facility, which opened about 18 months ago and is carrying out pioneering work, particularly on personalised care and on developing drugs to match patients' genetic profiles. We should welcome that and all the other contributions that Breakthrough Breast Cancer is making.

Nothing is more important to the future of Scotland than the education of our children. For that reason, maintaining teacher numbers in the face of falling school rolls seemed  to be one of the better policies of the Scottish Government. However, infuriatingly, the minister gave no explanation of why the Government has failed by a figure of 1,000 to achieve that objective. Instead, he trumpeted the so-called record resources to local government. In effect, he blamed local government for the failure. As Rhona Brankin reminded him, 12 of the 13 SNP councils have failed, including the City of Edinburgh Council. The case of Edinburgh is particularly worrying, because the city does not have a falling school roll. In fact, over the next 10 years, primary school rolls in Edinburgh will increase by 20 per cent. As it happens, the cabinet secretary has been talking quite a bit about Edinburgh recently. Last night she gave a television interview, but perhaps it would best be left in obscurity. In answer to a question that I put to her last week, she said: "the City of Edinburgh Council ... should be making efforts to reduce class sizes ... it wants to concentrate on areas of deprivation where, as we know, having smaller class sizes gives schools the space and time to raise standards of literacy and numeracy in those who will benefit most."— [ Official Report , 17 September 2009; c 19743.]  A couple of weeks ago, George Foulkes and I had a meeting with the City of Edinburgh Council education convener on the council's school closure proposals. We asked her whether the council had built class sizes of 18 into its proposal. We expected a long and detailed answer, but she just said, "No." The school closure proposals in Edinburgh will result in larger class sizes, including in areas of deprivation. Fort primary school in my constituency has the largest percentage of pupils who take free school meals of any school in Edinburgh. In spite of that, the school is 10 per cent above similar schools in terms of attainment. The proposal to close Fort primary school will result in £145,000 of savings in teacher costs. In other words, if the school is closed, the result will be a higher pupil teacher ratio in the larger school that the Fort pupils will go to. Of course, I understand the arguments about saving money spent on maintaining school buildings; sometimes there is an argument for closing schools for that reason. However, I have never come across a school closure document that seeks to make two thirds of revenue savings from cutting staff. In Edinburgh, school closures are being used as a mechanism for cutting teacher posts. In my constituency, the result will be larger classes and overfilled schools. I made the point at a public meeting last night on Royston primary school, which is also up for closure. As we have seen in the debate today, and not for the first time, there is an enormous gap between the SNP Government's policies and the  reality on the ground. The policy, which we keep hearing about, including on television last night, is for year-on-year reductions in class sizes and maintaining teacher numbers. However, every day across Scotland, the reality contradicts the policy. It is time for the Scottish Government to remember that nothing is more important for the future of Scotland than the education of our children.

I congratulate Frank McAveety on securing this important debate. Even more crucially, I congratulate the Scottish living wage campaign in general, and in particular Eddie Follan, who has been associated with leading it. Three or four weeks ago, I met him and other campaigners at a local meeting in my constituency and was certainly made aware of my constituents' widespread support for the campaign. I am pleased to give it my personal support. Although, as we all recognise, the introduction of a national minimum wage was one of the great achievements of the Labour Government in its early years, and represented a big step forward, we have to look with concern at recent poverty  figures and the number of working people who remain in poverty. The fact is that the living wage campaign is driven primarily by social justice and the need to tackle poverty. I know that outside if not inside the chamber the principal objection to the proposal will probably be that we are coming out of a recession and the economy is still weak. However, if we look back, we can clearly see that this recession has not been driven by the wage costs of the low paid. In fact, excessively unequal income distribution has contributed to the current financial instability and greatly increased the danger of economic breakdown. Indeed, John Maynard Keynes favoured greater redistribution of income to increase what he called the propensity to consume. That has been part of the economic debate on the recession. Targeting wage or benefit increases at those who are the least well off is one of the main ways to stimulate the economy. I therefore argue that the campaign fits with the requirements in the general economic circumstances, rather than being contrary to them. I referred to the minimum wage debates in the early years of the Labour Government, but I also remember the debates during the period of the previous Government, when the spectre was raised of greatly increased unemployment as a result of a national minimum wage. However, increased unemployment did not happen as a result of the national minimum wage. I do not believe that the policy that we are discussing would increase unemployment either. Looking ahead, we should reflect on one of the other advantages of the proposals. This week, we have heard a lot from people of various political parties about moving from welfare into work. A living wage would make that a whole lot easier. I therefore hope that the proposals are attractive even to the Conservative party, given Iain Duncan Smith's comments this week We should all acknowledge Glasgow City Council's achievement. It has been in the vanguard of the campaign and has shown how a living wage can be delivered, even in the current difficult economic circumstances. We should remind ourselves of Frank McAveety's point that more than three quarters of those in the public sector whose wages are below £7 an hour are women. The calls for a living wage are part of the general movement towards equal pay, to which I hope we are all committed. After the budget statement this afternoon, we all know that the Government faces difficult financial choices. However, it can take action on this issue, and I suggest that it could start with the national health service. From experience, I know that, because of agenda for change, the pay of most health service workers is above the living wage.  However, for a small number, it is below it. A relatively small sum of money in the health budget would be required to address the problem. I hope that the Government will show its good faith and good intent by taking early action on that.

I point out to the cabinet secretary that rolls will increase by 20 per cent in the next 10 years. Is the cabinet secretary concerned that her SNP colleagues in the City of Edinburgh Council administration are openly disregarding her pledge to have class sizes of 18 in primaries 1 to 3 in their proposals for school reorganisation, which will include Fort primary school and Royston primary school in my constituency? Does she agree that the only way of making those poor proposals semi-plausible is to have P1 to P3 classes of more than 30 pupils? Will she take the matter up with her colleagues in the council administration?

Does the First Minister share my concern at plans by the international company that produces Chambers reference books to close its Scottish office in my constituency with the loss of all jobs? Will he do everything he can to support the staff of this most historic and iconic of Scottish publishers and to question the stated reasons for this unnecessary closure?

This is certainly the most important debate that we have had for some time, because the Finance Committee's report is on the key issue that we will have to address not only in the coming parliamentary session but in the coming decade. When I read the report yesterday, I was certainly impressed by the way that it cut through conflicting analyses of the financial situation to arrive at a very balanced view. It also made the important recommendation that a challenge function should be established in the Scottish Government. Even when we were in government, I found it  unsatisfactory that a finance minister should have had such a large portfolio. The various conflicting analyses have been aired again this afternoon. Perhaps Labour and the SNP can come to an informal deal on this issue with the acceptance that there has been a significant reduction in the amount of money that was previously announced. We can continue to debate whether the reduction is £500 million or £380 million, but the fact is that the money is less. Equally, however, there will still be real-terms growth in next year's Scottish budget. It is nonsense to say that capital expenditure that has been brought forward somehow represents a cut. We must accept the reality of the situation, which is that, as the Scottish Government's director of finance said, there will be real-terms growth of 1.3 per cent. After that, we will, of course, have political arguments about the amount of money that we will receive, but the Parliament needs to concentrate on the more important question of how we make best use of it. First, I want to consider the political context of this issue. The SNP keeps going on about what it calls cuts from the Westminster Government, but it absolutely supported the fiscal stimulus that that Government introduced. From today's reports and from figures that have been issued over the past week or two, we can see that that policy has been very successful. Given that the SNP accepted it, it has to accept its consequences, particularly the repayment of debt. The Conservatives are in a different position, because they did not support the stimulus. However, if we had followed their advice, we would be in a far worse economic and financial situation. They also go on about overall levels of debt but, as I have said before in the chamber, debt as a percentage of GDP was less in every year between 1998 and 2008 than it was in 1997 when Labour came to power. Debt has increased only as a result of the fiscal stimulus and the effects of recession over the past few months.

I think that I already answered that question when I said that debt was less in every one of those Labour years than it was in 1997 when the Conservatives gave up government. That political argument goes on. However, in this Parliament, we must focus on how to make best use of the money that we have. We know for definite only about next year's budget and that thereafter any increase will not be as large as 1.3 per cent. Things will get more difficult, but  some of that will depend on whether there is a Labour or Conservative Government at Westminster in 2010. We clearly need an honest and clear view of the various options that confront the Parliament. We will probably have to think some thoughts that we have never had to think over the past 10 years; and we must take another look at the council tax freeze, certain universal benefits such as free prescription charges and many other aspects. I realise that, every time such an example is brought up, it produces great antibodies both in us and in the general population, but the fact is that we will have to look at options that have not been on the table before. That is the challenge to which we must rise in the next year. Let us remember that, next year, there will still be a real-terms increase in the budget. If the SNP will remember that, I am prepared to accept that of course there is less money than was originally announced.

Is the cabinet secretary willing to urge local authorities that are undertaking school closure exercises, such as the City of Edinburgh Council, to follow the proposed new arrangements that are set out in the first 12 sections of the bill? What would happen if HMIE were to suggest that no educational benefit would accrue from a proposed closure, as I believe is the case in Edinburgh?

I acknowledge the strongly held and sincere views on both sides of the debate and I believe that genuine respect should determine the tone of our proceedings today. This is unlike any other debate in the past 10 years, not least because we are dealing with a quasi-judicial decision by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice rather than with a Government decision. As such, it was a decision that should not have been influenced by political considerations or indeed by what might or might not happen to al-Megrahi when he returned to Tripoli. People have speculated on the cabinet secretary's motivation and we have heard a lot of nonsense about the UK Government influencing the decision. For my part, I take the cabinet secretary at his word and can see no other credible explanation for his decision, which was entirely consistent with sound Scottish legal principles and with compassion, which is a fundamental part of the Scottish legal system.  Some people have been shocked by my praise of the cabinet secretary last week. However, I think that 99 per cent of the public and more would be shocked and bewildered by a political culture that ruled out such praise. I am certainly not ashamed of holding the same views as Nelson Mandela on this or any other matter. Whatever anyone thinks about the cabinet secretary's motivation, his decision was certainly not based on populism, given that widespread opposition could be anticipated. What has taken me aback and surprised many others is the strength of support for the decision, as I have seen for myself in scores of e-mails, letters and comments from constituents and others during the past week. Opinion is far more evenly divided on the issue than some people think is the case. It is divided internationally and it is even divided among the victims' families.

I hope that Mr Brocklebank will have the opportunity to develop in a speech that point, which bears out my point about divided opinion among all sections of the population: at home, abroad and among the victims' families. As members said—Elaine Murray most eloquently—we all feel sympathy with the victims' families, but we must acknowledge that there is division even among the families. We all know the sincerely held and eloquently expressed views of Jim Swire on the matter. In the decision-making process today, we ought to recognise that there is division among all the groups that I mentioned and among political parties. There have been many polls, of which the most recent said that 39 per cent of Labour voters approve of the decision. I know for a fact that many ordinary members of the Labour Party support the cabinet secretary's decision, and some of my party members have communicated directly with the cabinet secretary, without any intervention from me, to make that clear. In recognising that the decision was different from other Government decisions, and indeed was not a Government decision at all, it is entirely appropriate that there should be a free vote today, but irrespective of whether there is a free vote, I will be voting with the Government.

I regret the politicisation of what is a quasi-judicial matter and, for my part, commend the justice secretary for a courageous decision  that is entirely consistent with the principles of Scots law and Christian morality, as evidenced by the widespread support for it of churches across Scotland. Does he share my revulsion at what happened when al-Megrahi returned to Libya, but does he accept that there is nothing that anyone in this Parliament could have done to stop it, and does he agree that it is entirely irrelevant to the rights or wrongs of the original decision?

Does Dr McKee not accept that the Calman commission's income tax proposals will allow the Parliament to invest more in ensuring that the growth of the Scottish economy is the key priority?

I am sure that, when they got up this morning, many of the people who have been involved with the bill for several months—if not, in some cases, years—were tempted to think that it was the beginning of the end, but of course we all know that it is merely the end of the beginning. Recognition of that fact is more crucial to our work on climate change than it is to our work on any other issue that faces us. Tomorrow we must recommit ourselves to delivering on the targets that we have included in the bill during today's historic proceedings, but perhaps for one evening we can take some satisfaction from delivering what is certainly the most important bill of the parliamentary session. Like others, I want to thank a number of people. I thank my constituents, hundreds of whom have shown how important an issue climate change is to them by writing to or contacting me about the bill. I also thank the Stop Climate Chaos Coalition, whose members have not only serviced the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on climate change—of which Shirley-Anne Somerville and I are co-conveners—but more importantly driven many of the developments in the bill through their energetic and unceasing engagement with MSPs on the big issues that we have discussed today. I know that they are slightly disappointed that some of the amendments that they supported have not been agreed to, but I am sure that they will take some satisfaction from the fact that, in many ways, the bill is stronger as a result of their efforts. We must also give credit to two other extremely important groups. Credit is due to the Government, which we should remember was the first Government in the world to go for an 80 per cent target, which was the ideal starting point for debates on the bill. In addition—without being too self-congratulatory—we must give credit to the Parliament. It is invidious to mention too many people, but I would like to single out Des McNulty, who managed to get the domestic effort target into the bill. When it was first introduced, the bill did not contain such a target. We should also thank many people for the development of the interim target, including Sarah Boyack, who lodged an  amendment on the subject. Clearly, individuals in other parties, too, were instrumental in bringing about those developments. The big debates today have been around domestic effort and the interim target. It struck me during the debate and previously that both targets are heavily influenced by emissions trading and that debates on both have been heavily influenced by our understanding of that trading. It was slightly disappointing that there was not more about that crucial issue in the documents that accompany the bill. Perhaps we still have to address that deficiency, because debate on the interim target will clearly continue. The headline today is that we are united on the 42 per cent interim target—and we should take some satisfaction from that—but the focus tomorrow will be on delivery. We know from the delivery plan that reductions of 36 to 37 per cent are in train, but we must look for more because the point of a target is to stretch and change behaviour. I have just looked at the crucial table in the climate change delivery plan that shows what the targets will mean sector by sector. It struck me that the difference between 34 per cent and 42 per cent in the heat sector is the difference between a reduction of 42 per cent and one of 46 per cent by 2020, which is not an enormous or unachievable difference. In transport, the table shows that the difference is between 24 per cent and 33 per cent, which is a bigger difference but, again, not unachievable. Somebody at a lobby in Parliament today said to me that he welcomed the announcement by the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change of the target of 10 per cent of all journeys to be made by bicycle by 2020 but that it had not been included in the delivery plan. Perhaps the minister can comment on that. We can do more, which is the message that we need to focus on in the weeks and months ahead. I am delighted, as I think is everyone in the Parliament, about the amendment on public engagement—amendment 86—being passed. The Government and Parliament alone cannot achieve what the bill seeks, although we must continue to show leadership. Communities and individuals throughout Scotland will do the work in partnership with us. Let us therefore go forward together across the party divides and in partnership with the people.

Why did the minister not lodge an amendment to replace "Act" with "Bill"? He has used the drafting error to introduce a completely new timescale. The section may come into force in goodness knows how many years' time; it depends on the Government.

The wording of amendment 107 refers to the Scottish ministers purchasing units rather than just accounting for them. The more substantive point relates to the assigned amount units to which the minister  referred. It was somewhat disingenuous of him to say that they are an allowance and not a reduction. The fact that they are made available results from a reduction somewhere else in the world. I understand his point, but he did not tell the whole story. As I indicated in my opening speech, we are talking not only about assigned amount units but about emission reduction units under Kyoto joint implementation projects, certified emission reductions from the clean development mechanism, and renewable units under Kyoto on the basis of land use change and forestry. I am slightly reassured by the minister's remarks on sustainable development, but I am not totally persuaded by the case that he made. The minister said that amendment 113 was a way of revisiting the last debate. Given that he won the vote by 60 to 59, it is worth testing the Parliament again, just in case any member happened to be having coffee or in the toilet at the time of the vote. I understand his reasoning, but not deleting section 18A(4) has the potential to create a dangerous loophole. I will press my amendments in the group.

As Des McNulty said in the debate on group 6, carbon credits should be used to meet the emissions reduction targets in the bill only as a last resort. Our first priority must be to reduce our own emissions and take our fair share of the global effort that is required to avoid dangerous climate change. As was also said in the debate on the previous group, the Scottish Government cannot interfere with carbon credits that installations in Scotland purchase under the EU emission trading scheme, but it can ensure that any carbon units that it buys are truly additional and contribute to sustainable development in the countries where they arose. Two major concerns have been levelled at the use of carbon credits under Kyoto mechanisms—whether the clean development mechanism or the joint implementation mechanism. The first concern is about additionality. Academic research from Stanford University has shown that between one third and two thirds of all clean development mechanism offsets represent not real emissions cuts but activities that would have taken place anyway. The second concern relates to sustainable development. The Stern report goes into great detail on some of the problems in implementing  the clean development mechanism. It says that the mechanism is "in its current form ... making only a small difference to investment in long-lived energy and transport infrastructure ... While a substantial international flow of funds is being generated through" the clean development mechanism, "it falls significantly short of the scale and nature of incentives required to reduce future emissions in developing countries." According to the World Bank, only 10 per cent of CDM projects by volume in the 15 months to March this year involved energy efficiency, fuel switch, biomass or other renewables activities, which Stern says are critical to the long-term reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. I would like the Government to give a commitment to take on board those concerns. If the Government has doubts about the credits that it should buy, it can refer to the Gold Standard Foundation, which is an international non-profit organisation that operates a certification scheme for gold-standard carbon credits. Amendment 113 would delete section 18A(4), which allows ministers arbitrarily to designate some categories of credits as not counting against the limit on the Government purchase of credits. In effect, that would make the Government's power to purchase credits unlimited. We recognise and welcome the Government's stated intent to keep the purchase of credits to a minimum, but we call on it to accept that the bill must support that aim and not create loopholes that would allow future Governments to reject that commitment and indulge in the excessive purchasing of credits, at the cost of action in Scotland. Section 18A(4) appears to be a giant loophole, but I look forward to any explanation that the minister has for it. In particular, I look for a commitment in relation to amendment 107. I move amendment 107.

This is the most important debate on the bill; indeed, this has been the key issue throughout the whole process. We all know that cumulative emissions are what matter and that, as a result, early action is crucial.  It looks as if we can show that the Parliament is united around the key issue of the interim target. Of course, there are debates to come about whether it will be modified. I am on the side of the argument that is reluctant to change from 42 per cent. The 34 per cent target was always rather unambitious because the trajectory from 1990, if we had reduced at the rate that we have been reducing, would have led us to a 32 per cent reduction by 2020. We need to be far more ambitious than that. The whole point of a target is to stretch and change behaviour. Of course we must listen to the expert advice, but the experts will be influenced by the policy options that we are prepared to bring forward. That is why the months that follow are crucial. We must think outside the box and be more ambitious in bringing forward policy changes that will make achievable a target that is far more ambitious than 34 per cent. Even the Government's delivery plan shows that far more than 34 per cent can be achieved, so let us concentrate our minds after today to ensure that we do not have to change the 42 per cent target in the bill, which we can all welcome today.

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that he is open-minded about modifying section 7 of the 2004 act so that antisocial behaviour notices can be enforced on landlords? In questions to and correspondence with the Scottish Government, I have so far been told that it has no intention of doing so. If there has been a shift in the Government's position, I very much welcome it.

Given that business, tourism and information technology are central to the Edinburgh economy, is the First Minister as appalled as I am that Edinburgh's Telford College, in my constituency, is talking about axing most of the teaching staff in its departments on those subjects in addition to support staff throughout the college? Will he intervene in that desperate situation, and will he ensure that Telford College gets a fair share of the Westminster consequentials that were announced for further education last week, along with corresponding bursary support, so that more, rather than fewer, students can be taught?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied that the generic community health nurse role being piloted by the review of nursing in the community will be appropriate for delivering its health priorities. (S3O-7233)

Does the minister agree with the majority of nurses that the generic community health nurse model would result in a loss of nursing experience in relation to children, young people and families, and that it would be better to have multidisciplinary community health teams that concentrate on either early years or adults? Will she therefore abandon the evaluation of the review of nursing in the community, given that it will cost £200,000 and will extend problems of recruitment and training until its completion in October 2010? Will she instead spend that money on filling vacancies in community nursing?

Can a modest amount of the expo fund be used to support the Leith festival, given that it has lost some of its commercial sponsorship? Can I encourage members to attend some of the wonderful events that will be on during June in the greatest community arts festival in Scotland?

The cabinet secretary will know of the outstanding success over the past few months of the Spartans Community Football Academy, which has provided facilities for hundreds of young people in my constituency—many of whom would otherwise be on street corners. Does the cabinet secretary share my disappointment that the academy was not successful in the previous round of applications to cashback for communities, and will he ensure that its undoubted success is drawn to the attention of the people who make the decisions in the next round?

I welcome the commitment that the minister gave at a parliamentary reception last night to our internationally acclaimed 2012 homelessness target. Does he realise that the City of Edinburgh Council has said clearly that it cannot meet that target with the level of resources that it receives? Will he not only allocate at least £45 million extra to housing this year but ensure that Edinburgh receives a large portion of that?

I congratulate Margo MacDonald on lodging the motion. I always admire her tenacity and style and I often support the causes that she espouses, but I cannot support the motion this evening. There is a case for a broad-ranging inquiry that investigates the details of everything that happened in the lead-up to the general banking crisis, but there is no case for homing in on one aspect, as Margo MacDonald recommends. The key issue for Edinburgh members and, I am sure, for all other members is the employment situation. John Park emphasised the key question, which is how we protect and preserve as many jobs as possible now. Given that employment and unemployment are probably the key aspects for everyone, it is worth saying that the main banking union, Unite, has always supported the merger. Critics of the merger must take that into account—and perhaps explain it. It is by no means obvious that resisting the merger would have meant more jobs. Like the trade unions, my basic belief is that unemployment would have been higher without the merger and without the wider action that the UK Government took to support the banking sector.

As is obvious, jobs are being lost in the banking crisis; the issue is whether we would have lost more jobs without the intervention. Another point that should be picked up, to which Christine Grahame referred, is that shareholders voted for the merger. The Chancellor of the Exchequer made it clear that funding was not contingent on the deal going through.

I do not have time to give way; I have already taken one intervention. I know what Margo MacDonald wants to say. If I have time at the end, I will take another intervention. We must remember the dire situation that HBOS was in last year. It developed long before the crisis of September; we have heard that internal people warned about the absence of risk controls and we know from figures from the Financial Services Authority that in June last year HBOS's funding gap was greater than that of any other UK bank, at £198 billion. That led to massive reliance on the  wholesale funding markets, which seized up after the collapse of Lehman Brothers on 15 September. Within hours, HBOS shares crashed—the markets decided that the bank was going to go. The fact of the matter is that, without the intervention of and guarantee from the UK Government, the bank would have gone under. It is clear that, without that intervention, we would have had far more job losses, not to mention the devastating effect on the rest of the economy. We have to remember what the situation was like in that critical week in September and applaud what the Government did at the time. Even more than that, we need to acknowledge the wider action that the Government took at the beginning of October to save the banks by way of recapitalisation. Whatever their criticism of the UK Government in other areas, members of other parties should give the Government credit for the decisive action it took at that time to save the banks. In the small amount of time that remains to me, I will focus on the present and the need to save as many jobs as possible. A City of Edinburgh Council meeting on the local economy on Monday of this week heard that Edinburgh is beginning to see beneficial flows of investment, including in the financial sector. One very interesting piece of information is that the Lloyds Banking Group is beginning to see Edinburgh as a centre of excellence, including for its procurement arm and asset management business. We have to look at what happened in terms of swings and roundabouts.

The Climate Change (Scotland) Bill is the most important bill of the parliamentary session and climate change is the most urgent issue of the age. Climate change not only threatens the future of our children and grandchildren, but is already affecting millions of people throughout the world. For example, the UN tells us that in the first five years of this century, 262 million people—of whom 98 per cent were in the developing world—were adversely affected by climate change. So urgent, challenging and potentially unpopular is the issue that we must come together across the political divide to lead together in a new-politics approach, as advocated by Shirley-Anne Somerville. She and I are the co-conveners of the cross-party group on climate change, which is showing how we can act together on the issue across the political divide. Equally crucial is community involvement and action. I am sure that all members have many groups in their constituencies that are acting on  climate change. When we debated eco-congregations on 17 December 2008, I mentioned churches in my constituency, so I will not repeat their names. However, perhaps I can be forgiven for mentioning groups that have won awards from the climate challenge fund—Greener Leith, the North Edinburgh Trust, the Out of the Blue Arts and Education Trust and the Pilmeny Development Project. Those groups illustrate the importance of local people coming together to take action at the grass roots. In due course, the bill should be amended to promote public awareness and engagement in meeting the climate change targets. Of course, the 80 per cent headline target is an excellent start. It is one of the main reasons why the bill was widely welcomed when it was published. However, I was given pause for thought when I read the Royal Society of Edinburgh's submission on the bill, which begins by saying: "The endpoint target of an 80% reduction by 2050 is an irrelevance unless there are appropriate intervening milestones." That encapsulates a main point that has been made by several members, including Sarah Boyack. The key issue for climate change is cumulative emissions. That is why emissions reductions must as far as possible be front-loaded rather than end-loaded, as the bill proposes. In all the submissions that I read, two of the most interesting pages were the last two in the Royal Society of Edinburgh's submission, which incorporate a table—I know that the minister, as a mathematician, will have studied it—that indicates that even with 3 per cent annual reductions starting next year, we would not reach the 80 per cent reduction by 2050. When I read that, I concluded that we certainly need 3 per cent annual reductions without delay. The only good effect of a recession is that it allows an easy start through recession-linked emissions decline. More fundamentally, we must get on urgently with the immediate action that is required on key issues if we are to have any chance of meeting the 2050 target. Many people have flagged up energy efficiency as a key issue on which to get started—we need the Government's energy efficiency action plan without delay. We also need other measures such as the green new deal and the excellent proposals in Sarah Boyack's member's bill. As we scrutinise the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill in the next few months, we must simultaneously develop the programmes and actions without which the bill will be empty rhetoric. I welcome some of the commitments that the Government has made, such as that on the inclusion of aviation and shipping emissions in the national target. We must ensure that a proper  multiplier is placed on aviation emissions from the start, to recognise the greater climate change damage that emissions at altitude cause.

We certainly need expert advice, but we also need radical action on aviation and other forms of transport. Transport is a big concern. Those who read the editorial in The Herald this morning will have seen the quotation from Maf Smith of the Sustainable Development Commission, who said: "Travel is the policy area where there is least alignment between current action and long-term sustainability". At the beginning of my speech, I referred to unpopular action, which we need. Aviation issues will not be solved just by using the planes to which the minister referred. We also need action on car travel, as well as the promotion of public transport. We must quantify emissions reductions in the transport sector, as in other major sectors, such as energy generation and energy efficiency. I welcome the limits on international credits. It is right that at least 80 per cent of emissions reductions should be achieved by domestic effort. I hope that that will be put in the bill. Finally and crucially, part of the acting together that I emphasised at the outset must be action by other public bodies. An enforceable duty must be placed on such bodies to reduce emissions in line with national targets. I hope that the minister will look seriously at Oxfam Scotland and Friends of the Earth Scotland's proposals for a public sector budgetary regime that involves incentives and disincentives.

Can Gavin Brown explain why at no point until the start of the recession has the debt level under the Labour Government been as high as the 43 per cent of GDP that it inherited when it came to power? Does that not demolish everything that he and Alex Johnstone have said this afternoon?

The Government motion begins with an absurd unqualified condemnation of the budget. I will return to that towards the end of my speech if I have time, but I will focus first on two distortions of reality that follow in the motion, which might be quite good politics but are appalling economics. The first is the statement that the debt situation is the "product of poor financial management".  It is difficult to see what the SNP would have done in a similar situation, given the international economic difficulties that we face. A key element of the budget deficit is the fiscal stimulus and the money to save the banks, but, of course, we know that the SNP Government supports that.

I might come on to that as I analyse the budget deficit, but I should point out that the Tories did not support the fiscal stimulus. The fact of the matter is that the 4 per cent contraction of the economy this year would have been far worse without a fiscal stimulus package. One leading economist had estimated that the contraction would be as much as 8 per cent. The second and more substantial element of the budget deficit is what are called the automatic stabilisers: public expenditure has to go up to deal with unemployment and other features of the recession. Even the Conservatives would have had to accept that—indeed, they would have had far more to pay, because there would have been much more unemployment. The third element of the budget deficit is the lost tax revenues. There are grounds for concern there. The Institute for Fiscal Studies analysis points out that there is a structural budget deficit now because there has been what it regards as permanent damage to the economy, because of the recession, and particularly because of the effect on the financial sector. That is a deep worry for us all, but it certainly cannot be attributed to any "poor financial management" by the UK Government. If the Government had not saved the banks, the situation would have been a whole lot worse and the budget deficit would have been a great deal more. Where exactly is the "poor financial management"? Derek Brownlee referred to earlier years, but for all the years between 1997 and 2008 the UK Government kept debt below 40 per cent of gross domestic product. During the past 10 years I certainly did not hear from the SNP or, come to think of it, from the Conservatives in this Parliament, complaints about the growth of public expenditure; in fact, many members of those parties were calling for more. I do not think that the statement in the motion blaming the Labour Government for the deficit as a result of "poor financial management" has any shred of truth in it whatever. An element of the fiscal stimulus with which both the Scottish Government—or, at least, sections of  the SNP—and the Conservatives disagree is the VAT element. I do not think that I have to repeat what Andy Kerr said about that. The Centre for Economic and Business Research, which is one of the bodies that analysed the VAT element, said in its report that turnover will be between £8 billion and £9 billion higher this year because of the VAT measure. That has clearly been of substantial benefit to the economy. The higher sales will in themselves generate higher taxes, so the overall cost at the end will probably be less than the £12.5 billion that was announced when the measure was introduced. The second distortion that we have heard repeatedly over the past few weeks is the idea that a £500 million reduction will lead to real-terms cuts next year. First, the figure is not £500 million unless we include the health capital expenditure, which the UK Government has dealt with in end-year flexibility. Setting that aside, there will not be real-terms cuts. I do not think that I have to repeat all the arguments that have been well put by various members, but we can arrive at the idea of a real-terms cut only by taking the brought-forward capital expenditure as something that is only in this year's budget. We have to look at capital expenditure over two years. In that way, it is as planned. The best way that I can illustrate the real situation is by referring to page 241 of the Treasury's red book, which the First Minister himself used as his main ammunition last week to establish a cut. If we take out the capital expenditure—we all know that the Scottish Government is playing funding games with that—and look at resource expenditure in everyday health and education budgets and so on, which people are mostly worried about, according to the same page as the First Minister quoted from, the Scottish Government will have a 1.3 per cent real-terms increase in resource expenditure next year. Nobody wants reductions in public expenditure, but surely the SNP can give us a little hint of what action it would take to rein in the budget deficit. Of course, the SNP has mentioned Trident and identity cards, on which colleagues will not be surprised that I agree with John Swinney, as does my former colleague Stephen Byers. However, the fact is that cutting such spending would not solve the problem that the cabinet secretary describes. Spending on Trident does not start until 2012 and is spread over 10 years, so to pretend to the Scottish public that cutting that would deal with all the issues is dishonest. My time is up. I had wanted to deal with the many good points of the budget that the motion ignores, but I will leave it to my colleagues to talk about them.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has considered the various options for regulation of houses in multiple occupation with particular reference to addressing the problem of antisocial behaviour in short-term lets. (S3O-6716)

As the minister will know, I wrote to him a few weeks ago asking him to consider various options for dealing with antisocial behaviour in short-term lets. Why will he not bring such lets into the HMO licensing regime so that action can be taken when there is a persistent problem, as with the stag and hen weekends at Western Harbour in my constituency? Over and above that, why will the Scottish Government not consider modifying by order part 7 of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 to ensure that antisocial behaviour notices can be served on the landlords of such properties?

I want to speak briefly about the overall level of resources available for housing and in more detail about the distribution of that money, with particular reference to Edinburgh. I welcome Alex Neil to his first housing debate as minister, and I welcome his new ministerial style, as mentioned by Ross Finnie. Of course, I acknowledge the high level of resources that the minister has been able to announce for housing this year, although it is clear that he has been able to make the announcement because of the money that has rightly been brought forward from next year's budget. I do not think that the minister should get too carried away by the figure—or by some of the other figures that he has been quoting recently in relation to approvals and completions. The downside of bringing money forward—although it was the right thing to do—is that a lot less money will be available for housing next year. That is why it is so important that the Scottish Government earmarks for housing the £45 million of consequentials from the UK budget. I was disappointed that the minister did not announce  that in his opening speech; I hope that he will do so in his closing speech. It is right to skew capital expenditure to housing. Harder times are coming for public expenditure, so it will be more important than ever to pick the right priorities. Emphasising capital expenditure on housing over other areas of expenditure is important for three reasons. First, it is socially just and necessary, especially when many people are losing their homes; secondly, it is economically important, as the minister has said; and thirdly, it will be essential if we are to achieve the historic 2012 homelessness target. As I am sure SNP members will acknowledge, of the several important achievements during the first years of the Scottish Parliament, the homelessness commitment is the achievement that is most appreciated and recognised internationally. We should all realise our obligation to meet that commitment in three years' time. In light of that target, I want to talk about distribution. In the next three years in particular, we will have to skew the distribution of housing resources with the objective of achieving the 2012 homelessness target. First, all local authorities will have an obligation to house all unintentionally homeless people, and we will need to ensure that each local authority has the resources to do that. Secondly, we will have to ensure that local authorities can do that without an excessively high percentage of new lets going to homeless people, because many others will have a clear and legitimate claim to council housing or other forms of social rented housing. Edinburgh cannot achieve the homelessness target. The council stated that explicitly in its homelessness strategy, and Cathy King repeated it at the Local Government and Communities Committee a few weeks ago: it cannot meet its target with its current resources. I should add that the council is already allocating two thirds of its lets to priority-need homeless people, which is twice the national average. The simple reason for that is the chronic shortage of supply in Edinburgh—a shortage that is by far the worst in Scotland, according to analysis done for the Scottish Government by Bramley a year or two ago. For every council house that becomes available in Edinburgh, there are 154 people seeking it. The result, of course, is that many people are disappointed. Furthermore, because of the emphasis that has to be put on homelessness, thousands of people in Edinburgh cannot move out of their overcrowded homes. The problem is compounded by the fact that not enough larger houses are available. The situation is masked to some extent by a successful private sector leasing scheme in  Edinburgh. However, when people are placed in a private sector leasing property, it does not meet the homelessness obligation. Other problems arise too. For example, high rents mean that people cannot move into work—just last Saturday, somebody talked to me about that at one of my surgeries.

I do not have time; I have only one minute and 40 seconds, so I will have to conclude. I acknowledge that the problem is not new. Although housing resources to Edinburgh increased in the latter years of the previous Administration, that increase had to be built on. Since that time, £1.8 million of the £40 million that was brought forward last year went to Edinburgh; £1 million of the £25 million for council houses went to Edinburgh; and—I acknowledge—£5 million extra went in this year, as well as money that has been brought forward from next year for land at Saughton. There are concerns that that money will be taken off next year's budget. I hope that the minister will be able to reassure us about that. I actually do have time for an intervention from Mr McLetchie.

It does not prevent them from getting proper housing; it prevents many of them from moving into well-paid work. That is the problem. There is cross-party agreement in Edinburgh that Edinburgh needs substantial extra resources. I know that the leaders of the SNP and the Liberal Democrat groups met Alex Neil recently to put that case. I make the case for a substantial amount of the £45 million going to Edinburgh, and more next year. More generally, I make the plea that housing resources over the next three years should be distributed on the basis of supply shortages and with the objective of ensuring that every local authority, including the City of Edinburgh Council, can meet its 2012 obligation.

I emphasise to the minister how serious the problem is in developments such as Western Harbour in my constituency, where a large number of stag and hen weekends are based. The people who are trying to impose the law are telling us that there is a problem with the legislation, so will the minister undertake at least to examine the problem and to consider options to address it? It is an increasing problem, and it came up at the local community council last night.

If the cabinet secretary's interpretation is correct, will the same not apply to any private finance that is secured by the Scottish  Futures Trust? In any case, is it not more likely that the projects will count on balance sheet but not against the departmental expenditure limit capital budget?

I congratulate Shirley-Anne Somerville on securing this important debate. She  and I are co-conveners of the cross-party group on climate change. Like her, I warmly endorse this Saturday's important initiative. As an Edinburgh MSP, I am pleased that so many buildings in this city will be shrouded in darkness at 8.30 on Saturday evening. I congratulate City of Edinburgh Council and the many businesses and schools in my constituency that have signed up for earth hour. I will not restate all the buildings that Shirley-Anne Somerville mentioned, but I will mention that three schools in my constituency—Broughton primary school, Leith primary school and Stockbridge primary school—are taking part in the initiative in a slightly different way by spending an hour for the earth this week in learning about climate change. The schools are also encouraging pupils to take part at home during the event itself. In this crucial year for climate change, earth hour will be an important symbolic moment but it could also have a significant effect. We all know that the radical action that is required on climate change needs commitment both by Government and by individuals and local communities. Earth hour will not only indicate the commitment of thousands of people to action on climate change, but encourage others who are not so committed to think about the issue. The fact of the matter is that we still have a great deal to do to get the climate change message across. The Scottish Government, like the Government in London, is showing leadership on that, but we clearly need individuals to respond in their own lives as well. I hope and believe that this Saturday's initiative will help to galvanise people to take action this year and in the years that follow. Clearly, this is a crucial year for climate change both in Scotland, given the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill that has been introduced, and internationally, given the Copenhagen meeting that will take place towards the end of the year. We need to ensure that this year is an important turning point for this country and for the world in recognising the scale of the action that is required. This evening is not the time for a detailed discussion of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, which we all look forward to considering in the months ahead. Like other members, I have followed the bill's committee process, which has been very good and has involved a lot of evidence taking. In reading the oral evidence that the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change gave to the committee, I was encouraged to see that he is open-minded about strengthening the bill. I believe—I will make this one point—that it is particularly important that the bill is strengthened in terms that provide for more ambitious targets over the next 10 years. We all know that the cumulative amount of emissions is  what matters. If we do not begin to take radical action now, total emissions will obviously be far worse come 2020 and the following decades. We have all committed ourselves over the next few months to considering the bill, which is possibly the most important piece of legislation that we will deal with in the current parliamentary session. I hope that this Saturday's initiative will not only help to galvanise us MSPs but encourage the population to take action to support the measures that the Government is taking and, indeed, to demand stronger action from the Scottish and UK Governments. I congratulate the organisers of earth hour, which I am sure will be of great international significance. I hope that we can all build on the event to make 2009 a critical and defining year in the battle against climate change.

Does the cabinet secretary accept that the co-payment arrangements that she has announced today will be tolerable only if universal access to new drugs is extended rather than reduced? In that regard, will she vigorously pursue a range of risk-sharing arrangements with the various pharmaceutical companies, whether it is a free first cycle of treatment, such as is being  offered in England with the kidney cancer drug Sutent, or the more typical risk-sharing arrangement that pertains, for example, in relation to the myeloma drug Velcade?

Science is the key to Scotland's future prosperity, central to our understanding of the world, the gateway to many employment opportunities and endlessly fascinating and exciting yet, for many, it is a closed book and an unknown world. Some people were perhaps turned off science at school, whereas others may be stuck in a two-cultures time warp, precisely 50 years after C P Snow's landmark lecture. Whatever the reason, science should be for all and for life. Of course, not everyone will be a scientist, but everyone should have a basic understanding of science and should be able to engage as a stakeholder in the many science-related issues and debates that confront us all. The key to all that is, of course, what happens at school. I welcome the marketing strategy that the  cabinet secretary launched at Trinity academy in my constituency a few weeks ago. However, I am sure that she will agree that the curriculum and the teachers are central. Science, in addition to literacy and numeracy, should have core status in the curriculum, as it has in England. It should be far more prominent in primary schools and it must be central to the secondary school curriculum. We should all be concerned by the findings of the recent trends in international mathematics and science study—TIMSS—report that Scotland is falling behind, particularly in the primary 5 to secondary 2 age bracket. One reason for that is that very few primary teachers have a science background. Action is already being taken at some schools in my constituency to deal with that by linking primary schools with secondary school science teachers. The Government should consider seriously the suggestions by the former assistant chief inspector of education Jack Jackson that we need a new cohort of science teachers working across the primary-secondary interface. He has also floated the idea of a quota whereby 20 per cent of primary teachers in training would have science degrees, as well as the idea that primary teachers should be taught science as part of their university training. Those suggestions must be considered seriously.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that welcome information. As other members have said, good-quality CPD in science is crucial for primary as well as secondary teachers. Good programmes are available from the Scottish Schools Equipment Research Centre. CPD for secondary teachers is particularly urgent because of the curriculum for excellence. One factor in the genesis of the curriculum for excellence was the need to do something about science in secondary 1 and 2, but there is a big concern, most clearly articulated a few months ago by the Royal Society of Edinburgh, about the science part of the curriculum for excellence. I know that the situation has moved on since then, but it would be good to hear from the cabinet secretary where that debate has got to. In summary, the Royal Society of Edinburgh was positive about the underlying principles of the curriculum for excellence and broadly supportive of its defined learning outcomes, but it was very concerned that, in the rush to cross-disciplinary working, insufficient attention would be paid to the  building blocks of the individual subject disciplines. The society also indicated that, without a common understanding of the structure of the curriculum, there was a danger of different agendas developing across Scotland. I would welcome the cabinet secretary's comments on the situation following her discussions with the society. What happens in higher education is equally important; when it comes to making or exploiting leading-edge innovation, it is more important than what happens in schools. The big worry is how Scotland can match the increasing resources that are coming to English universities for scientific research and other areas. As our amendment indicates, UK-level integration and UK research council funding are important, and the strategy should address how we maximise the benefit of that. However, there is still the wider issue of university funding. Sooner or later, the Scottish Government will have to initiate a major review of the issue, as called for again by Dr Brian Lang at last week's meeting of the proposed cross-party group on the Scottish universities. An equally important and related issue is the effect of science on the wider economy. The cabinet secretary flagged up some of the problems—for example, when she pointed out the low level of business expenditure on R and D. Central to the science framework are those pages that list the many actions that are being taken in the area, mainly by Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, such as supporting science-based business innovation. I hope that those actions will be implemented with great urgency. We should not get too depressed and should recognise the progress that has been made in connecting the universities with businesses—an issue that was highlighted by Linda Fabiani. We should also recognise the great successes that have been achieved in recent years, especially in the life sciences. What we need to do, especially in these difficult economic times, is to build on the solid foundations that have been laid. Dundee's success is often cited, but Edinburgh has also made great strides. Further development of the life sciences may be particularly important for Edinburgh now that financial services are under such pressure. In conclusion, I welcome the summit that is shortly to take place on the issue. I welcome the fact that Jack Jackson will be present and hope that the summit will be as inclusive as possible. I do not know whether Opposition spokespeople have been invited, but I suggest that they ought to be.

I acknowledge the increase for Edinburgh, which has been achieved by bringing forward money from 2010-11. Will there be a corresponding reduction from the pre-announced indicative allocation for Edinburgh for 2010-11, or will the minister move speedily on to a new distribution formula that pays proper regard to the shortage of affordable housing as the key indicator?

While welcoming the bill, does the cabinet secretary understand the concern of nurses that, under the alternative pilots outlined in her letter of 4 March, there may not be a position for a nurse director? Given how long and hard  they fought for that position, can she guarantee that there will continue to be a nurse director on the board under any alternative pilot?

I welcome Michael Russell to his first question time as Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution. I hope that  the omission of the word "Europe" from his title is not of any significance. Will the minister turn his attention to the accelerated procedures under the public procurement directive that were triggered within the past three months by the Commission and Council of Ministers because of the exceptional nature of the current economic situation? Will he explain why the Scottish Government's response to that is so unremittingly negative in tone? The Scottish procurement policy note is almost an exercise in giving reasons not to employ the accelerated procedures.

I support the Labour amendment, but I want to speak to two other aspects: the position of Edinburgh in the national planning framework and the extent to which public participation was satisfactory. I believe that the national planning framework ought to be modified to take account of Edinburgh's position as capital city and its significant role as an engine of economic growth for Scotland. It is the only city in Scotland whose population is going to expand considerably over the next few years, and the national planning framework must reflect the resulting pressure on infrastructure such as housing and transport. I therefore support the City of Edinburgh Council's proposed additions after paragraph 185 of NPF 2, which include reference to the tram as a key  element of transport infrastructure. There should also be an addition at the end of paragraph 74 to emphasise that the housing investment programme must reflect the geography of affordable housing need that is described in that paragraph and the surrounding paragraphs. It is not just Edinburgh in general that is not given proper recognition in the national planning framework, but the waterfront in particular, much of which is in my constituency. The waterfront should be included in the list in paragraph 57 of key locations that offer substantial strategic growth potential.

There will be lots of planning issues. The whole point of the national planning framework is to identify sites of national strategic importance. I believe that the list in paragraph 57 does that and that the waterfront should be added to it. I also believe that it should be in the list in paragraph 184 of areas where co-ordinated action is needed in the national interest. It is astonishing that, in the assessment matrix document, we are told that the waterfront is not an infrastructure project. The fact of the matter is that the waterfront requires a substantial infrastructure package, and national planning framework documents should reflect the infrastructure that is needed. That will involve road networks, drainage, public rail and the tram—which I have already mentioned—as well as new lock gates at Leith for smaller vessels and the renewal of coastal defences. I could go on. The council has been in discussions with the Scottish Government about the matter and has estimated that public infrastructure investment of just under £500 million is required for the waterfront to realise its full potential. It also estimates that that public sector spending would unlock private sector investment of £6 billion. Tax increment financing has been proposed by the council as a way of financing that infrastructure. I hope that the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will sympathetically consider the council's proposals. The main point at issue is the fact that the framework should recognise the waterfront as a key location for which infrastructure development is crucial. Finally, the following words should be added to the fifth sentence of paragraph 186: "and help to regenerate adjacent communities."  In describing the waterfront—albeit inadequately—NPF 2 does not recognise the waterfront's important role in regenerating the existing communities in Pilton, Granton and Leith. The cabinet secretary referred to participation in his recent speech and invoked Planning Aid for Scotland in defence of the consultation process. All that we can say in response to that is that there are different views, which are reflected in the committee's report. For example, although Veronica Burbridge of the Royal Town Planning Institute believed that the early stages of the consultation were satisfactory, she pointed out that the consultation was completely unsatisfactory in relation to the national developments. Those developments are crucial, because their need will be established by the framework, and there will be no other opportunity for communities to involve themselves in the discussion of need. There are, of course, stronger critiques of the participation work. The Buckingham, Hamilton and Ruskin Association is quoted on page 17 of the committee's report. Most significantly, my constituent Clare Symonds undertook a comprehensive analysis and critique of the whole process, which was presented to the committee. Members should take that critique very seriously. The fact is that we are in the early stages of doing planning consultation and participation satisfactorily. Great strides have been made in planning legislation to flag up the importance of consultation and participation, but we should be realistic and accept the fact that we do not yet know how to do that in a totally adequate way. The recommendations in Clare Symonds's report should be taken seriously. Some say, "Oh, but she only talked to 11 people," but the 11 people were involved. Also, Ms Symonds made 54 freedom of information requests. Her conclusions stand up to scrutiny. For example, she points out that the participation statement says that there should be wide representation of all groups, including groups from the community sector and various equality groups. She does not feel that that criterion was met. The participation statement should have made clear at an early stage how people could get involved. It failed on that front. There are lessons to be learned; let us learn them.

In welcoming Alex Neil to his new post, I tell him that he has an opportunity to make a name for himself by ensuring that we are on course to meet the 2012 target by the end of the current session. However, the City of Edinburgh Council has no chance whatever of meeting that target with its current level of resources. As his first good deed, will he ensure that sufficient additional resources are given to the City of Edinburgh Council to make it possible for Edinburgh to meet that historic and internationally acclaimed target?

The cabinet secretary is aware that there are 30,000 financial services jobs in Edinburgh and he may be aware that senior officials of the City of Edinburgh Council are already actively involved with partners in retaining jobs and promoting the abundant skills to be found in Edinburgh. How will he ensure that the task force works alongside and co-operates with that important work that is already being carried out?

I, too, speak as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee. We should recognise this as the first time that we have debated carers from an equal opportunities perspective as well as from the more normal health and social care perspective that we have adopted over the past 10 years. The act that set up the Northern Ireland Assembly placed on public authorities in Northern Ireland an equal opportunities duty in relation to  carers. It is perhaps unfortunate that the Scotland Act 1998 did not do the same for Scotland, but it is not the legal obligation that matters—although such an obligation may be placed on us through a recent European Court of Justice ruling. We must take action because it is the right thing to do and because society depends on carers to such an enormous extent. Margaret Mitchell cited the figure of £7.6 billion saved from public expenditure by their work. We will all want to pay tribute to the work of carers, some of whom are in the public gallery today. The evidence that we heard in our sessions was important, and I hope that it will feed into the forthcoming revised carer strategy. One of the key messages that we heard—it was disappointing for me to hear it—was that we do not have a partnership with carers, despite the fact that, on paper, the basis for carers policy over the past few years has been to have a partnership with carers. To a great extent, the fundamental cultural change has still to happen: we were told that too often the contribution of carers was assumed rather than negotiated by health and social care professionals. Another disappointing piece of information was that there was such a low take-up of carer assessments—some members will remember that they were at the heart of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002. Furthermore, there is nothing in the guidance that says that, when assessments take place, social workers should take account of carers' employment and education needs. That is required in England, and we should certainly look to ensure that it is required in Scotland—in addition, of course, to addressing the more fundamental point that action has to be taken on those assessments. A further concern is the variation among local authorities in what they do for carers and the fact that the defined outcomes under the single outcome agreements rarely indicate anything to do with carers. That leads us on to the national minimum standards on short breaks—although such standards could of course apply to other aspects of support for carers. We welcome the £4 million extra for short breaks that the minister recently announced, but at the committee's hearings witnesses made the more general point that there needs to be far more flexibility in how short breaks are provided. The minister talked about personalisation and taking account of carers' needs. I hope that the new guidance that she issued recently will help to ensure that that becomes a reality. We were also told that, in the minds of carers, advice and information are second only to short breaks. We welcome what the minister said about money to health boards and work on information and support for carers, and I hope that the  Scottish Government will consider the suggestion that there should be a national helpline for carers, which would be similar to the helpline that I think is about to be established in England. Carers themselves made that suggestion. The key message is that we must address the need for support for carers now. We all know that we are entering a period in which public expenditure will come under more pressure, but it would be madness to cut support for carers. In simple public expenditure terms—as Margaret Mitchell reminded us when she talked about the £7.6 billion that carers save the Scottish economy—the right thing to do is to provide more support to carers.

Will the cabinet secretary tell us approximately when announcements will be made  about the £80 million that is being brought forward to next year? Will she also tell us whether the indicative housing allocations that were given to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on Monday contained any of that £80 million?

Does the cabinet secretary accept that increased levels of borrowing by the UK Government have had a positive effect on Scottish banks, consumers and public services? If so, does he also accept that those increased levels of borrowing will have an effect in due course on levels of public expenditure?

The cabinet secretary welcomed this week's statement by Councillor Marilyne MacLaren that there would be no further cuts to devolved school budgets in Edinburgh, but does she realise that there will still be significant reductions in education expenditure, including fewer teachers next year? How can we have smaller class sizes and fewer teachers?

As I said in the economics debate two weeks ago, although I support the introduction of borrowing powers for the Scottish Parliament, we have to consider them as part of the more general debate on fiscal powers. We also have to beware of regarding them as a panacea.  There are two obvious but important reasons why borrowing powers cannot be a panacea. First, we would have to pay back any borrowing from what will inevitably be tighter budgets over the next few years. Secondly—the SNP might not be happy about this—any borrowing that we undertake would be part of UK borrowing, which cannot expand without limit, partly because of our membership of the European Union and partly for sound macroeconomic reasons. We benefit substantially from UK borrowing at the moment. It is important to say that in this debate because the impression might be given by some people that because we do not have borrowing powers we cannot benefit from borrowing. The reality is that because of the UK Government's borrowing, which the Conservatives have been so critical of, Scottish consumers, Scottish banks and Scottish public services are benefiting, as we heard once again in the budget debate yesterday. The Liberal Democrats will be pleased to hear that the Scottish Labour Party will make a submission to the Calman report, so they do not need to intervene during my speech to ask about that. My view is that we should support borrowing powers for Scotland, but only as part of a package of fiscal changes. Individuals can contribute their views to that debate, but I believe that we need a combination of fiscal changes that would involve some assigned taxes, some devolved taxes and some remaining grant for this Parliament. If Calman produced a package of that kind, we would need borrowing powers to smooth over revenue fluctuations. Obviously, one of the purposes of borrowing powers even at the UK level is to deal with declining tax revenues. As the Calman report implies quite clearly in the section on borrowing powers, the main purpose of borrowing powers is to benefit capital spending. The Forth bridge is the example that has been quoted most recently. The debate is important in the context of public-private partnership projects going on balance sheet, but the effect of that move on the Scottish budget is perhaps not as simple or as stark as the Scottish Government has been saying. We have not yet had the Treasury guidance on that, but it would be helpful if it were produced as quickly as possible.

I agree that that guidance would be helpful, but the corollary is that the  Scottish Government should not speak publicly as if it knows for certain that the move will have the drastic effect that it has described. I have only half a minute left in which to say that there has been a significant change since 1998. David Stewart referred to the limited provisions in sections 66 and 67 of the Scotland Act 1998. Since then, the growing awareness of the need for more financial powers for this Parliament and other, related developments, such as prudential borrowing for local authorities, mean that the time is right for the Parliament to have some limited borrowing powers. However, they must be considered in the round and in the context of the Calman commission.

Will the minister join me in congratulating the active Leith project and the north Edinburgh community climate change initiative on their success in the latest round of the fund? Does he agree that community grass-roots action, as demonstrated by both those initiatives, is vital in the battle against climate change? Will he do everything he can to promote the fund and to ensure that there are no underspends, so that carbon savings can be achieved in communities across Scotland?

I welcome the report of the Council of Economic Advisers. We should be grateful to the economists for giving up their time—although sometimes it would be good to hear about matters on which they disagree as well as matters on which they agree. There was certainly agreement on productivity, in all its aspects. I am sure that most members agree strongly with the section of the report that deals with productivity, although it is clear that members of the Labour Party have big concerns about skills and training, which I am sure will feature prominently during the next few days, as we approach the climax of the budget process. When the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth winds up the debate, it would be useful if he could reflect on the significant figures on new apprenticeships this year, which John Park mentioned—10,500 in Scotland and 225,000 in England—and tell us when the skills strategy will be brought back to the Parliament. Infrastructure investment, which features prominently in the report, is always important but is especially important now, as a key ingredient of fiscal stimulus. We have heard much about borrowing powers from members of the Government party, but we have heard nothing about the delays that have undoubtedly occurred as a result of the hiatus between public-private partnerships and the Scottish Futures Trust. I strongly support borrowing powers for the Scottish Parliament and I hope that the Calman commission on Scottish devolution will make recommendations on borrowing and other fiscal powers for the Parliament. However, support for such a position in no way excuses the delays in bringing forward infrastructure projects. When the cabinet secretary winds up the debate, it would be good to hear why not a single project or business plan was approved and not a single contract was signed last year during the eight months from March to October inclusive. I have never had an answer to that question and I would welcome one.

We must await the Calman recommendations. I hope that the SNP will swing behind them when they are made. Planning features prominently in the report. I support what Wendy Alexander said about the need to continue to publish information on local authority performance. We should also get on as quickly as possible with the implementation of  planning legislation, which has slipped somewhat. In the section on planning, the council made an interesting comment about financial incentives to local authorities to promote sustainable development. I would be interested to hear the cabinet secretary's comments on that—I am sorry to ask him to respond to so many points—given that in its response to the report, the Scottish Government appeared to be at least open-minded if not positive about tax increment financing. There have been discussions about funding tramline 1B, which would run to Granton, in my constituency, and is crucial for the area's development, through tax increment financing, based on regeneration of the waterfront, and it would be useful to hear the cabinet secretary's comments on that. If he has no time to give his view on the matter during his speech, I would welcome a written response. The emissions target is crucial in the report and crucial to our policy deliberations. The two massive challenges that we face, above all, are how we get the economy out of recession and how we proceed towards achieving the 80 per cent reduction without compromise or dilution of the target. We must be entirely pragmatic and open-minded about nuclear power and we must clearly separate that issue from the nuclear weapons issue. Members who are as old as I am know that we used to connect the issues decades ago, when there were good reasons to do so. However, they are separate issues and we should strongly support the advisers' recommendation that the Scottish Government commission "an independent assessment of the full economic costs and abatement potential of the various energy options open to Scotland." Such an assessment would have to be genuinely independent. Concerns have been expressed that the First Minister might try to have an assessment that was slightly less than independent. Patrick Harvie will be shocked that I am even open-minded on nuclear power, but if a radical environmentalist such as George Monbiot—there is no more radical environmentalist—can be open-minded without being enthusiastic about the matter, that is good enough for me. I hope that it will be good enough for the Scottish Government, too.

I am certain that nuclear is no panacea. There are great dangers in thinking that nuclear is a substitute for everything else.  We welcome the Scottish Government's emphasis on renewables, but reducing demand is also central. I highlight the report's recommendation on better insulation of the housing stock, which is crucial. My final question to the cabinet secretary is this: when will the long-awaited energy efficiency strategy be published?

I congratulate Mary Mulligan on securing this important debate, but it is even more important to congratulate Shelter Scotland on the enormous contribution it has made to Scottish society over the past 40 years. The motion in Mary Mulligan's name describes clearly the different aspects of Shelter's work. More than any other organisation, Shelter is the organisation that has spoken out on behalf of those who are homeless. It has also been at the cutting edge of service development over the years and played a key role in many important policy developments. I am thinking in particular of the policy on homelessness that the Parliament developed in its early years. A little-mentioned feature of the Scottish Parliament is the way in which the Government—the present Government and previous Governments—uses and draws upon the experience and expertise of outside agencies in its work. With all due respect to colleagues, the homelessness legislation would not have come into being were it not for the determination of Shelter, in particular, and other lobbyists who ensured that the Parliament took the issue seriously. When I had responsibility for housing, I always appreciated Shelter's work. A feature of the organisation is its ability to work productively with Government and, at the same time, to challenge it. In its briefing for today's debate, Shelter said that it  has always had good relations with Governments of different parties. I know that to be the case. My relationship with Shelter has always been positive. The best tribute that we can pay to Shelter at this time is to rededicate ourselves to the 2012 target. Of course we should remember its work over the past 40 years in the debate tonight—other members have detailed its many achievements over that time and that is the primary purpose of the debate—but I am sure that it would not want us to dwell on the past, because there is still so much to do. People in society—perhaps even some members—may feel that, with all the other difficulties that we face in the economy now and in the coming period, we should not press ahead with the 2012 target, but I hope and believe that the majority of members do not take that view. In fact, there are extra opportunities at present: land is cheap and capital expenditure on housing has been brought forward. We have an opportunity to meet the 2012 target and should rededicate ourselves to it tonight. This is not an evening for political speeches—it is certainly not an evening for party-political speeches—but I hope that in its housing policy the Government, which is committed to delivering the target, will devote itself single-mindedly to doing so and ensure that its housing resources are focused more on that than on anything else. The best tribute that we can pay to Shelter is to deliver the 2012 target; if we do, it will be one of the Parliament's greatest achievements. I hope that tonight, in celebrating the past 40 years, we will also rededicate ourselves to that task.

Given that one of the weaknesses of the current mortgage to rent scheme is the requirement for legal action to be imminent, will the minister tell us when people will be able to apply to each of the schemes, and also what the maximum value of the house can be for someone to be eligible for the schemes?

It was about the maximum value of the house.

I am not arguing for the option, but is the cabinet secretary absolutely sure that it would be a hit on the Scottish budget in one year? If he is, would not that scupper his Scottish Futures Trust as much as PPP?

I welcome the significant acceleration of housing expenditure for 2009-10. However, not a penny of that additional money will go to Edinburgh. How can the minister justify that? Given that we are moving towards our historic 2012 homelessness target, does the minister accept that the City of Edinburgh Council faces by far the biggest challenge, because Edinburgh has by far the biggest shortage of affordable rented housing? Surely Edinburgh desperately needs money in 2009-10, as well as in subsequent years.

Given that a significant financial pressure on the NHS is caused by the provision of new cancer drugs, can the cabinet secretary update us on progress on innovative arrangements with pharmaceutical companies to make the drugs available cheaper? Can she also tell us how many responses she has had to her consultation on the arrangements for NHS patients receiving private health care, which relates mainly to cancer drugs? On that final point, does she think that it was reasonable for the consultation  period on such a controversial measure to last only from 12 December to 12 January?

Although I accept the need for accountability to the health minister, is not there something inconsistent about having directly elected members who can be dismissed by that minister? I make that point despite my support for the general principles of the bill.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate Des McNulty on securing this important debate, and I offer even more congratulations to the 200 congregations  throughout Scotland that have registered to become eco-congregations. I am sure that members will forgive me for picking out the seven of those 200 that happen to be in my constituency. I pay tribute to St Serf's, South Leith parish church, St Andrew's and St George's, St James's Leith, St Paul's and St George's, Stockbridge parish church and Wardie parish church. I congratulate Wardie parish church congregation in particular on having recently received its second award—I am told that only six congregations in Scotland have achieved that. Having heard from many members of those churches and having looked into the matter, I am struck by the enormous amount of work and commitment that is involved in the eco-congregation scheme. An award is not gained easily—congregations have to work through a series of modules. Some of those are to do with the church buildings, for example, while others are about reaching out into the life of the community and carrying out environment-related work in that context. In Edinburgh, a network of churches—I believe that it is the same elsewhere—ensures systematic organisation of the eco-congregations. We should acknowledge the significant work that they are doing. It is an example of the churches showing leadership, sometimes on issues on which the majority of opinion is not always on their side. They have, for example, shown leadership on international development and nuclear weapons, and they are now showing leadership on climate change. That is particularly important because, as we all know, and given the enormous challenges that we face in relation to climate change, Government cannot bring about changes on its own. We should pay tribute to the Governments in London and Edinburgh for the leadership that they are showing, but we cannot make the advances that are required unless people take action in their own lives. It is important that we have more community-based initiatives to get people to change their lifestyles in relation to climate change. In many cases, it is difficult or challenging for Governments to deal with climate change, because the people are not always signed up to the changes. It is different, in that sense, from international development and other movements that grew up from below and put pressure on Governments. Governments are showing leadership on climate change, but it is difficult in many cases to take action for fear of alienating the public, which is why it is important that there are groups that are active in the community and which are putting pressure on politicians, showing leadership and trying to spread the message through community engagement at local level.  In that context, the eco-congregation movement is important. We face no greater challenge in this century than the challenge of climate change, and the more grass-roots initiatives, such as eco-congregations, there are, the more likely it is that we will achieve our goals.

The First Minister's answer to every question on cuts is to say what he alleges will happen in 2010-11. Will he for once concentrate on the present and the cuts that are happening in many schools in my constituency, the result of which is fewer front-line staff and resources? How  can he describe as efficiency savings the 1.5 per cent cut to school budgets that is currently being imposed and the 2 per cent cut that is proposed for next year? I am thinking in particular of what John Swinney said recently: "What might be described as crude cuts in services can in no way pass the test for efficiency savings."— [ Official Report , 20 November 2008; c 12632.]

I find Mr Finnie's views—particularly his last comment—interesting, but how are they consistent with his party's policy in Scotland of putting more money into people's pockets and taking £800 million out of public expenditure, including, presumably, capital expenditure?

Today we should concentrate mainly on the action that the Scottish Government should be taking, but we have to start by considering the comments that various parties have made about the Westminster Government. Notwithstanding Alex Neil's speech, the interesting fact is that the SNP's response to what the Labour Government has done at Westminster is relatively supportive. The SNP has supported a lot of the actions that the Labour Government has taken. It supports the general direction of travel and acknowledges the need for a fiscal stimulus in particular. That contrasts with the approach of the Conservative party, which wants to do absolutely nothing about the situation at UK level; of course, that approach will increase unemployment and the borrowing about which Mr Brownlee is so concerned. The Liberal Democrats are in an interesting position. Although they support a fiscal stimulus at Westminster, they do not support it in this Parliament, because if one reduces income tax by 2 per cent and thereby has to reduce public expenditure by £800 million, the net fiscal stimulus is zero. The SNP supports Labour's general approach in relation to a fiscal stimulus. In fact, the SNP benefited from that approach today, given the announcements that it has been able to make about £260 million of accelerated capital expenditure. It is certainly about time that we heard an announcement of significance from the Scottish Government. In the middle of August, it was proud to announce a housing package, which it claimed was ahead of what was happening in the rest of the United Kingdom, but what have we  heard from it for the past three and a half months, apart from the very thin six-point plan? We welcome the announcement that all the capital money is to be brought forward. It was certainly interesting to hear how the Scottish Government intends to spend it, which was slightly different from what we heard last week, when schools expenditure was flagged up as the key, number 1 spending priority. Today, that was hedged, along the lines that "Local government will have to decide, but that's still what we would like." When I heard the announcement about schools last week, I welcomed it, but I also thought that, in a sense, the Westminster Government was helping the SNP Government out of a hole. We all know that councils have been unable to proceed with the commissioning of new schools over the past 19 months because of the Scottish Government's failure to set up the Scottish Futures Trust and the hiatus between that and the previous PPP arrangements. Spending a lot of the accelerated money on schools might enable the SNP to play catch-up. The building industry has also pinpointed the delay in setting up the Scottish Futures Trust as one of the major reasons why so many jobs are being lost in the construction sector as we speak. Alex Neil should remember the job losses caused by his Government as well as what he describes as the job losses caused by actions elsewhere.

The main banking union does not take that view. The route that Alex Neil advocates would create more job losses. Employment has not been helped by the slow-down in housing expenditure. We were all shocked to find that 600 fewer housing association homes were built in the first six months of this year in comparison with last year. That figure has not been significantly offset by only £9 million of the accelerated money having been spent. Of course, another £9 million was announced last year—

I do not have time; I have only a minute and a half left and I need to say a bit more about housing. We need far more acceleration in housing spending and more housing money in general. The extra £10 million that was announced today is welcome, but we have a golden opportunity to build affordable housing when land is cheap and  when rising unemployment and increasing housing needs can be addressed by housing investment. However, one problem is that although John Swinney said that the extra £10 million of accelerated housing money that he announced would be deployed on the basis of need, that is inconsistent with an answer that Stewart Maxwell gave Sarah Boyack recently, which suggested that Edinburgh would receive none of the accelerated housing money. The accelerated money must be spent on the basis of need, to address the greatest affordable housing shortages and—crucially—to ensure that all local authorities can meet the historic 2012 homelessness target. The City of Edinburgh Council has made it absolutely clear in its strategic housing investment plan, which the Government has, that it cannot meet the target without significant increases in supply of about 500 houses each year over and above what the council is already building. The £36 million a year that the council receives will not address that need. The danger is that the accelerated money from 2010-11, of which Edinburgh will receive none, will mean that Edinburgh ends up with less money over the three years than it would otherwise have had. I hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and the Minister for Communities and Sport will consider that seriously. All housing money must be distributed on the basis of need.

If the member opposes the very modest tax increases that are proposed by the chancellor, what level of cuts in public expenditure does he propose as an alternative for the Scottish budget and all budgets, if his party were to win the election?

Does the First Minister think that it  helps the battle against poverty and inequality for 40 per cent to be cut from the budgets of a large number of well-established projects in north Edinburgh that are supported by the Scottish Government's fairer Scotland fund? At a meeting of local activists that I attended this morning, one well-respected activist said that the work and developments of 30 years had been undone in just 18 months. Will the First Minister speak urgently to his colleagues in the SNP coalition administration in the City of Edinburgh Council so that they take action to stop that carnage?

Will the cabinet secretary ensure that the accelerated capital expenditure is deployed as quickly as possible, unlike the accelerated money for housing that was announced in August, which no local authority has yet heard about, far less seen? Will he also ensure that the housing money is distributed according to need and with the 2012 homelessness target in mind, so that Edinburgh, which has by far the greatest shortage of affordable rented housing in Scotland, is not overlooked?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to prevent intrusive and humiliating questioning of women on their sexual histories in the course of rape trials. (S3O-4775)

Is the Lord Advocate concerned about the increasing use of sexual history and character evidence in rape trials, as highlighted in a report to the Scottish Government in September 2007? Does she share the concerns of Rape Crisis Scotland, which states, in its written submission on the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, that such questioning "adds to the distress experienced by complainers, ... is potentially highly prejudicial for juries and ... acts as a deterrent to women coming forward to report rape in the first place"? Can she tell us what the Government will do about that? Can she also tell us when the guidance to which she referred was issued?

The cabinet secretary made a typically robust defence of her budget, and I am sure that her debating skills and other qualities will win her the top award tonight. I am equally sure that she would have argued for more money for health at the time of the spending review and that she would have been disappointed not to have received it. Her main defence was that the percentage increase for health was the same as that for the Scottish budget as a whole and that the percentage of the total budget that is going to health will remain constant over the spending review period. However, at a time when the overall budget is not increasing as fast as it has done in the past, there is a strong argument for increasing the percentage of money that goes to health. I will give an example. A year or two ago, if there was a 6 per cent overall increase in the Scottish budget, a 6 per cent increase in health funding would have covered health inflation plus a bit more, but if the overall increase in the Scottish budget is roughly 4 per cent, a 4 per cent increase in health funding as a whole will not cover health inflation and a bit more.

I will talk about that. I am not arguing for a massive increase in health funding; rather, a small increase could be made by finding more money from somewhere else and perhaps also by postponing the abolition of  prescription charges. I support the abolition of prescription charges, but the cabinet secretary should at least consider postponing that in a time in which there is pressure on the health budget. Members probably know the general facts about health inflation and how drugs, demography and so on affect it, so I will not go into that. However, health inflation and other factors mean that a 3.2 per cent funding increase is presenting boards with great difficulties. The cabinet secretary was lucky to inherit a strong financial position for the health service and, indeed, a strong health service in other ways—for example, the problem of non-recurring budgets had almost been stripped out of the system. Therefore, she had a strong start, but seven months into the new spending review period, she must listen to what boards are saying and respond in some way. I am not saying that she is or would be able to find large sums of money, but she should, in deciding the budget for next year, argue with her colleagues that a little more or some more money should be found for health, perhaps from another budget or by postponing the abolition of prescription charges.

I am a back bencher now, so everything that I say can be taken as being said in a personal capacity. I responded to the point that the cabinet secretary made. She should consider other budgets—I am not putting things any more strongly than that—because she must respond in some way to what health boards are saying. The whole point of the debate is to put on the record what various health boards in Scotland are saying about the difficulties that they are facing seven months into the spending review period. We have two years and five months more of similar increases. The problem must be addressed. I will make two final points. The big picture is not the total amount of health spending, but how that money is being spent. The general direction of health policy is to spend more money on community-based services. We need to try to track that money and ensure that more money in the budget is going in that direction. I was concerned that Audit Scotland's "Overview of Scotland's health and NHS performance in 2006/07" stated that there is no evidence of that shift taking place. Today, we are talking about health budgets, but we must also monitor closely what is happening in local authority budgets. I will not go back over the debate about ring fencing, although I have  concerns about that, for example on the abolition of the mental-health-specific grant. We must monitor closely the single outcome agreements and what happens to health-related spend in local authority budgets.

What action will the Scottish Government take to put the onus on the courts, rather than individuals, to ensure that repossession is a last resort, especially given that individuals who exercise their rights under the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Act 2001 do not normally have access to legal aid?

I think that the Liberal Democrats' proposal is the worst and most irresponsible proposal that we have heard in the 10 years of budget debates in the Scottish Parliament. I say that for three reasons. First, it takes no account of the opportunity cost of imposing a 2p tax reduction. I was astonished that Jeremy Purvis spent five minutes telling us why he did not feel obliged to tell us where he would find £800 million of savings. He argued that the SNP and the Conservatives have been a little irresponsible in some of their pledges about tax cuts, but that is no excuse for being irresponsible in bringing forward the current proposal. We read about problems with health spending in the  Highlands and we are told that there is a black hole in the council finances in Edinburgh, and that is just in this morning's papers. Given that there are pressures on budgets, how on earth can the Liberal Democrats seriously propose £800 million of cuts at this time? In fact, they are not doing that. They are being dishonest, because they refuse to say where they would cut budgets to make room for the proposed tax cut. What we need to do is to bring forward infrastructure spending, because that is the most effective way of dealing with the looming problem of unemployment and introducing compensatory spending into the economy. We need to look at the budgets again, as David Whitton suggested. In particular, we should bring forward more money for affordable housing. In doing so, we will take up a great opportunity not only to help the economy but to fulfil our historic pledge on homelessness. That is an example of the economic measures that we need at present. We should not cut budgets and make work on capital infrastructure even more difficult. That is the main practical reason why a Parliament that does not have borrowing powers cannot afford to cut income tax by 2p. The second reason is the wider macroeconomic arguments. I refer Jeremy Purvis to an interesting paper called "If, When, How: A Primer on Fiscal Stimulus" by Douglas W Elmendorf and Jason Furman, which I found through Googling their names yesterday. It is well worth reading. One of the conclusions in that recent paper, which takes account of global economic circumstances, is that reducing tax rates is among the most ineffective or counterproductive options. There is certainly an argument for helping the most hard-pressed, and the Westminster Government has increased the winter fuel payment for all pensioners and the child element of child tax credit from April. We need targeted measures to help those who are on low pay or out of work. That is a legitimate fiscal stimulus, but cutting taxes across the board is not an effective way in which to stimulate the economy. It is economically wrong as well as practically impossible, I would say, because of the effect that it would have on the Scottish Government's budgets. The third reason why the proposal is wrong is that it is politically inept. We all know that debates take place about expenditure in Scotland and the Barnett formula. What message would it send out if we in the Scottish Parliament said, at this of all times, that we can afford to cut income tax by 2p in the pound? We know the conclusions that people in the rest of the United Kingdom would draw about public expenditure in Scotland. However, that is not the most important reason  why the proposal is wrong. The main reasons, as I said, are the effect that it would have on vital spending programmes in the Scottish budget and the fact that it is misguided because it is not the most effective way in which to counter the threat of unemployment. Let us bring forward the spending programmes and get on with the work on infrastructure. We should not be distracted by what is in effect a political stunt.

I support the general case for capital city status for Edinburgh, not least because of its unique capital city functions, but I re-emphasise that it needs more money for affordable housing,  not least because the population is increasing more rapidly and the need for affordable housing is far greater than it is elsewhere in Scotland. I point out to the cabinet secretary that, because land prices are lower at the moment, there is an opportunity to buy land for affordable housing at a much cheaper price. Extra money for that would be particularly helpful and opportune.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will issue an instruction to national health service boards requiring them to give patients the opportunity to donate tissue for research purposes provided proper consent is granted. (S3O-4496)

NHS boards can do that, but it does not normally happen. I welcome the Scottish Government's emphasis on patients' rights, but a patient also has a right to ensure that tissue samples from routine tests, procedures or operations are donated for research, if that is what the patient wishes. Why does the Scottish Government not instruct NHS boards to give patients that opportunity?

I welcome the report of the always independent Scottish Broadcasting Commission and the proposal for a new Scottish network. Does the First Minister believe that local television services should be linked to the Scottish network proposal, as the report suggests in paragraph 3.5.5? Will he argue strongly to Ofcom that spectrum must be made available for local services? Does he support the idea of a network of local channels that would provide a local dimension to the new Scottish network?

I welcome last week's proposals in relation to enhanced renewables obligation certificates for marine energy. However, does the First Minister accept that that will not help companies that are developing the technology and those at the early stages of production, such as the pioneering Pelamis Wave Power in my constituency? Will he consider urgently what help can be given to such companies, so that Scotland can develop into the leading marine energy player that we all want it to be?

I pay tribute to Michael Gray and Tina McGeever for the general contribution that they have made to Scottish life and for their particular contribution on this issue. In considering the topic, we should set ourselves two complementary objectives. First, we need to maximise the number of effective cancer drugs for patients and secondly, we need to achieve that equitably throughout Scotland. The difficulty with co-payments is that they help the first objective but undermine the second, which is why we face a dilemma. I will return to that point later, but I will start with the issue of getting effective cancer drugs. I will briefly put in a plug for the Beatson translational research centre, which will put Scotland at the forefront of translational research. A fundraising appeal for the centre has been launched, to which I hope the Government will be able to chip in. With regard to improving the number of available effective cancer drugs, we need to take two actions in the immediate future. First, it is necessary, as members have said, to review the QALY process—people will know that, in this context, it means quality-adjusted life years—to reflect rising health costs. That would mean maintaining the cost-benefit approach, but allowing a higher cost for a given level of benefit. Secondly, we need to examine the issue of risk sharing and value-based pricing agreements with pharmaceutical companies. That started in Scotland in relation to beta interferon and other drugs for multiple sclerosis in 2002, whereby if the drugs were not fully effective, the costs that the industry charged to the NHS would be reduced. In relation to cancer, I have come across one specific example: a response rebate scheme for the drug Velcade, which is used to treat patients with multiple myeloma. Under that arrangement, patients who are making progress have the treatment fully funded by the NHS, but for patients who show no or minimal responses, the drug costs are refunded by the manufacturer. That model should be explored further as a way of getting better value for money. Great strides have been made on equity in Scotland over the past 10 years, as Dr Andrew Walker acknowledged in his evidence to the Public Petitions Committee. I was pleased that Professor Johnson of Cancer Research UK praised the Scottish Medicines Consortium, saying that it  "is the envy of clinicians who work in England" and that it is "a model of good practice".—[ Official Report , Public Petitions Committee , 29 April 2008; c 709.] When the SMC was set up, there was a debate about the relative balance between centralised and localised decision making. I am sure that we support local decision making in many other areas, but in relation to this matter there must be some central direction. That is why guidance was issued that stated that NHS boards should ensure that recommended medicines are "available to meet clinical need." Improvements are needed in that area in relation to monitoring what boards are doing and intervening when necessary. That is highlighted in the committee's report and in the submissions that were made to the inquiry. There are also issues about exceptional prescribing procedure, to which we need to take a more standardised and transparent approach. Various members have talked about the need to improve data and hospital prescribing. Finally, we need to explain everything to patients, and I am glad that the Government has taken that on board in its response. I have covered those points quickly, because the heart of the debate—the big controversy—concerns co-payment. I am glad that the committee has recommended a review and that the Government will go ahead with it. I have listened carefully to what Nicola Sturgeon said about the issue on the radio this morning and in Parliament this afternoon and it seems clear to me that she accepts that there are serious clinical governance and risk issues with co-payment and that she will take those on board. In the evidence, I was struck by a quote from Professor Alan Rodger, medical director of the Beatson oncology unit—to whom we should pay tribute as he is retiring soon. He talked about two clinicians treating a patient and said that there could be "one in the private sector delivering one drug, the other in the NHS delivering three drugs. That is not good clinical care. It is a recipe for disaster."—[ Official Report , Public Petitions Committee, 29 April 2008; c 751-2.] I am sure that those clinical governance issues will be considered, but the heart of the matter is the fundamental issue of principle and the risk of, threat of and concern about a two-tier health service developing on the back of co-payment. We all have sympathy with patients who are in the situation that is highlighted in the petition, and members are aware of patients who come to the committee or to our surgeries who are in that position, but it is important that we exercise our  imaginations today and look ahead to a situation in which the guidance is different. In that regard, I think Jackson Carlaw's speech has been the most useful in the debate so far, because he described the future that will arise if we go down the route of co-payment. Members should read his speech and reflect on the consequences of that approach. If we go down that route, another group of patients will come to us with their concerns. There will be a situation that does not exist now in which patients are side-by-side in beds in the NHS and one is getting one treatment while the other gets a different treatment because he or she can afford it. Not only poor people but many people on modest incomes will come to us and ask, "Why shouldn't I get the treatment that's available to someone else?" Members need to reflect on that. We should also listen to the cancer charities, which have reflected seriously on the matter. I am sure that we have all read the briefing from Cancer Research UK, which says that co-payment "has the potential to create more problems than it solves." We all received what is perhaps an even stronger submission against co-payments from Macmillan Cancer Support today. Yesterday I talked to a senior cancer clinician who gave the same objections. We must think long and hard about the issue. It will be interesting to hear what Mike Richards comes up with in his review in England, but we have to take a Scottish view. My current view is that we should be very wary of co-payment, but we should certainly take all the other necessary actions.

I welcome the recent change to the renewables obligation to help marine energy.  Does the minister agree that a rapid expansion of wave and tidal power will be necessary to reach the 50 per cent target? Does he accept that, for that to happen, support will have to be given to marine energy companies at an early stage, when they do not have large orders and are not profitable? He will know of Ocean Power Delivery, in my constituency, which I visited recently.

Will the minister do everything possible to assist that company and other companies, so that they can expand rapidly as Scotland requires them to do?

I do not need to remind members today of the importance of the financial services sector to the Scottish economy in general and to Edinburgh in particular. In the first seven years of this century, our financial services sector grew by 60 per cent. Seven of the top 20 Scottish companies are in the sector and up to one in 10 Scottish jobs depends on it. Here in Edinburgh, which is the second-largest financial services centre in the UK, thousands of people are employed in the sector, including 6,500 HBOS employees. I know that we are all united today in our determination both to protect HBOS's customers and to preserve as many jobs as possible here in Scotland. I hope that the new company that is about to be formed by the merger will engage immediately in comprehensive talks with the recognised trade unions and, as soon as possible, give a guarantee that there will be no compulsory redundancies. We are concerned not just about jobs in general but about having headquarters functions in Edinburgh, with as much decision making as possible done in Scotland, up to and including new corporate headquarters. I wish the First Minister well in the presentation that he is to make about that. Of course, we are looking forward not just to any old decisions but to correct decisions, based on a correct analysis of what is going on. Correct decision making and analysis are important for bankers, and there have certainly been deficiencies in that regard, as the president of the Chartered Institute of Bankers in Scotland argued last night. I submit that it is also important that we politicians have a correct analysis of what has been going on. The Government and its supporters have tended to say that we should not discuss contentious matters in the chamber today, but they were the first to make contentious assertions about "spivs and speculators" and they blamed the UK Government for not acting in, as they see it, a decisive fashion. They have also claimed how much better it would all have been in an  independent Scotland. It is important that the issues are addressed today. We have to challenge a simplistic analysis that is based only on blaming "spivs and speculators". Of course we should criticise them, and short selling should have been suspended, but only 3 per cent of HBOS shares were shorted last week, compared with 5 per cent of Barclays shares. Short selling was not the fundamental cause of the problem, as many eminent economists have emphasised in the past few days. For example, Michael Moss, a research professor at the University of Glasgow who has written several books on Scottish financial institutions, said: "To blame speculators, as Alex Salmond did, is lunacy."

I also criticised spivs and speculators about 30 seconds ago. It is one thing to criticise them but another to say that short selling was the fundamental issue. I would be the first to praise HBOS for the support that it has given to many enterprises, to voluntary organisations such as the PROP-Stress Centre in Pilton in my constituency, and to thousands of customers. However, HBOS got into difficulty because of fundamental business mistakes, as one of the First Minister's advisers, Professor John Kay, emphasised the other night. It was overreliant on the wholesale market and there was an unsustainable gap between its deposits and loans, many of which were risky. Investors have been taking fright for months, which was why the £4 billion rights issue was such a failure. It was shareholders far more than spivs who repudiated the bank.

Of course, all banks have to rely on wholesale markets, but it is about the extent of the exposure, particularly in the past year since the start of the credit crunch. If the First Minister was wrong about "spivs and speculators", he was equally wrong about the role of the UK Government. There was no request for a line of credit last week, and the UK Government got it right to act and give guarantees on the  merger. We can argue for the relocation of the headquarters because the new company will be a UK institution. We should also argue that the Bank of Scotland should remain as a legally constituted bank with a separate licence and board within the new larger organisation, in the same way as Lloyds TSB, which currently has a separate legal entity in Scotland and a separate board More generally and fundamentally, we need to recast the financial system using different principles, with much tighter regulation. As Will Hutton said last night, a small country such as Scotland cannot do that, but the UK can. The UK can also lead the case for new global standards on supervision that match the global flows of capital. Last week was the nearest that we have come to 1929 since 1929, and we must respond with the urgency and radicalism that are required, unlike in the 1930s. That will no doubt include lowering interest rates and redefining the objectives of monetary policy, but what is crucial in the context of today's debate is that it must involve much greater financial transparency and much more effective financial regulation.

The Government maintained absolute silence on the issue in the statement on the legislative programme and in the long document on the legislative programme. Will the minister tell us why she is reintroducing presumably all the sections of the Creative Scotland Bill in a public services reform bill rather than reintroducing the Creative Scotland Bill? Is it not the case that, even without changing standing orders, which may well have been possible, she could have proceeded to the stage 1 debate on the Creative Scotland Bill in December? Given the route she has chosen, goodness knows when Parliament will have the opportunity to discuss the matter again. It would be helpful if she would enlighten us on that final point.

Given that the largest part of the Edinburgh world heritage site is in my constituency and that its status as such is highly valued, will the minister do everything possible—including meeting UNESCO representatives—to protect Edinburgh as a world heritage site? Will she also consider calling in any planning applications that threaten the site's status?

I welcome this opportunity, on behalf of the European and External Relations Committee, to open what I am sure will be a constructive and informative debate on a matter that is of huge interest to many colleagues in the chamber. Like others here, I was on the make poverty history march in Edinburgh in July 2005, and the sheer numbers of people who participated on that gloriously sunny day demonstrated the depth of empathy that many people in Scotland have for the developing world. Moreover, the range and diversity of groups that were represented signified the extraordinary amount of activity within Scotland's civic society in support of addressing global poverty. It was also a reminder that Scotland has a rich historical tradition of working with some of the poorest countries in the world, not least Malawi. It is, therefore, appropriate that the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament should take a lead role in Scotland in continuing to highlight the needs of the developing world while building on those historical traditions. It is also appropriate that we do so in partnership with the many organisations and individuals from across Scotland whose skills, expertise and sheer determination have contributed so much to the developing world. The inquiry was conducted on a cross-party basis and in a spirit of constructive engagement with both the international development sector in Scotland and the Scottish Government. That engagement included seeking the views of key organisations in deciding the inquiry remit. It was agreed that we would aim to take a strategic overview of international development issues within Scotland and report on the role of the Scottish Government's international development policy and on how value can be added to the extensive work that is already on-going in that area across Scotland. On behalf of the committee, I thank all those organisations and individuals who contributed to the inquiry, and particularly the schools that participated in the Europe day conference on 9 May. I also thank the clerking team and other  parliamentary staff for their support throughout the inquiry. On the committee's findings, I emphasise that we strongly support the Scottish Government's international development work and its commitment to continuing the good work that was begun by the previous Administration. In particular, the committee welcomes the increase in the international development fund to £6 million in 2008-9, rising to £9 million in 2010-11. Nevertheless, the committee was disappointed that the Scottish Government's newly published international development policy focuses primarily on the administration of the various funding programmes that the Government has established. Consequently, the committee recommended that the Government should develop a more holistic approach to its international development policy and be "concerned"—as the World Development Movement puts it "with far more than how to spend a discrete pot of money." The two specific areas that I wish to highlight in that context are the benefits of awareness raising in addressing the needs of the developing world and the need to mainstream the policy across all Government departments. A core concern for many of our witnesses was the importance of awareness raising, and in particular development education, in enhancing the effectiveness of the Government's development policy. The committee is concerned about the policy's lack of reference to awareness raising. One development education body stated: "from an education and awareness-raising point of view, there is not a lot in the international development policy to be positive about."—[ Official Report , European and External Relations Committee ,13 May 2008; c 648-9.] The committee welcomes the Government's commitment to supporting development education through the curriculum for excellence and lifelong learning. We hope that that commitment will be reflected in the international development policy and that it will be extended beyond the education sector. We call on the Scottish Government to take the lead role, with the support of the Parliament, in ensuring that the Scottish public are fully informed about the challenges that the developing world faces. The committee emphasised the need for the international development policy to be mainstreamed across all Government departments, and that it should not be viewed as a standalone policy. It is therefore to be welcomed that the Government has indicated in its response to the committee's report that the policy "is at the heart of government and integrated into the wider policy making process."  It would be useful to hear from the minister specific examples of how the policy is to be mainstreamed in practice, and for a commitment to that to be explicitly stated on the face of the policy. The committee identified health policy and procurement policy in particular as two domestic policy areas that can have a significant impact on international development. For example, we heard evidence on the potential harm of recruiting health care professionals from developing countries. It would be unfortunate if we supported the training of nurses and doctors in Malawi, only for them to end up working here. We therefore encourage the Government to continue to monitor the effectiveness of the code of practice for the international recruitment of health professionals, which lists a number of countries, including Malawi, that should not be targeted for recruitment. The committee heard from a number of witnesses who argued for the attachment of ethical and fair trade criteria to public sector procurement, which the Scottish Fair Trade Forum suggested amounts to £8 billion a year in buying goods and services. The Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund and the Scottish Fair Trade Forum both argued that there is greater scope to interpret European Union law in ways that are more favourable to fair trade products. It was mentioned, for example, that the Dutch Government has decided to include fair trade criteria in all its contracts by 2010. In response, the minister has stated that the Scottish Government "will continue do as much as possible within the limits of EU legislation." Although the committee welcomes that commitment, we have sought further clarification from the minister on the scope for interpreting EU law as suggested by SCIAF and the forum. Furthermore, the committee has sought the minister's comments on the Department for International Development's response to the House of Commons International Development Committee, which stated: "there are no legal reasons why public authorities should not include fair and ethical trade criteria in their procurement practices." I turn to the geographic and thematic aspects of the revised international development policy. The committee heard conflicting evidence on whether the policy should continue to focus on a single country—Malawi—or should have a wider geographic focus. Although some witnesses suggested that we should continue to focus primarily on Malawi, others pointed out that Scotland's development organisations are heavily  involved in many other developing countries. The majority of witnesses agreed, however, that if there is to be an extension, it should be focused on the sub-Saharan region. There was a good deal of concern that, given the limited resources involved, any attempt to widen the focus might reduce the impact and effectiveness of the policy. It was also pointed out by a number of witnesses that Scotland's non-governmental organisation sector already has a great deal of development expertise and experience within sub-Saharan Africa. Although the committee broadly welcomed the new Government's approach, especially its continued commitment to Malawi, we sought clarification on the reasoning behind extending the policy to include the Indian sub-continent. Given the evidence that the committee considered during the inquiry, the rationale for extending the policy in that direction appeared to be unclear. The minister might wish to respond to that in her summing-up speech. With regard to the thematic focus, the committee heard conflicting evidence about what the priorities should be. Some witnesses suggested that limiting the focus to a specific area such as health or education would maximise the impact of limited resources. Economic development involving Scottish businesses—for example, through partnership with civic society organisations in Scotland—was emphasised. There was also substantial support for prioritising the development of civic society within developing nations, especially through support for indigenous groups. The committee welcomes the minister's commitment to continue to focus on those areas in relation to Malawi. I began by referring to the make poverty history campaign. I am sure that it inspired many Scots to volunteer to work in developing countries. Although such altruism is broadly supported, some witnesses cautioned against short-term volunteering, which can be resource intensive without adding a great deal of value. To put it in perspective, it was pointed out that the cost of one volunteer's air fare is the equivalent of a Malawian teacher's salary for a year. It was recognised that longer-term volunteering schemes can be much more beneficial, and the committee encourages the Government to examine ways of promoting volunteer schemes, including through pension support for volunteers. The committee very much welcomes the Government's commitment to continuing the co-operation agreement with the Government of Malawi and to ring fencing at least £3 million to support it. It was clear throughout the inquiry that there is substantial support across Scotland for building on our links with Malawi. We heard  numerous examples of the effectiveness of the partnership between our two countries. For example, we heard from a Malawian schoolteacher, who was on an exchange visit to Penicuik high school, who emphasised the benefit of school partnerships. Perhaps the minister could look again at the recommendation about the publication of new guidance on school partnerships, possibly utilising Oxfam's excellent booklet on the subject. The committee also examined the possible benefits of having a Scottish representative in Malawi, and has invited the minister to keep an open mind on the matter. The committee warmly welcomes the efforts of both the Scottish Government and Scottish civic society, and it is hoped that the committee's report will be useful in developing the Government's international development policy and in helping to ensure that the hardships and challenges that the developing world faces remain topical and firmly in the public mind. If that is not the case, there is always the danger that the make poverty history event may simply be remembered as a great day out. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the European and External Relations Committee's 3rd Report, 2008 (Session 3): Inquiry into International Development (SP Paper 134).

To ask the First Minister what opportunity the Parliament will have to influence the remit and funding of creative Scotland. (S3F-993)

Does the First Minister accept that Parliament supports the establishment of creative Scotland but has legitimate questions about its funding and remit? Why, therefore, have he and the minister for culture refused to answer such legitimate questions over the past two weeks, and why are they postponing parliamentary decisions until an indefinite time next year, after the establishment of creative  Scotland in April? As the First Minister will no doubt blame us for voting down the financial memorandum—[ Interruption. ]

—I remind him that, if he had followed the advice that we gave him at decision time on 18 June, he could have reintroduced the Creative Scotland Bill right now.

John Swinney knows full well that another bill could be introduced and passed before April. How can the body be set up when its remit is to be determined retrospectively? That makes no sense. Even more fundamentally, why are the Parliament's financial concerns about creative Scotland being totally ignored?

I had intended to give a general speech, ending with some words about creative Scotland, but in view of events this morning, I must change the order of my remarks. Very little was uttered by the First Minister—one sentence, I think—about creative Scotland this morning. When I put three questions to the First Minister, none of them was answered—not surprisingly. However, within half an hour, a press release appeared on the Government's website that indicated a major change of policy and direction in relation to the future of creative Scotland. To say the least, that shows the Government acting in an underhand way. From the contents of the press release, it appears more accurate to say that it is treating the Parliament with contempt. I asked the First Minister this morning when creative Scotland would be established. Of course, he refused to answer that question, as well as my other ones. The press release indicates that the body "will be in place by April 2009", although the legislation to enshrine it in law will not be passed until one year later. It is therefore obvious to everyone that the Government is bypassing parliamentary scrutiny on that important piece of future legislation. What is worse, it is giving absolutely no response to the serious financial concerns that were voiced by the Parliament in June. The press release blithely says that the same financial arrangements as those that were announced on 18 June will apply. The Government has serious questions to answer about creative Scotland, and I hope that, during his winding-up speech, John Swinney will answer the other two questions that I asked the First Minister earlier. First, and crucially, will the public services bill be amendable in relation to creative Scotland? It is a bit odd that the body will have been up and running for about a year by the time the legislation is passed. We must ask ourselves how amendable the bill will be. The connection between culture and democracy in Scotland is very important, so it is very important that the Parliament gives the body a remit. Parliament unanimously supported the principles of the Creative Scotland Bill, and there is no reason why the Scottish Government could not have lodged a new creative Scotland bill as soon as possible, to be passed well before the set-up date of April next year.  The fundamental concerns about creative Scotland related, first, to finances. As I said, the press release indicates no change in that regard. I asked the First Minister this morning whether the Government had received a report over the past few months indicating that the cost of establishing creative Scotland would be approximately £7 million, or whether the £1 million that was announced to Parliament in June applied. The issue was revealed by The Times in August. On 14 August, the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture indicated to the newspaper that "she had no knowledge of the £7million estimate", but "said that revised estimates for the creation of the agency would be delivered by the Creative Scotland interim board next week." Perhaps the cabinet secretary can now tell us what those revised costs are. He could perhaps also tell us whether such a report was in fact received—as the Times journalist had on good authority. There are serious questions to be asked about the Government's handling of that piece of legislation, and what it has announced in its press release today is totally unacceptable to Parliament. I will move on to my more general remarks. I wish to ask three questions. For me, the key issues in politics now, in recent times and, in some cases, for all time, are how the Government's programme will deliver social justice, how it will deliver on climate change and how it will deliver on economic growth. What are the social justice measures that will deliver, especially for the most disadvantaged people and communities in Scotland? Such measures are not being taken in my constituency, which is being devastated through massive cuts to the fairer Scotland fund. Secondly, where is the action to tackle climate change emissions? Of course we welcome the proposed climate change bill and the 80 per cent reduction target, but where are the practical measures? I am sure that Sarah Boyack will talk eloquently about that and suggest some measures. In particular, where is the 3 per cent annual reduction in emissions that was promised in the SNP manifesto; what is being done about aviation emissions; and why will the basket of greenhouse gases not be covered? Those are vital questions. Thirdly, where are the measures to deliver economic prosperity? Rather than a skills bill, which would be welcomed universally, the flagship bill is on a local income tax, which is opposed by all the major economic bodies in Scotland, from the CBI to the STUC. Other objections apart—there are plenty of them—the bill would lead to  further significant cuts in services, which is far from the born-again Keynesianism that we heard from the First Minister today. Of course, that was to cover up for his interview gaffe—or should I say, his interview letting the cat out of the bag?—in the summer. I have no time to deal with that, but I am sure that we will discuss it a lot in the next few weeks. The First Minister made the fundamental mistake of separating economic and social policies. Finally, I heard the First Minister make another interesting speech at the Edinburgh book festival, in which he contrasted the work of his Government with that of the Westminster Government, which he said was doing little in the present economic difficulties. I am sure that Johann Lamont will talk about this at much greater length, but the housing package that was announced yesterday in England is far superior to the package that the Scottish Government announced two weeks ago. Of the money in the Scottish Government's package, £40 million depends on hard-pressed local authorities and only £20 million has been brought forward to this year, when it is required urgently. We have already had a £90 million cut to the social housing budget. I am sure that Johann Lamont will say more about that, but that is the reality that the Government should face, rather than all the time pointing out how it is supposedly superior to Westminster.

I thank the First Minister for his one, casual, throwaway sentence on culture—which is consistent, I suppose, with his level of attendance at this summer's magnificent festivals. More seriously, I ask him when creative Scotland will be established; whether there will still be detailed, amendable legislation to set it up; and whether the Scottish Government received a report in the past few months that indicated that the cost of establishing creative Scotland would be approximately £7 million rather than the £1 million or so that was stated to the Parliament in June.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

We strongly support the setting up of creative Scotland, but I ask the Minister for Parliamentary Business to withdraw both motions in the interests of establishing creative Scotland as quickly as possible. If he does not do so, he will jeopardise the quick creation of creative Scotland.

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I believe that there is a discrepancy between what the minister said in her opening speech and what she is saying now. Earlier, everyone in the chamber assumed that a new announcement was being made about the transfer of money, but we are now being told that the money that is being transferred is the £100,000 that was announced weeks ago.

The manifesto of Ian McKee's party dealt with that problem by promising grants to artists in lieu of tax relief. Will that still happen, or is it another broken promise?

This is a rather unusual stage 1 debate, given that most of the objections to and concerns about the bill relate to what is missing from it and not what it contains. It is for that reason that the Labour Party supports the general principles of the bill, but with serious reservations and concerns. I will not go over all the excellent proposals in the draft culture (Scotland) bill that was binned on 7 November, but will stick instead to the lack of clarity and detail about creative Scotland. Like the Finance Committee, I question the financial provisions that fail to match the extended remit of  this new national body. Many of the anxieties around creative Scotland are underpinned by that. [ Interruption. ]

Of course, I welcome the minister's announcement on the extra money. She has recognised that her previously held view was not sustainable. As the financial memorandum makes it clear, the combined budgets of the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen were set to decline in cash terms by £3 million over the next three years. We welcome the extra £5 million, although, in real terms, the budget probably remains a stand-still budget. In addition, we have the problem that the estimated £1 million for transitional costs may not be enough and, on top of that, the issue of efficiency savings. It is therefore no wonder either that people in the arts community are worried or that the central question on the bill has been, "How on earth can a body with such an extended remit possibly flourish on a budget that is not increasing in real terms?" Those concerns are compounded by fears about local authority budgets. Local authorities are now guided by targets and indicators, but without a single target or indicator that relates to the arts. Those anxieties about funding underlie the many demands for a definition of culture and, particularly, of the arts. For example, the Scottish Storytelling Centre has called for a definition of the arts that includes literature. It did so partly because it fears that support for literature will disappear in a difficult funding situation. When Scottish Language Dictionaries suggested a definition that includes language, it did so partly because support for the Scots language has already been cut significantly in a tight financial situation that is about to get tighter. The debate on definitions needs to continue on its own terms throughout the passage of the bill. We need to recognise that inclusive definitions, such as those that the Scottish Storytelling Centre and Scottish Language Dictionaries suggested, rule nothing out but guarantee that central strands of the arts would be properly supported by creative Scotland. It is perhaps unfortunate that no proper consultation was undertaken on the bill. At the very least, attention could have been paid to the conclusions of the consultation process on the draft culture (Scotland) bill. As the report on that consultation said, with reference to creative Scotland: "The majority of respondents felt whilst agreeing to the new body, that its role and responsibilities should be more clearly defined in the Bill, and that Creative Scotland would have to work closely with cultural agencies, local authorities and other cultural partners."  One has to wonder whether anyone in the Scottish Government read that. The issue of role, responsibilities and relationships becomes particularly problematic when we come to the creative industries. Given that that is the central new feature in the remit for creative Scotland, one might think that it is worthy of some clarity and thought. As members know, we get a reference at the end of section 2 of the bill to "supporting activities which involve the application of creative skills to the development of products and processes." As Scottish Enterprise tactfully put it, that is "open to interpretation". Legislation should not be open to interpretation. There must be clarification, either today or at a subsequent stage. Progress so far has not been encouraging, and simply talking about a forum does not answer the question. From listening to the minister's explanation today, I am tempted to paraphrase Byron talking about Coleridge—in explaining creative Scotland to the nation, I wish that the minister would explain her explanation. Progress has not been encouraging, because of a combination of confusion and unwillingness to answer questions. When Rob Gibson asked the minister in committee which elements of support for the creative industries creative Scotland should deal with and what proportion of its budget would be used for that, he was told that that was a matter for creative Scotland to discuss. When Mary Mulligan asked whether creative Scotland would be the lead strategic organisation that deals with the creative industries, as indicated by the transition team, the policy memorandum and the recent working group report, the minister said that we should get away from the view that somebody must take the lead. When asked whether there would be a transfer of budgets from Scottish Enterprise to creative Scotland—something that is not on the agenda, according to Scottish Enterprise—the minister told us that that is still being discussed. We note what the minister said on that today, but we must know before the end of the debate how much money she is talking about and the purpose for which the money is to be used. In the midst of all that confusion, the minister's usual formulation is that creative Scotland will be the lead advocate for the creative industries, although she did not use that phrase today. It is far from clear what that means in practice, quite apart from the fact that the key word in the bill about the creative industries is "supporting". Clarification of what "supporting" means is central to progress and, if support is not what is intended, that word should be deleted from the bill. Another requirement is clarification of the relationship  between creative Scotland and the other creative industry players, namely Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the local authorities. Clarification on the transferred money, the issue of who will lead and the relationship between the players should be given in the winding-up speech, please. The relationship with local authorities extends well beyond the creative industries, although their new business gateway function is important. Local authorities also have a crucial role in supporting arts activity in communities and schools. It is strange that the bill is silent on that central partnership. The policy memorandum talks of creative Scotland working "in partnership with a wide variety of interested organisations." Perhaps that should be put in the bill as a general statement, followed by the specific example of local authorities. Specific duties might be added, such as a duty to assist local authorities in the development of local cultural plans or to co-operate with education authorities to ensure that cultural components are incorporated in the curriculum. Local authorities are central to the delivery of arts and culture, as recognised by the sections on local authorities in the draft culture (Scotland) bill. I know that the minister did not like those sections, which were underpinned by the concept of entitlements, but that does not mean that a different formulation should not be considered. I have raised concerns about local authority funding and the absence of a target or indicator for the arts. In that situation, the minister must explain what leverage, if any, she has over local authorities that simply decide that the arts and culture are not for them. Perhaps creative Scotland should have a role in that. We certainly need clarity on the issue, as on so many other issues. Another such issue is further and higher education but, as the clock is ticking, I shall leave that and simply recommend the committee's recommendation in that regard. I want to talk in more detail about the key partnership with the voluntary sector. Like the minister, I was fortunate to be a speaker at the Voluntary Arts Scotland conference a couple of days ago. Many points were raised about creative Scotland, its funding and its relationship to bodies such as Voluntary Arts Scotland. The committee report refers to the important need for creative Scotland to recognise Voluntary Arts Scotland's role in developing and disseminating good practice advice to the voluntary cultural sector. The report also mentions the need to ensure that the new body does not get involved in more duplication. Voluntary Arts Scotland's suggestion that it should deliver that remit on creative Scotland's behalf should be considered seriously.  On the arm's-length principle in general, like the committee, I am satisfied with the balance that is struck in the bill. I merely add that that balance was precisely what the previous Administration intended in its draft culture (Scotland) bill, so the minister was hardly justified in trumpeting a great change of direction in that regard in her statement to Parliament on 7 November last year. However, although the arm's-length principle is correct for the artistic judgments of creative Scotland, it is emphatically inappropriate for the proposed legislation. We do not know whether legislation is necessary, although I will not go into the minister's contradictory statements in the committee about that. As Donald Smith put it in giving evidence to the committee: "The relationship between democracy and culture is extremely strong in Scotland, so Parliament should do a job and give the new body a remit."—[ Official Report , Education , Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee ,  7 May 2008; c 957.] In a sense, that is what the whole debate will be about—today and at the next two stages of the bill. We must establish clarity in the remit of creative Scotland, and we must not be led astray by the arm's-length belief that it is nothing to do with us. That seemed to be what the minister was suggesting on various occasions at the committee, when she almost made a virtue out of not knowing the answer. Finally, I will make a brief point about negative capability. Being in a state of uncertainty and doubt is very beneficial for the creative process, but it is highly damaging in a piece of parliamentary legislation. We shall support the general principles of the bill today, but with the proviso that more clarity and less uncertainty will be required next time round.

Does the minister recognise that, under the previous Administration, the vitally important and internationally recognised work of Scottish Language Dictionaries Ltd received £115,000 per annum? Does she further recognise that, by the end of this financial year, that work will have received precisely nothing? Will she address that problem?

Does Kenneth Gibson agree that the £25 million for council houses will build about 100 council houses, compared with the 36,000 social rented houses that we built in eight years in office?

I congratulate Nicola Sturgeon on being a bit better than the First Minster was two weeks ago when he ranted to Parliament about moving Scotland forward. However, there is nothing unusual in her being better than the First Minister—it is not saying much. As our amendment says, his statement then contained "no positive policies for the future" of Scotland—although I might have added to the amendment "with the exception of the university for sporting excellence", the idea for which the First Minister nicked from our manifesto. His statement was also, of course, bathed in the self-congratulation for which he is famous. The SNP Government should not get too carried away by a year in which it has delivered two pieces of legislation—one of which is impacting negatively on a significant group of students—plus a few headline-grabbing initiatives, including scrapping bridge tolls and freezing the council tax, which have led to damaging consequences for the environment and the provision of local government services respectively. Of course we welcome the cross-party initiatives on tobacco, alcohol and drugs that the motion refers to—indeed, I was pleased to defend the Scottish Government's recent anti-smoking initiatives on "Riddoch Questions" on Friday in the absence of the minister—but we must ask ourselves whether some at least of the £165 million that has been spent on the business rates reduction that the motion trumpets could not have been transferred to the central heating programme for older people, which the cabinet secretary effectively scrapped last week. When it comes to the future, of course we welcome more open government in relation to the environment and everything else, but it would be useful to know at least something about what is proposed. We looked forward to substantive and effective proposals on the issues that the motion refers to, but what did we find? The motion mentions criminal justice, but where is the long-promised criminal justice bill and the proposals for robust community sentencing? Those are the essential prerequisite of any changes to prison policy. The motion refers to climate change, but what has happened to the SNP's manifesto commitment on binding annual carbon reduction targets of 3 per cent? Where are the practical measures to make an overall 80 per cent  reduction achievable? Sarah Boyack outlined such measures in her excellent speech yesterday. The motion also refers to the curriculum for excellence, but I suppose that the Scottish Government could not have anticipated the extensive coverage in The Scotsman this morning about the ineffective implementation of our important initiative to raise educational standards, which is now floundering in vagueness and is so inadequately resourced. Those are the presumed successes that the SNP chooses to mention in its motion, not daring, of course, to refer to its flagship policies on the local income tax, reduced class sizes and the Scottish futures trust, all of which are falling apart at the seams as we speak. The legality of the local income tax was questioned by a leading lawyer yesterday, but legality apart, the local income tax simply will not raise the necessary money to keep services at their current levels unless it is set at a rate that would hammer ordinary hard-working families.

I have referred to several of the policy areas that Nicola Sturgeon mentioned and I will refer to several more in a moment. I understand that the SNP does not like to hear any criticism of its policy failures, but I remind her that that is part of parliamentary debate. Class size reductions will not happen either, as we were told yesterday by the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, without £420 million, which simply is not there in local authority budgets. The Scottish futures trust is such a shambles that it is hard to know where to start. Perhaps the kindest thing to say is that the SNP now appreciates the advantages of public-private partnerships, but it does not want to tell the small number of its more left-inclined back benchers. In the meantime, vital building projects slow down or grind to a halt and Scottish infrastructure, including new schools in Edinburgh, shows precious little sign of moving forward. If those are the SNP manifesto commitments that are running into the sand, what about those that have not yet seen the light of day? We have got so used to the idea of broken promises that some people are beginning to think that they are just a normal feature of government. However, a few days ago I was talking to a fairly senior civil servant who reminded me of how the previous Administration fulfilled well over 90 per cent of the  commitments in its partnership agreement, which was a combination of manifesto commitments from the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties. To be fair, he pointed out that that was very high in comparison with UK Governments in the last century, but does the SNP really want to be worse than those? I will not go through all the broken promises today. In order to save time, I merely ask the cabinet secretary—or whoever is to reply to the debate—to answer the questions that Wendy Alexander asked the First Minister two weeks ago today. The cabinet secretary's motion refers to "the new partnership with local government", but not, unsurprisingly, to the funding attached to it. The concordat contained a specific set of spending commitments costed in the SNP manifesto at £634 million, but funded at £223 million in the local government settlement. That is a shortfall of £411 million. The shortfall would be even greater if we were to accept the costings that the directors of education gave yesterday. The situation is compounded, of course, by the use of block grant to freeze council tax, thereby reducing the resources available for investment in services as well as removing from councils fiscal autonomy to meet needs through local budgeting. As a result, many local people in many local authorities are already suffering. Colleagues might provide other examples, but in my local authority area, the contrast between the rhetoric of Government policies and the reality on the ground is very stark in a range of areas such as class sizes, nursery provision, home care services and wider access to the arts. As I am shadow minister for culture, perhaps I should say more about that last point. People have noticed over the past year how the Scottish Government likes to talk a good game about support for the arts, but the catalogue of troubles grows by the day. First, there was the axing of cultural co-ordinators, who were vital to ensuring wider access to the arts. Then there was the widespread confusion and concern about the Creative Scotland Bill and, according to the Finance Committee, its worst-ever financial memorandum. Now a Scottish nationalist Government is presiding over wide-ranging cuts to traditional Scottish arts and Scottish language dictionaries. Perhaps the Scottish Government could start moving forwards rather than backwards in that important area.

Brian Adam knows fine well that we proposed a large number of amendments to the budget—indeed, far more in one year than his party proposed in eight. We are talking about moving forwards, but when are we going to get any movement at all on housing policy? I believe that last week the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing gave a commitment to the Local Government and Communities Committee that she would announce local authority housing allocations this week, a record eight weeks into the new financial year and 12 or more weeks too late. Whether or not they have been announced, I have not seen them yet, but the situation typifies a more general dithering and delay over housing policy. An even more serious matter is the prospect of a Scottish nationalist Government presiding over the destruction of the most significant and most distinctively Scottish innovation in Scottish urban policy over the past 30 to 40 years: community-based housing associations. I wanted to say more on that subject, but I am in my final minute. I, of course, support Murdo Fraser's amendment, which refers to Scotland remaining part of the United Kingdom. However, I have to say that at last night's Scotsman debate I was astonished to hear Nicola Sturgeon's statement that she could not accept my preferred referendum question about Scotland remaining part of the United Kingdom, on the ground that she in some sense supported it. Perhaps we should recognise progress on that matter—or perhaps Ms Sturgeon has simply recognised that the people of Scotland will always vote to remain part of the UK. I cannot accept the Liberal Democrats' amendment, as it would knock out ours. However, they are right to emphasise the need for the Scottish Government "to bring forward a coherent energy strategy". That is one of the essential responses to the challenge presented not only by climate change but by rising fuel prices. The UK Government has been very active in addressing the problem of international oil supply and in implementing a coherent demand reduction policy. It would be interesting to know what the Scottish Government is doing in the areas for which it has responsibility, instead of doing what it always does best—blaming the Westminster Government. I move amendment S3M-2001.2, to leave out from first "welcomes" to end and insert:  "condemns the self-congratulation and lack of positive policies for the future in the First Minster's statement on Moving Scotland Forward on 14 May 2008; recognises the many SNP broken promises on a whole range of manifesto commitments, from dumping student debt to providing a £2,000 grant to first-time buyers, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward substantive policies to address climate change, skills development, affordable housing shortages, health inequalities and the other big challenges that confront Scotland."

To ask the Scottish Executive how use of the ASSIGN risk score would be likely to affect the overall number of people being treated for cardiovascular disease. (S3O-3534)

I welcome ASSIGN's weighting for deprivation, which is consistent with many studies, including the exciting work of the Glasgow Centre for Population Health. To allay public concerns and some misreporting, will the minister confirm that the effect of ASSIGN will be to increase the numbers of people in deprived areas who are likely to be treated without having any effect on the numbers who are treated from elsewhere?

The country is entitled to know how we would stand in the unlikely event of an independent Scotland. If the First Minister failed in his attempt to renegotiate the common fisheries policy, would he accept the common fisheries policy or would he leave the European Union?

I congratulate Ian McKee on securing this important debate, and I pay tribute to the NAYO for its important work in increasing opportunities for young musicians and for its annual festival of British youth orchestras, which has occurred every year for the past 25 years or so. Ian McKee described the confusion about whether a final decision has been made. I will not go over that, except to say that I profoundly hope that it has not. I, too, read Professor Caird's article in "NAYO News". I was unpersuaded by his arguments for a move and can find no reasonable grounds for such a decision. I was struck by a recent quote in The Herald by Carol Main, who  was the director of the NAYO from 1979 to 2003. She said that she was "bewildered, frustrated and saddened" by the decision, and went on to say: "Scotland has nurtured and sustained this organisation for many years, and I do not remember anyone ever saying to me, 'I don't know why you are based in Edinburgh.'" The other thing that concerned me about Professor Caird's article was that he talked a great deal about the admittedly exciting developments in music in England, but seemed to be totally unaware of what was happening in Scotland in that respect. The youth music initiative, which I note the Scottish Government is fully committed to continuing, is a flagship policy that has made a great difference. I found Professor Caird's comments worrying. I am told that one of the problems may be that there is only one Scotland-based person on the NAYO board. We should make it our job to make them better informed about what is happening in Scotland. There are many other music developments in Scotland. Sistema Scotland, for example, is a project that is just starting in Raploch to give a large number of young people new opportunities to learn an instrument. The project is based on a Venezuelan model and was initially driven forward by Richard Holloway. I hope that the Government gives further support to that exciting venture. I was struck by the large number of Scottish members of the NAYO—both local authorities and independent orchestras and ensembles. As has been referred to, the City of Edinburgh Council is a member. My colleague Councillor Paul Godzik lodged a motion some time ago, and I am glad to hear from Ian McKee that the administration is working hard to help to resolve the situation with the NAYO. I hope that the City of Edinburgh Council and the Government will do everything that they can to keep the NAYO's headquarters here—that is important—and to ensure that its festival continues to take place every summer, both in Edinburgh and at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, to which Ted Brocklebank referred. It would be appropriate to end by reinforcing the point that the RSAMD is critical for Scottish music. I was encouraged by what the minister said at question time, but I urge the Government as a whole to do everything that it can to address the funding difficulty at that institution.

Will the minister tell us even one way in which children's access to music provision has improved in the past year? Is it not the case that cultural co-ordinators, who are vital to widening access, are being run down and will be axed? In Edinburgh, is not the council's SNP coalition administration depriving children of opportunities to access and enjoy Scottish Ballet and Scottish Opera? We welcome the continuation of the youth music initiative, but is not its budget flatlining in cash terms and therefore declining in real terms?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take to ensure that fair trade principles are applied to the awarding of public contracts. (S3F-811)

Was the First Minister concerned by this week's BBC Scotland report that several public authorities have entered into contracts with companies accused of serious abuses of workers' rights, including child labour? Will the Government first take action to ensure that products currently procured by the Scottish public sector meet minimum ethical and fair trade criteria; and secondly, will it go beyond that to include ethical and fair trade criteria in its own procurement contracts, mindful that several other European countries do that, and that the International Development Committee of the Westminster Parliament, based on evidence from the United Kingdom Government, has stated that "there are no legal reasons why public authorities should not include fair and ethical trade criteria in their procurement practices"?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply and for his letter in April, when he explained that and other issues to do with rates relief after I wrote to him on the subject. Has he received approaches from the City of Edinburgh Council in that regard? If the council approaches him, will the Government automatically make the 75 per cent contribution? I hope that that will be the case. I am sure that the cabinet secretary is aware of the severe hardship that many traders are suffering because of the effect on their businesses of the tramline construction work. If relief is not granted, some traders might well go out of business.

When will the City of Edinburgh Council be told its housing budget allocation for this year? Is there any precedent in the past 50 years for local authorities in Scotland not being told their housing allocation by the seventh week of the financial year?

I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate and on her campaigning work on alternative and augmentative communication over a period of years. I also congratulate and welcome to the gallery members of the alternative and augmentative communication campaign. I commend their central demand for a strategy that is based on need; that sets out minimum standards of service; that delivers better-quality and equitable provision throughout Scotland; and that leads to the co-ordination or pooling of local education, social work and health budgets. I was pleased to see from the survey that was carried out that Lothian NHS Board—which is the board that covers my area—is doing better than some other boards in that regard. However, it is clear that we cannot regard as satisfactory a situation in which eight NHS boards are judged to provide poor services. Of course, as the suggestion to pool resources indicates, alternative and augmentative communication is not just a health matter. It affects a wide range of services, including education, social care, justice and other services. I was pleased to commission research on communication support needs in 2006 when I was the Minister for Communities. The first part of that research, entitled "Communication Support Needs: A Review of the Literature", was published in 2007. The research found, among other things, that people with communication support needs are more likely to experience negative social interactions in education, health care, criminal justice and other services. It also found that people with communication support needs have difficulty in accessing the information that is required to utilise services. A key recommendation was that there should be further research, central to which was the recommendation that research  should be carried out that engaged directly with people with communication support needs. That was the most important of several recommendations that the report made. In January, I asked a parliamentary question about the report. I was told: "The Scottish Government very much welcomes the findings of the research report ... The review concluded with recommendations for three further research studies and we are considering the options carefully. We hope to respond in the spring with our plans for addressing the issues raised."— [ Official Report , Written Answers, 31 January 2008; S3W-8595.]  As we can all see the sun shining into the chamber, we know that spring has now passed. I therefore look forward to the minister's response.

I accept that the debate will focus on the six or so pages of the international framework document but, given that there is a short paragraph on international development at the end of the document, I was surprised that the minister asked me not to move my amendment, which refers to international development. If the Parliament is to make a statement about its international framework or strategy, it is important to make it explicit that work on international development is a crucial part of that. I cannot disagree with the sentiments in the motion on promoting Scotland and in particular on growing the Scottish economy. However, our  international strategy always had two strands. One strand, of course, was about promoting Scotland and growing our economy; the other strand was about ensuring that we fulfil our obligations to the rest of the world. It would be quite wrong to agree to a motion that does not contain both elements. We cannot have an international framework that does not encompass international development. For example, it might be good for this country's economy to attract nurses and other health care workers from certain countries in Africa, but that would not be good for those countries. We must consider the issue holistically. I hope that the minister will change her mind in that regard. I cannot object to what is said in the motion and the framework, but I must express disappointment with the framework, not just because—how shall I put this?—it is not the best Government document in its structure and clarity, but, more fundamental, because its content is extremely thin. I applaud the phrase, "where we assert excellence there must be substance to those claims", but the new international framework is markedly less substantial than the previous international strategy. Although the Scottish Government's claim that it will extend, align and provide new focus for its actions in the international arena sounds innovative and progressive, its policy contains little that is new. The emphasis on economic growth, for example, was the top priority of the previous international strategy. The statement about the importance of marketing Scotland "as a great place to live, learn, visit, work, do business and invest" is an almost-verbatim quotation from the previous strategy. There is confusion on page 1, where it is suggested that our international activities will contribute to sustainable economic growth by "Creating the conditions for talented people to live, learn, visit, work and remain in Scotland", rather than by promoting Scotland as a good place for talented people to be. The conditions themselves will largely be determined by economic and social policies in Scotland. Elaine Murray will talk about such policies. The confusion between international activity and wider economic policy is evident when we consider how the framework's success is to be evaluated. Although the key targets of population growth and GDP growth, which are set out at the beginning of the document and referred to in the motion, are useful and important, the international framework fails to set out how we can ascertain  the extent to which the policies that it contains have contributed to those economic objectives. How the third key objective of "Managing Scotland's reputation as a distinctive global identity" is to be measured and evaluated is even more unclear. No attempt is made to address that question in the central section, "Scotland's Story", nor is there any clear, overarching sense of how to brand Scotland consistently around the world. At the same time, substantial and important components of the previous strategy are being lost. Partnerships between schools, cities and businesses are being put at risk by the decision not to renew the long-standing and productive co-operation agreements between Scotland and key regions in Europe and around the world. There is no longer any emphasis on the importance of promoting Scotland's cities as competitive international centres through urban design and regeneration and effective branding and marketing. The establishment and promotion of transport routes to and from Scotland is no longer a priority on this Government's international agenda, and yet that is essential in creating the optimum conditions for economic growth through business and tourism. This Government has frequently been accused of adopting a style-over-substance approach, and yet even the style of the framework document leaves a lot to be desired. Not only has the Government omitted to include vital areas of importance while offering little that is really new, it has also failed to provide any detail on how it will implement the few pledges that it has made. For example, both policies—the previous Administration's policy and this one—make mention of education, lifelong learning and research in their international agendas. The previous strategy set out at least 10 clear objectives—the Executive detailed how it would enhance the profile of Scottish education and research institutions to attract overseas students, researchers and investment and, at the same time, promote links between academia and industry. By contrast, the new international framework acknowledges only that "Promotion of Scotland's institutions and their innovative capabilities should therefore be a key facet of our overall brand promotion strategy abroad", without providing any information on how it is intended to achieve that end, whether that general statement is the only target and—crucially—what measures will be put in place to monitor and evaluate progress.

Of course, I understand the concept of a framework and accept that three action plans sit underneath this framework document, copies of two of which I was handed five minutes before I came into the chamber. We are not debating those plans today but, that said, it is fair to say that none of them covers the topic that I am addressing and I will move on to mention others that the action plans do not cover in any way. If the Government had covered those topics anywhere else, I would not have a complaint but, as far as I am aware, they are not covered. Education and lifelong learning have been seriously downgraded in the new framework, but I do not have time to go into the examples that I had hoped to mention. I turn to the "New priorities" section, towards the end of the document. The arc of prosperity countries are mentioned alongside those of the Commonwealth, and yet the statement of intent warrants barely three sentences of what is—admittedly—a short and flimsy document. Of course, I have no objection to getting more detail somewhere else. If there are to be no further action plans or other supporting information on the arc of prosperity countries, perhaps the minister will say more when she sums up. Perhaps she will say exactly how she intends to co-ordinate our efforts in those countries and what the focus and geographical extent of those activities will be. In her evidence to the European and External Relations Committee on 29 April, the minister said: "There are approximately twice as many residents of India in higher education as there are people in Scotland."—[ Official Report , European and External Relations Committee , 29 April 2008; c 602.] With that in mind, surely we need more information on the Government's announcement in the framework that a priority will be to "strengthen links with India". We have one SDI office in New Delhi. What further resources will be made available in India? Will the geographic focus continue to be on New Delhi? What further new initiatives does the Government plan in India? I do not have time to quote from the evidence that Sir David Edward gave to the European and External Relations Committee on 22 January 2008. However, an international development organisation asked me to raise the issue: why India and not Pakistan, too? I could raise other similar questions, but I said that I would raise that one.

I do not think that I can, as I am in the final minute of my speech.

My amendment also mentions working in co-operation with the United Kingdom Government. I was pleased to see in the section entitled "A Fresh Approach", at the end of the framework document, that there is an intention to make full use of UK resources. I had thought, rather naively, that the minister would accept my amendment and I hope that she will reconsider. I move amendment S3M-1838.2, to insert at end: "in co-operation with the UK Government and including international development objectives as a key priority."

I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement, but does she agree that the main challenge facing the future of the policy is Scotland's changing demographics? Does she agree that the main reason why the original costings were an underestimate is that the 2006 census projected far more old old people—that is, people living over the age of 90—than the previous census, on which the care development group report was based? Although I agree with the cabinet secretary on the specific attendance allowance issue, does she agree that perhaps the most important recommendation in Lord Sutherland's report relates to the wider review of all the costs of long-term care? Would it not be sensible to set the attendance allowance issue within that wider context?

Returning to the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, do the minister and her colleague, the cabinet secretary—who is sitting beside her—recognise that the RSAMD is a world-class institution that depends to a large extent on one-to-one tuition? Are they therefore concerned about the new contracts that are being offered to teachers? The RSAMD appears to be at risk of losing staff because of the greatly reduced salaries that are being offered for fewer hours of work. Does the minister accept that the Scottish Government has a responsibility because the drama courses in particular are not funded at conservatoire level and have to cross-subsidise the music courses? Will she intervene with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to try to rectify the underlying problem?

Over and above the debacle of the financial memorandum, will the minister comment on the fact that the budget lines for the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen are declining over the next three years? How on earth will creative Scotland be able to fulfil the new and extra functions that it will have in relation to the creative industries?

I am happy to support Iain Smith's amendment, with its emphasis on effective engagement with local communities in relation to listed buildings. More generally, we should emphasise the importance of engaging with local people on a range of issues to do with the historic environment. For example, Iain Smith talked about adapting buildings to new uses and functions. When we do that, and when we get involved in regeneration initiatives more generally, it is important that we involve local people. Iain Smith also talked about the importance of buildings as a way of promoting the year of homecoming. The theme of tourism and its relation to the historic environment was also emphasised by other speakers. We all look forward to next year. Historic Scotland is working closely with the National Trust for Scotland on the year of homecoming, as I found at a recent meeting with the NTS. I cannot give full support to Ted Brocklebank's amendment, so I think that we will abstain from the vote on it. It implies that Historic Scotland should be responsible for funding some, if not all, of the work on relevant buildings, which is a step too far. He spoke about several buildings and an airfield of which I have no knowledge, so I will pass over that. I have, of course, acquainted myself with Castle Tioram, which was mentioned by John Farquhar Munro and Jamie McGrigor—and perhaps others whom I have forgotten. I do not want to get involved in the specifics of the issue, but I suppose that, as I have looked into it, I have become aware of how exceptional Castle Tioram is, in a way. The local public inquiry into Castle Tioram was the only such inquiry in Scotland that year. In the same year, Historic Scotland approved more than 200 applications for scheduled monument consent. When there are complaints about particular examples, it is important that we maintain that perspective. John Farquhar Munro called for the abolition of Historic Scotland, which I am in total disagreement with. It is vitally important that we have a national body to oversee the historic environment. Indeed, I  had that thought in mind when I included in my amendment the need to maintain "strong safeguards ... to protect heritage assets". Whatever new powers may be given to local authorities, we certainly cannot do without Historic Scotland. Christopher Harvie reminded us, with his typical and helpful historical survey, why we need a body such as Historic Scotland. In that regard, I certainly need look no further than Princes Street on the edge of my constituency and what was done there in the 1960s. I am sure that Historic Scotland would not allow anything similar to happen today. Christopher Harvie also picked up the theme of public engagement with civic architecture, which is an important new dimension. The Edinburgh World Heritage Trust held a debate in Edinburgh last week during which there was some dispute between the newly appointed director, who said that the public should be involved, and some architects who thought that it should all be left to them. I am happy to side with the newly appointed director and Christopher Harvie on that issue. James Kelly spoke eloquently of his constituency and the refurbishment of Rutherglen town hall in particular as a model of how to move forward. That was one of many examples given in the debate of Historic Scotland's positive contribution, working in partnership with local authorities and developers. Helen Eadie emphasised the important theme of disability rights, which I only touched on in my opening speech. It was important that she highlighted that theme in more detail, pointing out the importance of having a guide on access to historic buildings. She also pointed out that Historic Scotland should be sensitive to meeting disability rights requirements when there are applications for changes to historic buildings. Willie Coffey, too, was positive about Historic Scotland—unlike his colleague from Ayrshire, in a parliamentary question last week. Willie Coffey reminded us of examples of Historic Scotland's positive role in relation to a conservation area in Kilmarnock for which the council won a planning award, with Historic Scotland giving money to support the work. I may have picked him up wrongly, but he also referred to the historic environment audit as a new initiative. I say gently that sometimes the new Government has a slight tendency to speak of things as if they are new; in fact, that audit was initiated several years ago by, I believe, my colleague Patricia Ferguson, to whom I now come. I paid tribute to Patricia Ferguson's work in my opening speech, and it was helpful that she spoke  in the debate today. She emphasised the obvious importance of having checks and balances in relation to local and national work. She also asked questions about resources for local authorities for the pilots and about the monitoring of the pilots, which I hope the minister will answer in her closing speech. Patricia Ferguson also emphasised another dimension to the green side of the debate, pointing out that reusing buildings is one of the greenest things that we can do. She picked up on Rob Gibson's excitement about the word "concordat"—perhaps that is another example of what I was talking about a moment ago, given that the new Government did not invent concordats. Indeed, I think that the review of Historic Scotland in 2004 talked about concordats and that Patricia Ferguson ensured that they began to happen. Rob Gibson, like Patricia Ferguson, emphasised the importance of community planning, which is another dimension of the involvement of local people. In my opening speech, I referred to the HEACS report, which said that there is little recognition of the historic environment in community planning. I ask the minister for the second time to address the HEACS recommendation on developing a set of qualitative and quantitative indicators for including the historic environment in community planning. It would be useful to know the minister's thinking on several other HEACS recommendations, although she will probably not have enough time to talk about them today. For example, HEACS recommended that local authorities and other public bodies and agencies should have a statutory duty of care for the historic environment. That seems a good suggestion to me. HEACS also recommended the creation of a set of key performance indicators for local authorities for dealing with the historic environment, and it suggested exploring specific grant mechanisms to fund specialist posts in local authorities to support the development of a quality historic environment service. All those recommendations seem to be good, but the minister did not respond to them with absolute approval. If she has enough time, it would be interesting to hear about the minister's thinking on the HEACS report on the need for legislation. Did she abolish HEACS because she did not like that report? Of course, HEACS supported something in the Scottish National Party's manifesto that has since been ditched.

I welcome the announcement of the £8 million to continue the work of the conservation area regeneration scheme, and the key performance targets for planning consultation, which came up during the course of the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill. I also welcome what the minister described as the new joint working agreement, although I think that it has been on-going for some time. Indeed, it was one of the recommendations of the review of Historic Scotland in 2004, which I will talk about in a moment. The minister pointed out that those and other initiatives were responses to the Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland's report. I regret the council's prospective demise, because it is important that ministers receive independent advice on historic environment matters. Setting that aside, I read the minister's response to the report, and I was slightly puzzled when I heard that this debate was to be about new powers for local authorities, because recommendation 3 of the report referred to reassessing the balance of work between Historic Scotland and local authorities. In her response to the report, the minister noted recommendation 3 and stated: "We believe the balance is about right". It is clear that the minister has moved on in one regard and is now talking about delegated powers to deal with listed building casework. I hope that she can say a bit more about that in her wind-up speech, because local authorities already have considerable powers and responsibilities with reference to listed buildings. We are still slightly unsure, therefore, about the detail of what is proposed. If it is within the kind of framework that the HEAC report proposed, I am happy to go along with the thrust of the motion. However, it is important to add my amendment, the first part of which is crucial, because all of what is proposed must take place within a framework of continuing, strong safeguards to protect heritage assets.  It is clear that Historic Scotland is central to that protection, and I pay tribute to it for all its work. In 1997, I had, among many other ministerial responsibilities, responsibility for it, but I recognise that there has been significant culture change since then. In that context, we should pay tribute to the work of Patricia Ferguson, who I hope will speak later about that and many other matters. Historic Scotland's structure and function was reviewed in 2004. One recommendation was that there should be concordats with local authorities, work on which, I understand, has been on-going since. Increased flexibility was recommended to ensure that the organisation is responsive to change, which is relevant to what my amendment says about disability rights and climate change, which I will cover in a moment. The review also led to a change in Historic Scotland's organisational structure, including the establishment of regional inspectorate teams that put the closer relationship with local authorities on a more systematic base. "Scottish Historic Environment Policy 1: Scotland's Historic Environment", which is the first in a series of important policy statements that the previous Administration initiated, also emphasises the importance of Historic Scotland working in partnership with local authorities. As well as setting out key outcomes, it reminds us of an important message for the debate: "The protection of the historic environment is not about preventing change", but about managing change "intelligently and with understanding". The best approach involves Historic Scotland working alongside local authorities and developers in order to manage change in that way. There are many outstanding examples of such an approach being taken. Colleagues in the City of Edinburgh Council to whom I spoke talked about how the council has worked constructively with Historic Scotland over the past few years to ensure that change is managed in a way that is sensitive to the historic environment. Some time ago, Elaine Murray spoke in the Parliament about how Historic Scotland worked on the Crichton campus in partnership with the developer and local authorities. That also happened with Taymouth castle. John Swinney raised issues relating to that castle with me when I was minister with responsibility for planning; Historic Scotland then engaged with the developer. I have been reliably informed that there has been an outstanding conclusion to that work. Such work goes on all the time, and it is far more typical of what happens than the one or two examples of Historic Scotland rejecting proposed changes that we may hear about in the debate.  Moreover, people are often on the side of Historic Scotland rather than that of the local authority when there is a disagreement. Somebody recently talked to me about the site of the battle of Bothwell bridge, which the local authority wanted to develop. Historic Scotland, supported by local people, took a different view. Communities that are questioned about the importance of the historic environment give it a high wellbeing rating. As the HEACS report reminded us, there is little recognition of the historic environment in community plans. The report stated that it would be a good idea to work up qualitative and quantitative indicators for including the historic environment in community planning. In her response to the report, the minister said that she would explore the matter after the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 was fully implemented. I am not clear why there should be a delay. It is important that in the debate we raise concerns that have been expressed about the national outcome indicators for local authorities. I am sure that concerns will have been expressed to other members about those indicators. It seems that not all local authorities will have historic environment measures in their single outcome agreements. It would be helpful if the minister commented on that. I referred to the 2004 review's message of flexibility in response to change, which is relevant to two issues that my amendment highlights. I refer to constituency examples that I have been given. In taking advice from Historic Scotland, the local authority objected to a lift being installed in a mental health crisis centre, because the building was listed. Disability campaigners and local people in general objected to that, as I did. It is important that Historic Scotland responds to the new legislation and the new emphasis on disability rights. Climate change is clearly in the same category. There are probably more listed buildings in my constituency than there are in any other constituency in Scotland, not least because it contains the new town. A solar panel on a house in a conservation area on the edge of the new town was recently rejected. Again, it is important that Historic Scotland takes on board the green revolution. We also hope that the SNP takes that on board, as we seem to have had a green counter-revolution this week in Lewis; however, that is slightly off the point of the debate. My amendment highlights the fact that we should continue to ensure that the skills that are required to maintain our historic buildings, such as stonemasonry, are available in Scotland. To achieve that, it is important that we support as  many projects as we can that ensure the survival of those skills and promote training. The HEACS report's recommendation on the need for historical environment legislation is also relevant. In its manifesto, the SNP was committed to such legislation, but it seems to have changed its mind. Perhaps the minister can tell us why, and why she has changed her mind about merging the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland with Historic Scotland. In addition, the minister talked about statutory protection for battlefield sites, which was in the SNP's manifesto. Is that still on the agenda? In closing, I congratulate Historic Scotland on its record-breaking attendance figures at its buildings in the past year. I believe that the total number of visitors passed the 3 million mark for the first time last year, and the figure has now reached 3,239,000. We should also remember the National Trust for Scotland, representatives of which I met recently, and the Historic Houses Association, representatives of which I will meet next week. Both those organisations work together with Historic Scotland in the historic properties group. Their role in both conserving Scotland's heritage and presenting it for education and enjoyment cannot be overstated. I am sure that we all pay tribute to that work. I move amendment S3M-1751.2, to insert at end: "always ensuring that strong safeguards are maintained to protect heritage assets, that the skills required to maintain historic buildings are available and that, in protecting the historic environment, proper account is taken of disability rights and climate change objectives".

To ask the Scottish Executive  whether it will reconsider the distance criteria that are proposed as a precondition of permitted development rights for wind turbines. (S3O-2922)

If permitted development rights for microturbines applied only to houses that were at least 100m from the next house, as proposed in the Scottish Government's consultation paper, how many households in Edinburgh does the minister think would benefit from such rights? Would it be better to have a minimum standard for noise emissions from microturbines and to grant permitted development rights wherever that standard was met?

The First Minister boasts of setting a higher bar and of having greater ambition, but will he give us the evidence for that in respect of culture? Does he not realise that the previous Administration established an international touring fund for the national companies—and, indeed, established the National Theatre of Scotland itself—leading to the great success of "Black Watch" in the USA, as well as visits by the Traverse Theatre, the Citizens Theatre and Stellar Quines? Does he also not realise that, last year, we funded tartan week events that were run by, for example, the Scottish Book Trust, the Scottish Museums Council, Scottish Screen and the Edinburgh festivals? What comparable initiatives can he tell us about?

At last night's meeting of the cross-party group on cancer, more than one cancer charity pointed out that it is slightly odd that, in the current consultation document, the chapter on diagnosis and treatment is followed immediately by a chapter on palliative care. Does she agree with those charities that there should be more focus on the welcome reality that more people live with cancer for a considerable time? Will she ensure that that reality is addressed more extensively in the final document?

I will focus on the gap between the rhetoric that we have heard from the Scottish Government about the level of finance for local government and the public services that it will support and the reality of what is happening. I will  give concrete examples from issues in which I have been involved in the past few weeks in Edinburgh and Leith and I will not become engaged in a war of statistics, except to point out that many official figures are underestimates—for example, the £780,000 cut in grants to the voluntary sector in Edinburgh is actually £2.6 million if we take account of efficiencies and a lack of inflation provision. Schools highlight sharply the gap between the rhetoric and the reality. At a school in my constituency last week, I talked to distressed staff who face the reality of a cut in staffing numbers next year. That is happening when the Government is talking about smaller class sizes, which I presume should mean more teachers. That cut is part of the £3.8 million cut in funding to schools in Edinburgh, which is more than 1.5 per cent of the overall budget. On top of that, £966,000 will come out of sure start and 320 full-time nursery places will be lost. Both those developments fly in the face of the rhetoric that we heard a couple of weeks ago when the Scottish Government launched its early years strategy. Another prominent cut that has provoked widespread concern in Edinburgh and Leith in the past few weeks is the £300,000 cut in funding for leisure centre crèches. I was pleased to support the campaign for those crèches, which continues. That cut is contrary not only to what the Government says in its early years strategy, but to all its good intentions on health improvement. In the past few weeks, I have met many parents—mainly women with young children—who, as a result of that cut, will no longer be able to use superb leisure centres in Edinburgh such as the Leith Victoria swim centre in my constituency. It is not just the young who are affected. There is an on-going review of home care services in Edinburgh, and now only those who are in the critical care category are eligible for home care. Again, that is completely contrary to the Government's rhetoric about care at home in local communities. Those who are still to receive home care will attract a 17.5 per cent increase in the charge. If that is not bad enough, there are £8.2 million of cuts still to be identified in the health and social care budget over the next three years.

That does not reflect the experience that I had in the school in my constituency last week, and it is not true more generally. In fact, there was £52 million in the  reserves when the previous Administration left office. Having taken that intervention, I do not have time to go into detail on the £833,000 cut in the community learning and development budget and the 85 per cent cut in funding for the Edinburgh Community Newspaper Trust, which is threatening the excellent North Edinburgh News in my constituency. I will conclude on an issue that concerns my portfolio of culture. We have heard a great deal of fine rhetoric about support for the arts from the new Scottish Government, but the reality of the administration in Edinburgh—in which the SNP is prominent—is that there has been a cut of £83,000 in support for the outreach services of Scottish Opera and Scottish Ballet. We believe not only in supporting excellence in the arts, but in ensuring that that excellence is available to the widest possible range of people. The programmes of Scottish Opera and Scottish Ballet in schools and in the community more generally will be decimated by that cut. When it comes to culture policy, education policy and care of the elderly, we hear fine words from the Scottish Government but the reality on the ground, time and again, contradicts those policies. It is very important, in this debate and more generally, that people listen to what is happening in the real world and test the Government's fine words against the reality.

To ask the Scottish Executive what housing resources will be allocated to the City of Edinburgh Council for 2008-09. (S3O-2707)

Does the minister realise that the Edinburgh housing market area has 75 per cent of Scotland's overall shortage of affordable homes and only 15 per cent of Scotland's overall housing spend, in spite of a doubling of Edinburgh's housing resources over a three-year period by the previous Administration? Does he also realise that the previous Scottish Executive planned to proceed to a new distribution formula that would give greater weighting to affordable housing shortages? When will the minister make that shift and give proper recognition to Edinburgh's unique housing problems?

Does the minister accept that if we are to promote sport and physical activity in communities it is often desirable to provide child care for families who want to get involved in sport? Is he concerned that the administration in the City of Edinburgh Council, of which his party is a member, has withdrawn crèches from many leisure centres in the city, including the Leith Victoria swim centre in my constituency? Will he give his support to the demonstration that will take place at 3.30 pm this afternoon, at which people will call for that decision to be reversed?

I welcome this debate on Fairtrade and wider trade justice issues and congratulate Patricia Ferguson on securing it. As we have seen in this and previous years, Fairtrade fortnight is a fantastic opportunity to raise further public awareness about fair trade issues in Scotland and around the world. It is a  chance to celebrate the power of the individual to shape how our supermarkets, food outlets and high street stores do business and the good will and determination of the people of Scotland and the UK in working towards combating issues of poverty and global injustice. Those efforts continue far beyond the allotted two weeks of Fairtrade fortnight. I want to widen the debate, as other members have done, because Fairtrade fortnight is also a good way to provoke debate about what more needs to be done and how we can do more to tackle the root causes of poverty, not least those that prevent or hinder developing countries from competing in the world market on an equal footing with their richer neighbours. Although Fairtrade fortnight celebrates the power of the individual consumer, it is important to recognise the need for Government and the Scottish Parliament to take a lead in addressing these issues both at home and on the world stage. At home, we must ensure that the essential principles of fair trade, development and justice are major factors throughout all areas of Scottish policy. We need to confront the sticky issue of public procurement to ensure that ethical and sustainable procurement is at the heart of all public service delivery, wherever possible. Although there has been some uncertainty about the extent to which the Scottish Government is able to include ethical trading requirements in its tendering policies within the prescriptions of EU law, mounting evidence, not least from the House of Commons International Development Select Committee's report last year, suggests that there might be more scope than it first appeared to include social and environmental criteria in future public service procurement contracts. Moreover, we need greater accountability to ensure that service providers adhere to the international standards that are currently in place. In its bid for the 2012 Olympic games, Madrid put forward tendering proposals for the supply of Fairtrade T-shirts. Perhaps Scotland could develop that idea further to include fair and ethical criteria in its procurement contracts for the 2014 Glasgow Commonwealth games. That is just one way in which Scotland can do more not only to support the ideals of Fairtrade but to promote more ethical codes of practice in business in Scotland and abroad. That might be one small step towards addressing some of the larger issues of trade justice on the world stage—the structural and apparently insurmountable inequalities that are embedded in current international trade regulations and procedures. The continuing controversy surrounding  negotiations between the EU and African, Caribbean and Pacific countries over economic partnership agreements is a critical example of the ways in which international development aims are so frequently sacrificed to a pro-western mercantile agenda. However, international pressure to liberalise markets to such a degree—and so quickly—might have catastrophic effects on those countries, which could result in unfair and overwhelming competition from technologically advanced, subsidy-maintained European economies and cause further economic insecurity and disempowerment in developing countries. For example, a study by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa indicated that Zambia could lose up to $15 million in revenues as a result of being forced to lower import tariffs—that is roughly equivalent to its total annual spending on HIV and AIDS. According to the Kenyan Ministry of Trade and Industry, Kenya could lose up to 65 per cent of industry and 12 per cent of Government revenues, which would threaten the livelihoods of millions, especially those in rural areas. The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, of which Malawi is a member, could lose up to $0.25 billion dollars in regional trade as a result of the current EPA deals. If trade is ever to be really fair, Scotland, in partnership with the UK, must put pressure on the European Union and the World Trade Organization to redress those and the many other trade injustices that serve to keep developing countries in crippling poverty.

I thank the minister for recognising that the previous, Labour-led council in Edinburgh funded outreach work for Scottish Ballet, Scottish Opera and many other arts companies. Is she concerned about the effect of cuts in local funding for the arts? In particular, will she condemn the proposed cuts to Scottish Ballet and Scottish Opera? More generally, given that the substance of her answer to Richard Baker was about the Scottish Arts Council, will she explain how a declining budget for arts activity over the next three years will enable regional performing arts to be funded throughout Scotland? In an answer to me today, she recognised that creative Scotland will have many new responsibilities, but that means that traditional support for the performing arts will decline. Does that not give her cause for concern?

After reading the consultation document and some of the responses to it, I support the concept of independent scrutiny that has been outlined and am inclined to support the third option. As it makes clear, such an approach is not entirely new. Indeed, the first sentence in the section that outlines the third option says: "The NHS has used the approach of an independent, expert panel a number of times in the past", and it gives the example of the group that reviewed maternity services in Glasgow—which,  as it happens, I announced in a parliamentary debate in 2004. Independent scrutiny represents another step towards establishing an open and effective procedure for bringing about service change that is based on developing options with people, not on presenting options to them. It is fair to say that such an approach has been evolving over a number of years and that, as I say, this is the next stage in the process. Some NHS boards have been much better at this type of approach than others. Returning to the example of maternity services in Glasgow, I felt that there was great frustration that direct intervention was possible only at the end of the process. It would be useful to be able to intervene before formal consultation takes place—although I realise that under the proposals such intervention would be made not by the minister but by the scrutiny panel. That is consistent with the approach that was adopted in the Kerr report, which said that all options for service redesign must be considered before centralisation on grounds of resource or workforce constraints is considered. A key question for a scrutiny panel is whether all the options have been examined. In relation to the Vale of Leven hospital, the scrutiny panel recently said that all the options had not been properly considered, which was a reasonable intervention at that point. The scrutiny panel's key task of assessing whether all the options have been considered is part of its more general commentary. It is useful to have a check in the system at that point, which will be crucial in giving people more confidence in the process, and it might potentially lead to a wider range of options being available—I say "potentially" because there might be little need for comment if a health board has done its job properly. In my day, I always used to commend Tayside NHS Board and lament the fact that other health boards did not engage the public and put forward options to the same extent. If they had, the whole process would have proved much more successful. Perhaps we should hope for a withering away of the scrutiny panels in time, as boards get better at producing a range of options with a comprehensive evidence base. Part of the purpose of the debate is to ask questions. Margaret Curran and others have done that, and I am sure that the minister will reply to them. An obvious question is about the nature of the panels. As it happens, last night, I asked a health activist in my constituency what she thought of them. Her response was that it depends who is on them. That is a crucial issue, although the way of forming the panels that the consultation recommends seems entirely reasonable. It might  be desirable for a wider range of groups to be approached on the nomination of panel members but, apart from that, the general approach seems right. There is also the issue of the degree of change that will be referred to panels. People have asked about that in the consultation responses and elsewhere, and the cabinet secretary has substantially addressed it. It is vital that there is clarity on the respective roles of the Scottish health council and the expert scrutiny panels. In general, people seem content with the proposed arrangements, but there might be an issue if boards work collaboratively to develop options for change. Will the scrutiny panel look only at the options, or will it look at how they have been developed? That question might already have been answered, but I have no doubt that it will be dealt with in the summing-up speech. The key question is what happens when the evidence is contested. Page 12 of the consultation document says: "The board would be able to reflect their conclusions"— the panel's conclusions— "in the final proposal for public consultation." Does that suggest that the board can take or leave the panel's recommendations? A few questions remain to be answered but, in general, as the consultation responses indicate, there is overwhelming support for the external scrutiny process and I am happy to lend my support to it.

I welcome the continuity of policy on these matters, but I will question the cabinet secretary further about patients appealing against an excessive level of security; her colleague Shona Robison said that that was one of the most welcome parts of the bill when it was debated in the Parliament five years ago this month. To some extent, the cabinet secretary clarified the position in her answer to Richard Simpson. Is it not the case that the First Minister has to give consent to the specific place with a lower level of security but does not have the right to stop the transfer altogether? Does she agree that the First Minister was misleading Parliament when he implied that he could stop a transfer? Can she give a guarantee that the First Minister cannot stop a transfer when the Court of Session has demanded it?

Does the minister agree not only that small-scale renewable energy technologies can play an important role in reducing domestic energy consumption but that the 15 per cent renewables target for new developments set out in Scottish planning policy 6, which was issued before the election, can be important in expanding their use? If so, why have the majority of local authorities not translated the target into their local plans, and why have they not received any support or pressure from the Scottish Government to do so? Moreover, why is the Scottish Government dragging its heels on introducing permitted development rights for microrenewables in existing buildings, despite independent advice received more than a year ago that supported the policy?

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received on the abolition of the cultural co-ordinators scheme. (S3O-2302)

I will not embarrass the minister by reminding her of what the Scottish Arts Council said about the matter in the e-mails that were reported in The Herald  on Monday, but surely she realises that not just the Scottish Arts Council but many local arts organisations are enthusiastic about cultural co-ordinators. Indeed, many national bodies are enthusiastic, as was illustrated in the evidence from the National Theatre of Scotland at yesterday's meeting of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. Why does the minister not leave decisions about the funding of cultural co-ordinators to the Scottish Arts Council, which is best placed to make such decisions? On a related matter, why has she decided to cut in real terms by almost 10 per cent the Scottish Arts Council's budget over the next 10 years? I ask her please not just to refer to an increase in the culture budget as a whole, because I am sure that she realises that the Scottish Arts Council is at the heart of that budget.

I welcome the debate and Linda Fabiani's opening comments, which indicate a great deal of continuity from the previous Administration's approach. I also welcome the announcement on 7 February of the Scottish Government's allocation of more than £677,000 in continued support for international development programmes in Malawi. Perhaps in her winding-up speech, the minister will confirm whether the budget of £4.5 million for international development programmes for this year has now been allocated fully. Although international development is largely a reserved matter, three years ago the foundations of Scottish international development policy were laid with the aims of complementing the United Kingdom Government's international development policy, contributing to the millennium development goals, which have poverty eradication at their heart, engaging the Scottish population in international development issues, and transferring Scottish skills to where they are most needed in the world. Malawi is central to that effort. The signing of the co-operation agreement on 3 November 2005 was a momentous event that celebrated and cemented Scotland's historic links with Malawi and paved the way to a successful development partnership. I very much look forward to hearing the speeches of those who were instrumental in putting those policies into action, especially Jack McConnell and Patricia Ferguson, but also Karen Gillon and Sarah Boyack, who visited Malawi only last week. It is a depressing thought that so many things have not changed since I first became actively involved in international development issues more  than 40 years ago—indeed, some things have got worse. For example, it is shocking that 30,000 African children will die today from diseases that we can prevent and cure. However, there has been recent progress, not least in Malawi, and the UK Government has increased its commitment to the global development challenge. That is reflected, for example, in the 11 per cent real-terms increase in the Department for International Development budget for the forthcoming spending period and in the £70 million a year that that department has pledged to Malawi in the period 2007-11. Although it is at times disheartening to see just how much work is still needed in Malawi, it is encouraging to see progress. For example, although Malawi is one of the 10 poorest countries in the world, poverty levels fell by 5 per cent in 2006. Moreover, the latest figures show that life expectancy is rising after years of decline, and they reveal significant falls in infant mortality. The Save the Children report, "Saving Children's Lives: Why equity matters", which was published two days ago, reveals the horrifying extent of child mortality rates in developing countries throughout the world. Sub-Saharan Africa, with about 11 per cent of the world's population, accounts for nearly half of the total infant deaths throughout the world, and 19 of the world's 40 worst-performing countries are found there. However, because of support for the various health programmes in Malawi, the mortality rate there for under-fives dropped by more than 10 per cent between 2004 and 2006, which prompted Save the Children to identify Malawi as a positive example of the progress that can be made in sub-Saharan Africa. The Malawian Government's community home-based care programme is a key development. One project, which is supported by Oxfam and funded by the Scottish Government, works to provide basic medical care to rural communities in the 81 villages that are worst affected by HIV/AIDS. Across Malawi more generally, the number of people contracting HIV and AIDS is starting to stabilise, with greater access to testing and anti-retroviral drugs, particularly in urban areas but increasingly in rural regions as well. Moreover, a UK Government-supported programme to make a substantial increase to health workers' salaries in Malawi is reducing staff emigration and improving the health prospects of those who are most in need of health care. There have been further improvements in education—for example, more than 80 per cent of children now attend primary school. There have also been improvements in management of the economy, with growth of more than 7.5 per cent over the past two years. However, there is clearly a very long way to go. It is therefore vital to build on the successes while maintaining the continuity  and sustainability of the programmes that are already established. Sustainability has to be one of the central principles of our involvement in Malawi; we have to bear that in mind whenever a project is funded. Involvement has to be based on partnership and a sustained engagement with local people to help them to develop in the way that they decide on. Before any project is begun, or indeed extended or ended, there has to be full consultation with the communities that will be benefiting from the intervention and also with other agencies and partners. Moreover, when funding decisions are made—as was recognised by the previous Administration—additional weight should be given to projects that promote women's equality and empowerment, thereby positioning women's rights and contributions at the heart of the development process. Finally, we need to harness the expertise and experience of Scottish non-governmental organisations and civil society organisations in Malawi in order to ensure that we encourage and deliver best practice and channel Scottish skills and good will in ways that offer the most effective assistance to the people of Malawi. Over and above all that, we must never forget the broader international context. There has been significant progress in debt cancellation for Malawi since Gleneagles, but there are still big trade injustices and the particular challenge at present of the European Union's economic partnership agreements. As John McAllion of Oxfam told us at a recent meeting of the cross-party group on Malawi, Malawi will have to remove tariffs on EU goods this year, which could affect both its food production and public spending levels. We should never forget the bigger international picture because, at the end of the day, no amount of development of good practice will be successful if the international rules continue to be stacked in favour of the developed countries of the north and against the developing world of the south.

Given the role of the Scottish Arts Council in funding such festivals, should the minister not be more concerned about that organisation's budget than she is about the Lewis chessmen? It was revealed for the first time in the Finance Committee's report on the budget, through a letter from the minister, that the SAC's budget will decline by £3 million over the next three years, which represents a real-terms cut of almost 10 per cent. Will she explain why that has never been brought to the Parliament's attention and—more important—what effect it will have on the funding of the festivals under discussion?

Does the minister share my hope that digital switchover will lead to more rather than less television, given the increased amount of space available on the digital spectrum? In relation to Border specifically, does the minister agree that the important thing for the Government to do—although Ofcom is the more relevant body in this situation—is to listen to the views of local people, who value their local, Scottish and United Kingdom identities? Should not the views of local people be paramount in the matter?

I, too, congratulate Rob Gibson on securing an important debate and join him and other members in congratulating Hands Up for Trad—for organising the awards—and the winners, who have showcased Scottish traditional music to brilliant effect. It is sad that so many people in Scotland are disconnected from such a rich tradition. That is why the part of the motion about television is particularly important. I share Rob Gibson's view that the Scottish Broadcasting Commission could consider the issue, now that it has entered the cultural phase of its work. As members know, the six programmes by Phil  Cunningham that were shown recently—I think that they have already been mentioned—were an outstanding example of television showcasing Scottish traditional music, and they made riveting viewing. Given that they dramatically highlighted the emotional richness of much traditional music, it is sad that they were not shown throughout the UK. Another interesting feature of those programmes was that they demonstrated the effect of Scottish traditional music on the music of many other countries in the world. I must apologise to Linda Fabiani because I will have to leave the debate early—I am co-convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on climate change, an interesting meeting of which began two minutes ago. It will look at the lyrics of Bob Dylan's song, "A Hard Rain". On that subject, it is worth saying that a significant amount of American music, including some of Bob Dylan's work, has been influenced by Scottish traditional music. The Phil Cunningham programmes highlighted bluegrass music, in particular, as having been influenced by such music. Mention of Phil Cunningham leads us to think of the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, and I am sure that everyone is delighted that he will take up a position there. However, it is clear that there have been concerns that the job problems at the RSAMD might affect the traditional music department. We hope that those problems will not have a negative impact on the brilliant teaching that the academy has done and the important role that it performs.

I join Jamie McGrigor in welcoming that development. Many members have spoken about the importance of increasing participation in music. All parties are at one in supporting the youth music initiative that was started by the previous Administration and which is being continued by the new Government. That has been and will continue to be important in growing the number of young people who have opportunities to participate in music. We hope that as much support as possible will be given to traditional music and to enabling more people to experience it. Specific action through the Scottish Arts Council to develop that thriving scene would also be welcome. Finally, I again apologise to the minister for not staying for her speech.

Surely if there is no cash increase in the communities regeneration fund over the next three years, that has to be a real-terms cut.

For clarity, will Nicola Sturgeon explain why such an emphasis is now placed on the solidarity golden rule and why a dismissive remark has been made about the internationally recognised definition of poverty? The internationally accepted standard for poverty income is technically defined as income that is less than 60 per cent of the United Kingdom median income. Why has there been a shift?

Does the cabinet secretary realise that, according to Professor Bramley's housing needs assessment, which was commissioned by the Scottish Government, the positive net need for affordable housing in Edinburgh is five times that of any other local authority in Scotland and that although resources for Edinburgh are twice what they were three years ago, they are still well below the per capita Scottish average? Will he take action significantly to increase housing resources to Edinburgh to meet homelessness targets as well as Edinburgh's wider social and economic needs?

Does the minister agree that apart from the wonderful Eddi Reader, the highlight of the symposium was a presentation on the play "Black Watch" in America by an American professor? I congratulate the National Theatre of Scotland on its outstanding success with that and other works. Does the minister acknowledge the foresight of the previous Administration in agreeing to establish and fund a national theatre? Will she undertake to increase funding over the next few years to that outstanding theatre company?

I congratulate Margo MacDonald on securing this important debate. I assure her that I have visited on more than one occasion the excellent and well-attended Polish drop-in at the Fort community wing. From my constituency experience, as well as everything else, I am well aware of the significant contribution that ethnic minority communities—including the new migrants from eastern Europe—make to Scottish society. In general terms, I support the sentiments of Margo MacDonald's motion. She focuses on skills and highlights the fact that people's skills could be utilised even more. It is important, however, that we all recognise the enormous contribution that the skills of ethnic minority communities already make. I spoke at a conference on Europe on Monday. Although I was extremely alarmed and concerned at the UK Independence Party speaker who was there, who was complaining about—among other things—new migrants coming to this country, I was reassured by another speaker, who said that the new migrants are contributing between 0.5 and 1 per cent to Scottish gross domestic product growth every year. I have not seen that figure before, but we all recognise the fact that they already make a significant contribution. The figure could be even higher if their skills are fully utilised, as Margo MacDonald suggests. I am not sure about the details of Margo MacDonald's proposed welcome centre at Edinburgh airport, but we need to make available advice on employment, training courses and the full range of services that are required. I had an interesting meeting a week or two ago with two women from other parts of Europe—one from Belarus, the other from Italy. They persuaded me of the desirability of providing a service that combines language teaching, cross-cultural understanding and information about services for new migrants. We all recognise the importance of all three for integration, but they suggested that they should be combined into one service. I wrote to the Scottish Government on the matter and got a reply from Stewart Maxwell. I am always glad to see Linda Fabiani in debates; I suppose that she shares this issue with Stewart Maxwell. Among other things, he said: "Following on from the spending review, the Equality Unit is currently redefining its funding process for 2008 - 2011  which will, amongst other things, take account of community cohesion and integration issues." It would be good to know whether the Scottish Government has come to any conclusions about how it will spend its money on "cohesion and integration issues". There have been pilot projects in many areas—I was responsible for them in a previous life, as Minister for Communities. Margo MacDonald's idea for a pilot is certainly worth consideration by the Scottish Government.

I intended to say something about the local government angle, but I will not have time to do that. Sarah Boyack makes an important point. I meet Polish people every Saturday when I go to one of my surgeries in the Royston/Wardieburn community centre. They are being supported in the English language and in other ways by the community learning and development team there. I am concerned that there is a proposal to cut the City of Edinburgh Council budget by £850,000 and I hope that it will be reconsidered. I referred to the skills pilot that Margo MacDonald proposed. The Government could also consider combining language teaching services with cross-cultural understanding and information about public services. Such a pilot project would be desirable. The Scottish Government has to consider its role, although I accept, of course, that local authorities have an enormous role to play in this issue. The Edinburgh partnership board is doing good work. When I wrote to the council about that, it said that it is going to set up an Edinburgh migration network. That is positive step forward for Edinburgh but, as Sarah Boyack reminded us, without funding, all such initiatives will be put at risk.

I congratulate George Foulkes on  securing a debate on an important and controversial topic. Among the excellent speeches, I am sure that members were particularly moved by those from Nanette Milne and Cathie Craigie, both of whom emphasised the vital role that transplantation has played in their lives through saving their loved ones. Because of such stories, and because of the long list of people who are waiting for transplants, I take an entirely pragmatic view. If it can be demonstrated that presumed consent will increase the number of transplants, I will support it. We should consider all the evidence, especially that from other countries in Europe. I hope that the forthcoming second report from the organ donation task force will consider that evidence carefully. On balance, having considered the evidence, I am inclined to support the move towards presumed consent. However, I would be the first to admit that the situation is complex. Public opinion is highly relevant, as is the opinion of experts. Those opinions were among the key factors in persuading me against presumed consent when I was on the Health and Community Care Committee at the time of Richard Simpson's report and again when I was a minister responsible for health. However, there are signs that public opinion is changing, which is very important. I am not entirely clear whether other people on the front line—such as transplant co-ordinators—have changed their views entirely as well. I would want to hear further from them. However, I am encouraged by polls that suggest that a majority of people now accept presumed consent. That will be essential if any system of presumed consent is to work. Because many European countries have one variant or another of the system, we have a great deal of evidence. Spain is the most quoted example, but Christine Grahame was right to point out that more than one factor influences the Spanish position. We will have to consider all factors. Some people from Spain have said that transplant co-ordinators are key. I hope that, in Scotland and across the United Kingdom, all the recommendations in the first report of the organ donation task force will be implemented as quickly as possible. Even if we consider all the evidence across Europe, I still feel that—as Kenneth Gibson argued—presumed consent can be identified as one factor, among others, that has increased the number of transplants in Europe. That is one of the factors that have persuaded me to change my mind. I have one final thought to share. One of the most successful countries—perhaps the most successful—in terms of transplant rates is  Belgium. It might sound odd, but the Belgians have two lists—an opt-out list and an opt-in list. That might address some of Mike Rumbles's concerns. Mike made a fair point in his speech. I was obviously involved in the proposals to change the legislation. We thought that hardening things up and giving legal force to carrying the card and being on the register—as I am sure that we all are—was a big step forward. I have said that I want my organs to be donated, and that is the final word in law. If we moved to what was simply an opt-out system, I would be concerned that I could not have that confidence. Mike Rumbles made a valid point about that. The possibility of having both opt-in and opt-out registers should therefore be considered.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the First Minister's statements on the Lewis chessmen are an expression of Government policy. (S3O-1995)

Has the minister thought through the implications of the U-turn from her previous position, when she refused to support Shetland's demand for the return of the St Ninian's Isle treasure from the national museum of Scotland? Can we assume that she now supports the removal from Scottish museums of the very large number of cultural artefacts from other countries, such as—to name but one—the tea service of the Emperor Napoleon that is in the national museum of Scotland? Will she, on reflection, abandon her new culture priority and concentrate on more urgent issues, such as the funding crisis at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama?

Although I welcome the £12.5 million for the most deprived areas, does the cabinet secretary accept that that is less than the money that was allocated four years ago for unmet need in deprived areas? Will she tell the chamber whether the unmet need pilots have been evaluated? If so, what conclusions has she drawn in terms of allocating further money to disadvantaged areas?

I will not detain Parliament for long as we are all looking forward to the long-awaited debate on health improvement. However, I will speak briefly in favour of the Labour amendment, which I believe achieves the right balance. Our amendment does not exclude the many voluntary sector organisations that might wish to benefit from the funds, but it places a particular emphasis on services for young people. That has struck a chord across Scotland. The first concrete example of the dormant bank account issue that I came across was at a recent meeting of the cross-party group on Scottish contemporary music that was attended by Feargal Sharkey, who is the chair of the UK live music forum. He flagged up the fact that, in England, money has already been promised from the dormant bank account fund to provide rehearsal spaces and instrument lending for young people in disadvantaged communities. I know that all of us who attended the meeting—including several MSPs—were struck by that proposal. Of course, I would be the last person to say that we should copy England indiscriminately but, equally, I  believe that if something good is happening in England, it is perfectly reasonable for us to pay attention to it. The issue is serious. We know that 43 per cent of young people who want to participate in music are unable to do so because of a lack of facilities and prohibitive costs. Allocating some of the fund to the provision of rehearsal space for young people would be a good use of money. I will flag up one more issue relating to young people and music. There has been good progress as a result of the youth music initiative. The distinguished and highly regarded chair of the Scottish Arts Council, Richard Holloway, is running a personal appeal for a pilot project in Raploch to bring together a large number of young people who would not normally have the opportunity to learn how to play an instrument to form an orchestra. I am impressed by his enthusiasm and the success of the experiment in Venezuela, and hope that the pilot can be considered as a recipient of some of the money that we are talking about. We all realise that there can be profound benefits for young people if they participate in music. Those who are not convinced by that argument should remember that grass-roots live music is the foundation of the music industry, which is one of the top five United Kingdom exporters. I hope that, as part of the consultation, the minister will take on board the suggestions that I have made.

Andrew Welsh did not mention his budget adviser's view on acceleration of the rates reductions or, indeed, on any other aspect of the budget. Did he take any account of those views, especially given that the budget adviser was critical of the Government's claim to be promoting a fairer Scotland and stronger economic growth through the budget?

Will the minister confirm that she has received a large number of representations against the axing of culture co-ordinators, from a range of distinguished individuals and companies in the artistic front line? Will she also concede that the Scottish Arts Council wanted to expand the culture co-ordinators scheme, as stated by its representative at the Enterprise and Culture Committee on 23 January last year? Why, therefore, is she forcing the Scottish Arts Council to axe that highly successful scheme, especially when she claimed in her statement on 7 November in the chamber that she rejected ministerial interference in such decisions?

Has the Scottish Government discussed with the City of Edinburgh Council the parlous state of the King's theatre, which is of such concern not only to the thousands of people at home and abroad who flock there each year but to those involved in planning its future as a theatre and training academy? Will the Government impress on its Scottish National Party colleagues in the city's administration that the council must take action very soon to begin the theatre's refurbishment and that yesterday's positive news about one aspect of the theatre's problems does  not mean that the council can sit back and do nothing for the next two years?

I congratulate Keith Brown on securing this important debate. I am happy to agree with large sections of his motion, although I am not sure whether it is fair to criticise the BBC. Clearly, it can show only the games that it has rights to, so I do not think that we can criticise it for showing the England game instead of the Scotland game. It had a contract with the English FA and not, unfortunately, with the Scottish FA. Having said that, I am a strong supporter of the games being shown on terrestrial television, not least because that is the only television to which I have access. Obviously, that is not the main point, apart from the fact that many people are in the same position and that it is important that major sporting events can be accessed by the population as a whole. Clearly, the change can happen in one of two ways. The SFA can enter into a contract with the BBC or STV but, as Keith Brown has said, that may be financially difficult for it. The other route is for the UK Government to require the change, through the inclusion of Scottish—and presumably English—international matches on a protected list of sports events. I strongly support that, and I note that the Department for Culture, Media and Sport will review the list of sporting events in the next few months. Keith Brown referred to that review, as did Margaret Hodge, the minister of state in the DCMS, in a debate in the House of Commons on 5 December. I also note that material from the Department for Culture, Media and Sport states: "A listed event is one which is generally felt to have special national resonance. It should contain an element which serves to unite the nation". The particular football match to which Keith Brown referred would certainly be covered by that definition. The suggestion that at least some of the international matches towards the end of a qualifying group should be listed seems reasonable. Keith Brown has raised that with James Purnell, and I undertake to do the same. Ideally, we would get all the qualifying matches, but getting the ones towards the end would be a fall-back position.  On the last sentence of the motion, I do not think that a debate on the devolution of broadcasting can be settled by reference to this one issue. However, as Keith Brown has not majored on that point today, I will not say any more about it—other than to say that the constitutional commission that is being set up should consider the issue appropriately.

I congratulate John Lamont on securing this important debate and, among more important matters, giving me the opportunity to make my third speech in two hours—I hope that it will be a bit less contentious than the previous two. John Lamont's speech was extremely informative. I do not see Border TV routinely, but to hear that 300 stories from the Scottish Borders and 500 from Dumfries and Galloway were shown on that channel in the past year highlights the potential loss that the new arrangements could create. Not for the first time, I heard how the situation is a major concern for Elaine Murray's constituents. Local people's views must be at the heart of the debate. From having read more general material, I was not too surprised about the local support. "New News, Future News"—a recent Ofcom publication—said that the people of Scotland show much more interest in local news than do their counterparts in England and Wales and that, despite the increasing plurality of news outlets, public service broadcasting channels remain overwhelmingly the main source of news for most people. It also said that many people in Scotland want more local news, not less. In a general way, that reinforces the examples that members have given. Under the Communications Act 2003, public service broadcasters are obliged to provide  "a comprehensive and authoritative coverage of news and current affairs ... in the different parts of ... the United Kingdom" to facilitate "civic understanding" and encourage "fair and well-informed debate". Broadcasters must also provide sufficient programming that reflects "the lives and concerns of different communities and cultural interests". I am sure that Ofcom will bear those words in mind. It is charged with overseeing the Border issue and wider public service broadcasting matters. However, we must remind ourselves that the 2003 act says that Ofcom must also have regard to "the costs to persons providing relevant television services of the fulfilment of the purposes of public service television broadcasting". At a time of incredible change and diversification in the media and the communications industry, broadcasters face as many challenges as possibilities. Ofcom will focus its attention on those issues in its second review of public service television broadcasting, which will address the further challenges that arise from the digital switchover and investigate future mechanisms for providing public service broadcasting after 2014, when ITV's licence expires. Ofcom is doing that work now; some of us attended its conference in Scotland to launch that. It will also consider the Border issue specifically. I hope that Ofcom will be able to balance the competing priorities to which I have referred and—crucially—to listen to the views of people in the Borders. I know that Vicki Nash and her team will do a highly professional job. One interesting feature is the fact that people want to preserve through local, national and UK-wide news the multiple identities that are available to them. One lesson that I will take from the debate is that they welcome and relish the diversity of identities that is available to them in their communities. We all hope that the availability of more space on the digital spectrum will mean more, rather than less, local television—a parallel debate is about the possibility of having more local television channels—and I hope that that opportunity will allow local television to continue in the Borders. The efforts of John Lamont, Elaine Murray and others will help in achieving that objective.

Will the minister give way?

Mike Russell takes the moral high ground about a referendum and castigates me for not supporting one. Why was today's SNP line on a referendum never even mentioned in the debate on the EU reform treaty on 19 September and not articulated in the debate on 8 November either?

I remind Murdo Fraser that Gordon Brown at least turned up to sign the treaty, which is more than Margaret Thatcher did for the Single European Act or John Major did for the Maastricht treaty. On more substantial matters, I fear that my prediction about the exaggerating and distorting arguments of the Conservatives was borne out in the debate. There are many examples, but I will give one or two. A fundamental point for many  speakers was the allegation that the constitutional treaty and the reform treaty are the same. My former colleague Michael Connarty was invoked. I do not agree with everything that Michael Connarty said in his report, but none of the members who mentioned him quoted his key comment that there is substantial identification between the two treaties "for those countries which have not requested derogations or opt outs from the full range of agreements in the Treaty". Even Michael Connarty admitted that the UK belongs in a completely different category. Murdo Fraser made the mistake of not doing that when he talked about new EU powers over criminal justice and strangely omitted to mention that the UK Government can decide on a case-by-case basis whether to opt in to a particular policy. Ted Brocklebank talked about a common energy policy, but new article 176A says: "measures shall not affect a Member State's right to determine the conditions for exploiting its energy resources, its choice between different energy sources and the general structure of its energy supply". I hope that Ted Brocklebank welcomes the role that the EU will play in promoting energy efficiency and the development of renewable energy. I have made the point about the EU foreign minister many times, including to Margo MacDonald when she intervened during my opening speech, so I will not waste members' time by repeating myself. Gavin Brown talked about the loss of the veto in 60 areas, but the extensions of qualified majority voting pale into insignificance compared with the extensions in the Single European Act under Baroness Thatcher. There are 49 extensions in the treaty, of which 13 do not apply because of the UK's justice and home affairs opt in and other derogations and nine are minor and technical. I think that only nine of the extensions are of genuine substance, and all of those are modest and sensible and I hope would be supported by members. For example, decisions on emergency humanitarian aid to third countries will be subject to qualified majority voting.

I welcome the positive attitude of the Green Party towards Europe, which I am sure is related not least to the new EU competence on climate change and the many other positive measures that the EU has taken on the environment.  Liberal Democrat members will forgive me if I do not spend long on their speeches. I agree substantially with what they said about fisheries and welcome their reinforcement of the point about exclusive competence over marine biological resources having been in the treaty for a long time. I also welcome Ross Finnie's comments about the inadequacy of a presidency that changes every six months and the problems that that creates. Ross Finnie was speaking from experience.

It is clear from today's news that the SNP Government has benefited from the difficult decisions on stock conservation that Ross Finnie and the previous Administration took. The member's comments do not contradict the points that were made about exclusive competence. Again, Labour speakers made many useful points. I cannot spend too much time on them other than to say that Irene Oldfather's point on Denmark was particularly relevant. Helen Eadie made an impassioned speech. I endorse everything that she said and pay tribute to all the work that she has done throughout her life to forge bonds across the EU. In my last two minutes, I must, of course, move on to address the SNP speeches. Gil Paterson included various quotes on the constitution and treaty in his contribution, which contrasted to those that Irene Oldfather and I gave. People can pick on the similarities or differences between the constitution and treaty, but key to whether a referendum is necessary are the differences. Gil Paterson may have taken the moral high ground on a referendum, as Keith Brown did, but, in my speech, I emphasised the SNP's shifting position on the issue over the past three months. Indeed, the SNP's position on a referendum was a key feature of the debate, along with its lack of clarity on the treaty. Because the debate was shortened, I had to omit a section of my speech on the SNP's shifting position on the common fisheries policy. Given that one of the ministers with responsibility for fisheries is winding up the debate, perhaps he will clarify the SNP Government's position on the CFP. The SNP's manifesto policy is to work towards withdrawal from the common fisheries policy.  However, it remains profoundly unclear how that policy is compatible with EU membership. The latest formulation of the SNP position on the CFP was made on 3 December when Linda Fabiani spoke of reforming it. The SNP seems to recognise that its policy on the CFP is no longer tenable. We welcome clarification from the minister on the issue. I am sorry that I have spent so much time in both my speeches today on fisheries policy. The fact of the matter is that the Scottish Government is obsessed with that aspect of the reform treaty to the exclusion of all others. Legitimate questions need to be asked about the treaty and its implications for the Scottish Parliament, particularly in terms of justice and home affairs and the operation of the UK's opt in. We heard nothing from the Government about that today, however. The European and External Relations Committee has also heard nothing in response to its questions on the subject. I assume that the Scottish Government has held discussions with the UK Government on the matter, but there is a complete lack of transparency on this and many other aspects of its European policies. All that we have are silence, shifting opinions and, in terms of exclusive competence, the use of a highly misguided opinion. Above all, the debate was about the Government's sheer political opportunism in calling for a referendum. The Government was misguided in lodging the motion. A call for a referendum is totally out of step with the people of Scotland's attitude toward Europe, which is positive and realistic—unlike the view of the Scottish National and Conservative parties.

It is with great pleasure that I debate the EU reform treaty, now known as the Lisbon treaty, for the third time in three months in Government debating time. That said, I find it extremely odd that, although the Government has found time for us to repeat the arguments on the treaty not once, but twice, it has not found time for a single health debate. We know what the debate is all about: once again, the SNP and the Tories have come together in an unholy alliance for opportunistic political reasons. In this case, they have come together to demand a referendum—one that the chairman of the Conservative party's commission for democracy said would be "crackpot", "dotty" and "frankly absurd". We have seen the alliance at work so many times over the past eight months that it is fair to describe it as Parliament's auld alliance. Never has it been more ridiculous or incongruous than it is today. On one hand, we have the Tories, with their exaggerated and distorting denunciation of everything to do with the treaty and, on the other hand, we have the First Minister praising enthusiastically the totality of the treaty, with the sole exception of a single line. For once, Alex Salmond is worth quoting. In a lecture last week, he said: "The proposed Treaty will bring many benefits ... a more efficient decision making process, greater openness and democratic accountability and a stronger sense of direction." He could have been quoting from the Labour amendment. The First Minister went on: "importantly for Scotland, it will advance the principle of subsidiarity and the role of national Parliaments in the legislative process. We welcome these and many other reforms". I could not have put it better myself.

It is untrue for Margo MacDonald to say that the high representative for foreign affairs will be able to initiate policy—all that  that person will do is implement the EU's agreed policy, and that has to be on the basis of unanimity. I am afraid that that is one of the many scare stories, which I did not expect to hear from Margo MacDonald. To return to Alex Salmond, why such sensible remarks on the treaty as a whole should be combined with a totally disproportionate and wrong-headed response to a single line about marine biological resources is one of the great unsolved mysteries of recent debates on Europe in Parliament. The Government has never explained that in any detail, either in Parliament—today or in other debates—in the European and External Relations Committee, or in response to specific written requests from that committee. Everyone except the SNP seems to be absolutely clear that the conservation of marine biological resources has been an exclusive EU competence for decades. I could quote many statements to that effect, but perhaps it is best to go back to the UK accession treaty of 1972, which was negotiated by the Conservative Government of the time and which states: "From the sixth year after Accession at the latest, the Council, acting on a proposal from the Commission, shall determine conditions for fishing with a view to ensuring protection of the fishing grounds and conservation of the biological resources of the sea."

I will not just now, because I am way behind time. The matter is absolutely clear and the European Court of Justice has spelled out the matter for anyone who doubts it. There is treaty change in the move to co-decision making, with new powers for the European Parliament to influence the broad guidelines of fisheries policy. I would have expected the SNP to welcome that as a step forward, rather than to imagine that the exclusive competence line is a step backward. We can speculate on motives, but it would be helpful to get some answers for a change. I have some points to make about the common fisheries policy but, because speeches must be shorter than was envisaged, I will move to Linda Fabiani's central point, which was about a referendum. She had the gall to contrast the UK Government's alleged change of position with the SNP's "logical and appropriate" view. Let us see how the SNP's view has changed in the past three months. The first I read about the matter was from a senior SNP source in The Herald newspaper on 7 September, who said: "The party is not sure whether it wants a referendum, and if there is one, it is not sure which way it would campaign."  That perhaps explains why there was no mention of a referendum by the Scottish Government in the debate on the treaty on 19 September.

I have no time. I am already having to miss out bits of my speech. In a debate on 8 November, Linda Fabiani connected the issue of a referendum with change to the marine biological resources line. She said that the SNP would demand a referendum, "Unless or until it is changed".— [ Official Report , 8 November 2007; c 3283.]  By 26 November, the policy had evolved yet again. In a letter to the European and External Relations Committee, Linda Fabiani wrote: "It is our opinion that, in view of the ... identity of effect between the Constitutional Treaty of 2004 and the current Reform Treaty, the UK Government ought to fulfil its own manifesto commitment to hold a referendum on the Treaty." "Identity of effect" had never been mentioned before, but political opportunism had triumphed once again and the ground was prepared for today's unholy alliance. There is, of course, no "identity of effect". The fact is that the treaty does not embody a far-reaching European constitution, but is a traditional amending treaty that is extremely modest in comparison with the changes that were negotiated by the last Conservative Government through the Maastricht treaty and the Single European Act.

I am having to miss out bits of my speech: clearly, I cannot take interventions. Basically, the Lisbon treaty introduces pragmatic evolutionary changes that will streamline decision making, improve efficiency and increase democratic accountability through providing an enhanced role for the parliaments of member states. We will hear quotes today about how 90 per cent of the treaty is the same as the original proposed constitution, but the fact is that the other 10 per cent makes an enormous difference. The measures that have been dropped in that 10 per cent are precisely the most controversial points that gave rise to calls for a referendum in the first place. As someone said, mice and human beings are 90 per cent identical, but the 10 per cent makes one heck of a difference. Of course, several European politicians who are most upset about the changes will strive to emphasise the parts that have not changed, but many Europeans have given a more accurate and balanced assessment. For example, the Italian interior minister Giuliano Amato, has reflected on the substantial differences between the constitutional treaty and the reform treaty.  As another example, the Dutch Council of State—a group of independent legal experts—has made it clear that there are real and substantial differences between the original constitutional treaty and the reform treaty. The New Federalist magazine has expressed its profound disappointment. It states: "The result, full of compromises, opt-out opportunities and special texts for certain countries is not going to give rise to a treaty that wins any federalist awards. Indeed, the result is extremely disappointing for anyone who had been campaigning for a Constitution for Europe, and in particular for a Constitutional Treaty." As that quotation makes clear, the treaty is a defeat for the integrationists and provides a way for an enlarged union of nation states to work together for mutual benefit. The mandate for the intergovernmental conference also made it clear that "The constitutional concept, which consisted in repealing all existing treaties and replacing them with a single text called 'Constitution', is abandoned." It is therefore not surprising that not one country in the EU proposes to hold a referendum, with the exception of Ireland, which is constitutionally bound to have one. The UK has never ratified an international treaty of any kind by a referendum. There were certainly no greater opponents of doing so than the previous Conservative Government. In 1992, John Major stated: "The Government do not intend to hold a referendum on the outcome of the Maastricht negotiations. ... we are a parliamentary democracy and I see no need for a referendum." —[ Official Report , House of Commons , 21 November 1991; Vol 199, c 415.] The truth is that there were many Eurosceptics in the Tory part then, but John Major was prepared to take them on. The Eurosceptics have now taken over the Conservative party. As Ken Clarke put it, they would have "demanded a referendum just about the date on the top of the piece of paper". As our amendment makes clear, we recognise the enormous advantages that membership of the European Union has brought to Scotland and the UK more generally. We also recognise, in the exciting next phase of the EU, what further advantages it can bring to the rest of the world. I was particularly pleased by the amendment to article 174, which refers to "promoting measures at international level to deal with regional or worldwide environmental problems, and in particular combating climate change." I was also pleased that it was agreed last week at the European Council that a key part of the EU's external agenda is how, by working together, we can maximise our influence in tackling global  poverty. To that end, the Commission will report on how the EU is meeting its commitments to the 2015 millennium goals and how progress can be accelerated. The contrast in today's debate is between, on one hand, an amendment that is both positive about Europe and realistic about the treaty and, on the other hand, an opportunistic motion that is unable to say anything explicit about either Europe or the treaty, but which is implicitly negative and misleading for supposed political advantage. I see no sign that the people of Scotland are clamouring for a referendum on the issue: I believe that they are much more positive and realistic about Europe than those who lodged the motion presume. I move amendment S3M-1053.1, to leave out from "the UK Government" to end and insert: "membership of the European Union has been hugely positive for Scotland and Britain, delivering more jobs, a single market, freedom to work and live abroad, environmental protection, security and an enhanced place for Scotland and Britain in the world; believes that the European Union needs to become more efficient, more effective and more accountable and welcomes the signing of the European Reform Treaty as a significant step towards tackling these concerns, and believes that the treaty will allow the European Union to move on from debates about institutions to concentrating on the fundamental challenges of climate change, globalisation, terrorism and international development."

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to avert industrial action by procurators fiscal. (S3O-1635)

Does the Scottish Government agree that lawyers in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service are paid less than other lawyers at equivalent grade in the Scottish Government? Does it agree that management accepted that there is a shortfall and undertook to address it some time ago? Does it also agree that, as a result of the problem not yet being resolved, there is a problem with staff recruitment and retention in the service? What action has the Scottish Government taken to resolve that worrying dispute? Will it meet at the  highest level union leaders to try to resolve the issue before industrial action begins?

Can the First Minister tell us why his Government is forcing the Scottish Arts Council to end the highly regarded cultural co-ordinators scheme, which has ensured wider access to the arts for a large number of young people and which has massive support from the artistic community and local authorities throughout Scotland? Why do we have to read about that on the front page of a national newspaper this morning when I specifically asked the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth about the future of the scheme in questions on the spending review statement on 14 November? Following the Government's rejection of cultural rights and entitlements, which were at the heart of the previous Administration's ground-breaking work on extending access to culture, will the youth music initiative be next for the chop? Will there be no end to the Government's destruction of the wider access agenda?

Does Nicola Sturgeon accept that  the views that Wendy Alexander expressed last week were views that she has articulated for a very long time? Those views are shared by a large number of people in the Labour Party, including me. Will Ms Sturgeon give Wendy Alexander credit for leading the campaign for greater powers for the Parliament?

In this wide-ranging debate, despite the many differences, a great deal has united us. Before dealing with the various contributions, I join other members in welcoming Dennis Canavan to the public gallery. I acknowledge all his work on the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Bill and on many other issues over his long career. I will start with Margo MacDonald's short speech. I assure her that I agree entirely with her central point that St Andrew's day is an occasion on which to be whole-hearted about being Scottish. My passing remarks about St Andrew being the patron saint of Greece and Russia in no way contradict that. At the same time, I agree with other speakers that on St Andrew's day we must look outwards as well as inwards. Ted Brocklebank made that point at the beginning of his speech. It was also at the heart of Bill Kidd's very moving speech about one Scotland, many cultures. He emphasised that it is highly appropriate for modern Scotland that St Andrew is an international patron saint. I was a little bit puzzled by Sandra White's speech. She chided us for not having a more positive outlook, but at that point in the debate I had been the only Labour speaker. I suggest that she read my speech in the Official Report and tell me afterwards what was negative about it.

I will come to our amendment later, but the central point is that Sandra White made those claims about our views on St Andrew's day. She went on to say that St Andrew's day is not about parochialism, but who ever said that it was? I pointed out that this year's celebrations are very similar to last year's, but I certainly made no complaint about that. Iain Smith gave another example of that in respect of the winter festival that will follow St Andrew's day. As he reminded us, there have been winter festivals for several years in many parts of Scotland. He referred in particular to Edinburgh's long-standing winter festival, but I  know that many other places celebrate the winter period in a similar way. Jamie Hepburn said that nobody likes to celebrate devolution day. I remind him that the Scottish Constitutional Convention's report was launched on St Andrew's day in 1995. His party had nothing to do with that, so I can accept why he might have overlooked that fact. I suggest that he should watch out for another important devolution landmark tomorrow. On St Andrew's day, we celebrate devolution along with the other great advances in Scottish history and culture. I join Bill Butler in congratulating the STUC on its march and rally against racism and fascism, which are an important part of the lead-up to St Andrew's day each year. I also share his sense of genuine disappointment about the failure to conduct a study on the effect of banning trading on new year's day. Widespread discontent about that is evident in Bill Butler's postbag and in mine, so I would be very surprised if SNP members did not see it in theirs, too. As ever, Karen Whitefield talked eloquently about her constituency. I join her in congratulating St Andrew's primary in Airdrie on its 50 th anniversary. She mentioned the fundraising that the school has done for St Andrew's Hospice, which I am sure is one of many superb examples of work that people are doing for St Andrew's day. She also talked about pupils learning about the school's history and Scotland's history. In that context, I am sure that we all welcome the news of a few days ago that Scottish history will always be part of the higher history syllabus. She went on to discuss the Christmas Day and New Year's Day Trading (Scotland) Act 2007, which she so diligently promoted, and expressed concern that thousands of shop workers will be unable to participate in the winter festival, especially on new year's day. It is entirely appropriate for that issue to be raised in a debate about the winter festival. She said that shop workers were relying on the Government to fulfil commitments that were first made during the second session of Parliament. It is certainly appropriate for the Parliament to express its disappointment about the Government's failure to meet those commitments. Murdo Fraser helpfully and correctly reminded us of the religious origins of St Andrew's day. That theme will run through the festival period. On a more light-hearted note, Gavin Brown told us that a splashing white sergeant and a drip the willow are to be held—given my enthusiasm for swimming, I hope that he will be able to tell me where that is taking place. Robert Brown and Jeremy Purvis expressed concerns about St Andrew's day being aligned too  closely with a particular point of view, and I am sure that most members agree that that is to be avoided. Robert Brown also made an extremely valid point about multiple identities. It is important to emphasise that it is possible to feel simultaneously Scottish, British and European—many of us do—as well as being citizens of the wider world. James Kelly made a powerful speech on the subject of being positive about Scotland and St Andrew's day, in which he focused on a particular aspect of Scottish history—our outstanding scientific achievements. We should celebrate those achievements, along with all the other aspects of Scottish history and culture. Notwithstanding the differences that have been expressed, I hope that we can all unite in celebrating the diversity of modern Scotland and the richness of our culture and history. However, given that St Andrew's day is the start of the winter festival, it is legitimate to focus on an important day during that festival period and to express disappointment at a callous Government U-turn on the proposal to carry out a study on the effect of a ban on trading by large retailers on new year's day, to which the Parliament agreed. As people on all sides of the debate on new year's day trading united in support of that proposal, I hope that the Government will think again and help to make the winter festival even more inclusive and enjoyable.

I am very pleased again to be taking part in the celebration of St Andrew's day and the winter festival that will follow. I am also happy to support the motion and the Liberal Democrats' amendment. However, although I support the sentiments that are expressed in the Conservative amendment, we cannot support it, as it would delete ours. I say "again", because I have a strong sense of déjà vu about everything that is happening at this time. The new Government has helpfully left all the previous Executive's old press releases on its website. There I am, as the previous Minister for Communities, stating in a release last November: "Scotland is a place where we can all benefit from a diversity of cultures, religions and backgrounds. The contribution of everyone should be valued and the events taking place on St Andrew's Day will remind us again of how rich our cultural influences are here in Scotland." One of last year's events was the one Scotland ceilidh, which we ambitiously planned to be held in the open air. At least the new Government's jig in the gardens, which will take place under canvas tomorrow night, is more realistic about Edinburgh's weather. The one Scotland, many cultures theme is rightly at the heart of our celebration of St Andrew's day in modern 21 st century Scotland. Integration and multiculturalism are not contradictory—as some argue—but two sides of the same coin. As we rightly strive to ensure that ethnic minority communities are integrated as equals into Scottish society, we should recognise that integration will be all the stronger if it is based on respect for diversity. Like the motion, I commend the work of schools and community groups across Scotland in teaching our young people about St Andrew's day. As under the previous Administration, packs and flags have, I believe, been sent out to schools. I am sure that many different activities will have been developed by schools throughout Scotland. However, St Andrew's day is not just about Scotland. We should remember that St Andrew is also the patron saint of other countries, including Greece and Russia. I am told that he is also the protector of Romania.

I am not in a position to answer that question, but I hope that the answer is the former.  As with last year, many different events will be supported across the world tomorrow. I join others in thanking all the bodies that are referred to in the motion for the work that they have put in. Scots around the world are our ambassadors. They can spread the message about the modern 21 st century Scotland that we want to build. As Scots in the past went out into the world, our population is now growing as we attract more and more people to Scotland. A modern diverse Scotland welcomes people from across the world and embraces their enterprise, culture and ambition. On St Andrew's day, therefore, we should celebrate not just shared Scottish traditions, but our shared future. Just as the broad definition of culture leads to the celebration of diversity, so its narrower artistic definition should lead us to the same conclusion. As we have reasserted our Scottish identity over the past few years through the achievement of home rule, we have seen a blossoming of literature and other forms of art. However, the writers do not all say anything like the same thing and many of them do not write about Scotland at all. For the most part, they are outward looking and they often draw on other cultures: Janice Galloway has reflected on the life and position of Clara Schumann and Ali Smith has transposed classical mythology into a modern setting. That is the modern diverse culture of a modern diverse Scotland. That is what we should celebrate at this time. It is not that there is anything new in all this, given that the winter festival that begins tomorrow will culminate on Burns night. It is hard to think of a writer who has had more international themes or more international recognition than Burns. Debates may rage about his views of Scotland within the union, but they are irrelevant to his underlying appeal. Scotland's history and culture belong to us all; they should never be hijacked for narrow political purposes. Clearly, the new Government has aligned culture with Scotland's international image and relations. That has some advantages in promoting Scotland abroad all the year round and particularly on St Andrew's day. However, there are two dangers. First, it could result in too narrow a definition of Scottish culture. Secondly, it might overlook the central importance of promoting culture at local level. In celebrating Scotland and Scottish culture today and looking forward with confidence to the future, we should focus clearly on two central questions. What kind of Scotland do we want to create? How do we ensure that national cultural standards and increased access to culture go hand in hand? I endorse the motion's reference to  "a fair and inclusive society", but I have some concern that fairness has replaced social justice in the Scottish Government's lexicon. I hope that they mean the same thing, but I am not entirely sure. We have not time today for a detailed debate on what kind of society we want to create, but our amendment raises a specific aspect of that issue that is also relevant to the winter festival theme. I will not embarrass the Scottish National Party too much by quoting all the SNP members who supported the final outcome of the Christmas Day and New Year's Day Trading (Scotland) Bill, but suffice it to say that Jim Mather—now Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism—stated: "We are particularly persuaded that the bill and its amendments offer an opportunity to ensure a sensible balance between the competing pressures of spending time at work, enabling people to earn and trade, and having the time to celebrate and relax with family and friends."— [ Official Report , 7 March 2007; c 32805.]  Jim Mather's boss, John Swinney, waxed even more lyrical about the value of the bill in promoting a better work-life balance. In the light of those two ringing endorsements from the Scottish National Party's business team, it is hard to understand why the Cabinet Secretary for Justice decided to invoke business when refusing to commission a study of the effect of a new year's day ban on trading by large retailers. Can the minister give a better explanation for that overturning of Parliament's decision than the ridiculous excuse that the justice secretary gave at question time last week—that he could not afford the study because of the Edinburgh tram? If £300,000 extra is being spent on St Andrew's day this year, surely it would be reasonable to spend a third of that amount on an important study? Given that we are celebrating Scottish culture, I will end by addressing the second question that I posed on cultural standards and access. I reassert the concern that I expressed at question time about the backward movement of cultural policy over the past few weeks. I set aside the budget, as I have asked questions about that; I will keep my powder dry until I receive the answers. The statement that the minister made on 7 November, which ditched the local authority sections in the draft Culture (Scotland) Bill and binned all the central recommendations of the Cultural Commission was a serious backward step for culture in Scotland. I repeat the question that I asked during question time: how are we to address the current perceived inequity in access to cultural provision when there is no outcome indicator for culture among the outcome indicators for local authorities? Linda Fabiani said that the bill had no teeth, but it certainly had more teeth than  her non-existent proposals. At least it would have placed some requirements on local authorities. At a Scottish Arts Council conference some time ago, Annamari Laaksonen of the Barcelona Interarts Foundation, who is one of the leading cultural thinkers in Europe, said that, on the basis of international research, Scotland's intention to adopt a practical rights entitlement approach to culture was considered widely to be in the vanguard of cultural policy in Europe. That approach has now been consigned to the dustbin. Although the new Government talks a good game about Scottish culture, we must have serious concerns about how it will deliver. I move amendment S3M-946.3, to insert at end: "and, recognising that St Andrew's Day is the start of Scotland's Winter Festival which includes Christmas Day and New Year's Day and concludes on Burns Night, looks forward to the success of all components of the Winter Festival starting with the events on St Andrew's Day, and in this context regrets that the Scottish Government has overturned the decision of the previous Parliament to commission a study into the impact of a ban on large retailers trading on New Year's Day."

Given that widely disparate levels of provision at the local level is one of the main problems in cultural policy, why has the minister ditched all the proposals and policies that were designed to address the problem? Does she realise that the Cultural Commission's thinking on rights and entitlements was designed precisely to address that problem? Does she acknowledge that the provisions that we included in the draft Culture (Scotland) Bill were an attempt to give practical effect to that? How will she ensure that local authorities deliver at a local level when there is no outcome indicator that relates in any way to culture?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the budget in 2008-09 will be for the new fund to be deployed by community planning partnerships and into which the community regeneration fund, the community voices programme and working for families will be rolled. (S3O-1392)

I hope that the minister will confirm that that allocation relates only to the three funds to which I referred. Even if it does, I think that it represents a cash cut on the combined budgets of the three funds. In the autumn budget revision, the budget for the community regeneration fund was £126 million, the budget for  the working for families fund was £15 million and the budget for community engagement was £6.1 million. Even if the budget is adequate for the next two years, what reassurance can the minister give to anxious communities, including communities in my constituency, about what will happen in 2010 in relation to vital work for community regeneration?

How can NHS boards throughout Scotland employ more physiotherapists or more of any other staff group next year when the real-terms increase to NHS boards is 0.5 per cent—the lowest increase that I, or I suspect the First Minister, can remember? Notwithstanding the excellent progress that NHS boards have made over the past few years in slashing waiting times and reducing the number of deaths from the great killer diseases, how does the First Minister expect boards to address the challenges of an increasing elderly population and new drug developments when the increase that is available to them is less than health service inflation, which runs at least 1 per cent ahead of general inflation?

I strongly endorse the point that Peter Peacock made and remind the Minister for Schools and Skills of the excellent youth music initiative, which ensures that all primary school pupils have the opportunity to learn a musical instrument. Last year's budget contained a £10 million line for the initiative. Notwithstanding that missing line—one of many that are missing from last week's budget—will the minister tell us how much money will be devoted to the initiative in the forthcoming financial year?

Given that significant, sustained and real-terms increases in the culture budget during the past few years meant that the culture budget was rising inexorably towards 1 per cent of the Scottish budget, why has culture's percentage share fallen back significantly this year, as a result of a minimal cash increase? What does that mean for outstanding initiatives of the previous Administration, such as cultural coordinators in schools and the youth music initiative? What does it mean for expanding access to cultural opportunities and for the proper support of our great performing companies? If we also consider the axing last week of the local authority sections in the draft culture bill, what kind of commitment to culture is being shown by a Scottish Government that talks big but—again—fails to deliver?

The debate has been wide ranging and interesting; it has strayed way beyond the EU treaty, although that has been a central feature. I will go through what we have heard from the political parties one by one, starting with the Conservatives. I will comment mainly on the EU treaty. I was astonished by Murdo Fraser's remarks at the end of his speech and amazed that he had the gall to talk about massive transfers of sovereignty to the EU—transfers that pale into insignificance compared with those of the Single European Act and the Maastricht treaty, which the Conservative Government passed at Westminster without any concessions or talk of a referendum. I did not think that I would have to repeat the points about the proposed EU president. Murdo Fraser must know that he or she will have no executive powers. Indeed, the Commission opposed that because it would have strengthened the hand of Government against the Commission. We heard the same old scare stories about the proposed high representative for foreign affairs, who will express a view only when it is agreed unanimously by EU foreign ministers. Murdo Fraser also talked about massive powers over criminal justice, but surely even he realises the secure, comprehensive, legally binding opt-in on justice and home affairs matters that the UK Government has secured.

He was referring not to the opt-ins that the UK Government has negotiated, but to the wider treaty for the rest of Europe. There is more truth in that, but it is still not the whole truth. As I said, the constitutional principle has been abandoned. Ted Brocklebank was honest enough to admit that no changes to the common fisheries policy would be made through the treaty, but he suggested that he wanted the CFP to be rejected. That raised the question in my mind whether rejection of the CFP was code for coming out of the EU altogether. The same question could be asked of the SNP, given its attitude to the common fisheries policy. I agreed with what Iain Smith said in the preamble to his speech. The idealistic vision of Europe that he painted is one that I have had throughout my adult life. It is particularly appropriate to remember that vision in armistice week, as Irene Oldfather and Helen Eadie said. Iain Smith reminded us that Ross Finnie should  be congratulated on ensuring that our interests were taken seriously in Europe. I agree, but I remind Iain Smith that other ministers who were involved in Europe at the time ought to be congratulated, too. Liam McArthur made an interesting speech. I am glad that he quoted article 176a of the treaty, on energy, in detail, because it addressed Margo MacDonald's concerns about energy policy. We should all be pleased about the role that the EU will play in relation to promoting energy efficiency and the development of new, renewable forms of energy. That does not take away from the energy policies of member states.

I gave way to Margo MacDonald in my earlier speech and I suspect that I will be pushed for time in this one. How long do I have, Presiding Officer?

Five minutes altogether—I do not have very long at all. I have dealt with the energy point. Margo MacDonald's question, what is in it for us, was answered very well—

Right. I am still not taking an intervention from Margo MacDonald at this point. I might take an intervention from her if there is time left. What my Labour colleagues said answered Margo MacDonald's question on what is in it for us. Margo MacDonald overstated the point about the Westminster European Scrutiny Committee and the argument that the red lines had all been rubbed out. Even the chair of the committee, Michael Connarty, said that three of the four red lines were absolutely sound and I believe that David Miliband has since clarified the fourth. I have reason to believe that all four red lines are absolutely sound. Irene Oldfather emphasised the economic advantages of the European Union. We could give many facts to illustrate that, such as that more than 3 million jobs in the UK are related to exports to the EU and that half our trade in goods and services is with other EU countries—we could go on. Irene Oldfather also reminded us helpfully about the social programmes. I am sure that those of us who know about the Daphne II initiative would join her in commending its excellent work in combating violence against women. I echo John Park's tribute to the MEPs. I mentioned some of David Martin's recent work,  but let us pay tribute to all the MEPs, Scotland House and Scotland Europa for the sterling work that they do. I hope that all members agree with John Park's emphasis on ensuring more and better jobs in Europe and on the social dimension of the EU. I was pleased that the UK Government's document "Global Europe: Meeting the Economic and Security Challenges", which was published a couple of weeks ago, placed heavy emphasis on jobs and prosperity as part of the new agenda for Europe. Helen Eadie made a passionate speech about health issues and emphasised that one of the fundamental reasons for Europe is that it has kept the peace. I agree with that and I hope that everyone else does, too. I turn to the SNP. Christopher Harvie started with an interesting metaphor about a three-part elephant and made interesting points about transportation, energy and geography. I agreed with him entirely—as I did this time last week—when he emphasised the importance of tidal and wave energy. I thank him for once again providing a historical perspective and emphasising how we in Scotland can help create an idealistic perspective on the notion of a united Europe. Alex Neil talked a great deal about fishing. I was pleased that Mike Rumbles intervened on him to remind us what the president of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation said at yesterday's meeting of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. Mike Rumbles, who was at the meeting, said that the president said that Scottish fishing objectives were now in line with UK objectives.

How long do I have now, Presiding Officer?

In that case, I had better just carry on. Alex Neil talked about the special UK opt-outs, as he described them, and said that they would not prove effective in practice. I have already dealt with that point, although I will take an intervention from Mr Neil if he so wishes.

The main point of Jamie Hepburn's speech was that it was vital that Richard Lochhead take the lead at the fisheries councils. However, he went on to say that the views of Scottish fishermen were already being taken into account, so there was a total contradiction at the heart of his speech. Keith Brown, unlike all other SNP members, at least tried to address the issue of the red line and marine biological resources. It was interesting to hear him say that that red line, which is what the Government says its whole case against the treaty is based on, did not represent any change. Is that the Government's view? The situation seems to be getting even more bizarre as we go through the afternoon. However, I agreed with what Keith Brown said about the contribution of EU nationals to the economy and to society more generally. It is vital that Linda Fabiani uses her winding-up speech to clarify the Scottish Government's attitude to the EU reform treaty and a referendum on it. She said at the European and External Relations Committee that that was her immediate priority, and we heard from one of her colleagues that nothing is changed by that one line in the treaty. Does the minister think that that one line about marine biological resources changes anything in the treaty, and does that lead her to support a referendum?

I am delighted that the minister began by saying that she represents a pro-European Scottish Government, although I am not sure whether that can be said for all of her party. I am also not sure whether it is demonstrated by the SNP's somewhat bizarre attitude to the European treaty. I am also glad that the minister mentioned, among other issues, the soil thematic strategy—not least because our own Sarah Boyack led for the United Kingdom in discussions on the framework directive on the protection of soils. That is relevant to remarks that I will make later in my speech. I am pleased that the minister will, like her predecessor, attend the European and External Relations Committee every six months to present her EU priorities. I will outline the background. In December 2005, the then Scottish Executive implemented a new process for selecting its EU priorities. Instead of focusing on the short-term plans of the presidency and the European Council, the Executive devised a more strategic approach, which focused on dossiers over the medium to long term. That comparatively new approach is based on the European Commission's legislative and work programme, the European Council's operational programme for the following two presidencies and the current European Parliament work programme. Of the 21 dossiers before us today, 20 are from the list of 24 dossiers that was agreed by the previous Administration in February, when four overarching priorities were also identified: energy and climate change; sea fisheries; structural funds; and the draft spirit drinks directive. Issues with the draft spirit drinks directive have been successfully resolved, but it would be useful to  know whether the current Scottish Government also has overarching priorities and, if so, what they are. It would also be useful to know which of the priorities listed by the Government involve positive action—and the timescale for that action—and which merely require a watching brief. I do not complain about the fact that there is a mixture of reserved and devolved issues in the list of priorities, since that replicates the pre-election situation. However, the Parliament and its committees may wish to pay most attention to the issues that are devolved or which impact directly on devolved matters—as the reform treaty does. If there is a great deal of continuity between the previous Administration and this one when it comes to EU priorities, the same cannot be said of this Administration's new category of EU political objectives. We may wonder what the connection is between the priorities and the objectives. My initial thought was that the priorities had been written by civil servants and the objectives by politicians. The objectives are full of SNP obsessions. The first objective, on fisheries and aquaculture, is dominated by the "capital importance" of Scotland's fisheries minister acting as UK lead minister at the fisheries council. Scottish ministers have led EU negotiations for the UK at not only the fisheries council but a number of EU councils. As I said, in February, Sarah Boyack led on the framework directive on the protection of soils, which is one of the 21 dossiers before us today. If Scottish ministers lead for the UK, that is, of course, based on their securing an agreed UK position—something that has been achieved on many occasions on many subjects for EU councils. The benefit of that approach is that the Scottish position gets the backing of the UK, with its powerful voice at every EU council. Scotland gains strength in Europe through being part of the UK delegation—that is the opposite of what the SNP persistently claims.

There are hundreds of examples of when we have benefited. I am not saying that one or two exceptions cannot be found, but the fact is that, on an enormous number of occasions, Scotland has benefited from being part of the UK delegation. What effort has the SNP put into securing an agreed position on fishing rather than posturing about constitutional arguments? How does Richard Lochhead help his chances of leading the UK delegation by telling the SNP conference that  he is being gagged by the UK and that he is not allowed to have his say or represent the Scottish interest? He should instead build up trust with the UK Government and satisfy it that he would stand up for the Scottish fishing interest as part of standing up for the UK fishing interest. Today is not a day for detailed debate on fishing, but my understanding is that there is not such a great gulf between Scottish fishermen and the UK Government as we are sometimes led to believe.

I have not got time to take interventions now—time is running away from me. At yesterday's meeting of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, the head of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation gave the impression that he was, to a considerable extent, content with the negotiations as they have been led by the UK Government. I should perhaps also refer to the cod recovery plan, as it is one of the dossiers that is before members today. As the Scottish Executive, we helped to negotiate that plan as part of the UK, and it is now leading to a significant degree of recovery, opening up the possibility of review as outlined in the dossier. Perhaps it is time for the SNP to start negotiating and to stop its counterproductive posturing. The Administration's second EU political objective, and the minister's immediate priority—according to what she said at the European and External Affairs Committee on 18 September—is our old friend the EU treaty. There is specific reference to the red line of our exclusive competence over marine biological resources—about which more in a moment—but also a welcome endorsement in the statement of political objectives for the rest of the treaty. The Government says that it acknowledges the value of institutional reforms that will make the Union more efficient and yet also more transparent and democratic in its decision making. The Scottish Government is therefore in the ridiculous position of endorsing the whole treaty apart from one line, on the basis of which it is calling for rejection and a referendum. That position is all the more absurd because that one line does not change the status quo in any material way. The fisheries provisions in the reform treaty replicate the existing division of powers and merely put the existing position into legal form. Why has the Scottish Government got itself into that ridiculous position, and what does it hope to gain from such pointless posturing? We can speculate, but perhaps the minister will tell us in her winding-up speech. On the treaty more generally—I anticipate what the next speaker will perhaps say in covering the  most controversial points—the mandate for the intergovernmental conference made it clear that the constitutional concept has been abandoned. Of particular relevance to this Parliament is a secure, comprehensive and legally binding opt-in on all justice and home affairs measures. On qualified majority voting, several of the extensions do not apply to the UK, many are of a purely technical nature and the rest are modest and sensible—for example, decisions on emergency humanitarian aid to third countries will be taken by qualified majority voting. Any extension of qualified majority voting will be subject to a triple lock comprising the Council of Ministers, national Parliaments and the European Parliament. Any transfer of powers is massively less significant than those that were contained in the Maastricht treaty and the Single European Act, both of which were signed by the Conservative Government without a referendum. The EU treaty is a traditional amending treaty, with some pragmatic evolutionary changes that will streamline decision making, improve efficiency and safeguard democratic accountability. It will also allow the EU to move on from debates about institutions to creating the outward-looking Europe that we desperately need to meet the fundamental challenges of globalisation, climate change, terrorism and international development. The UK Government will propose a declaration that will spell out those new priorities at the next Council meeting in December. The new agenda is about tackling climate change and energy security; combating terrorism and organised crime; reducing global poverty; reforming the EU budget; renewing the focus on completing the single market through, for example, the liberalisation of the energy sector; and making a commitment to free trade and openness, but in a way that does not damage the developing world. With regard to that, we should give full support to the efforts of David Martin MEP to delay the European partnership agreements between the EU and some of the poorest countries in the world that are due to come into force at the end of the year. That is the outward-looking, globally-focused Europe that we desperately need, and that will be the ultimate prize of signing the treaty.

Under the EU reform treaty, the UK Government has complete control over whether we participate in any particular justice and home affairs issue. Does the minister welcome the excellent opt-in arrangements that have been secured by the UK Government?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of her statement, which should perhaps properly be referred to as a statement on the disappearing culture bill, because of her single-minded and misguided determination to hack away every section of the draft culture (Scotland) bill except one. I welcome the minister's determination to carry forward our creative Scotland proposals, including work to build the contribution of voluntary and community arts and the guarantee that there will be no political interference in creative Scotland's artistic judgment, which was, of course, never intended. Creative Scotland was to lead on the development of national standards for the creative sector and to advise on cultural entitlements. Will national standards still be at the heart of creative Scotland's work? Why on earth was there no mention whatsoever of cultural entitlements or cultural rights in the minister's statement? The Scottish Government's document that includes the responses to the draft culture (Scotland) bill shows that there is widespread support for the guiding principles of local cultural planning and entitlements. Indeed, many of the respondents wanted the Government to go further in that regard. COSLA, which the minister mentioned, wrote: "It is our view that local cultural entitlements will make an important contribution to increasing participation in cultural activities." Why has the minister turned her back on that central plank of cultural policy, which was at the heart of the Cultural Commission's work and has been widely accepted throughout Scotland and internationally? I am glad that the minister continues to support our cultural pathfinders, but how will she ensure that local authorities deliver on the cultural agenda without the legislative and other proposals that we put forward?  Last but not least, will the minister put her money where her mouth is on cultural policy, as we undoubtedly did? Significant increases in funding have been made available in the past few years. Why has she not yet spent all of the £20 million extra that went with our response to the Cultural Commission? Will she continue our many important new initiatives, such as cultural co-ordinators in schools, for which £4.65 million was earmarked for 2008-09? What support package will she provide to enable the creative industries to thrive? What on earth has happened to her manifesto commitment on a new grant to artists? Is that simply one more Scottish National Party broken promise?

This is an excellent motion from Mike Russell, and I commend him on lodging it, but it cries out for addition. First, I have a minor point. Although delighted with the artists who have been mentioned, we all want to add one or two more. Cathy Jamieson understandably mentioned Burns and, echoing Nanette Milne and Ted Brocklebank, I will throw in Lewis Grassic Gibbon. More than any other Scottish writer, he evoked the power of the land as an almost animistic force. More substantially, we could add that culture is not just about celebration but is an agent of change. Similarly, the environment is not always something to be celebrated and can be in drastic need of change. Both culture and the environment lend themselves to the concept of entitlement, which is no threat whatsoever to the highest cultural and environmental standards. I enjoyed Mike Russell's speech. I agreed with what he said and liked his quotations from Sorley MacLean, James Hogg and others. He paid tribute to the Scottish landscape forum, which was set up by the previous Administration. I point out to him that it reported earlier this year, with 21 recommendations. Perhaps, in summing up, the minister can tell us when the Government will respond to and act on those recommendations. Peter Peacock, who has the most beautiful constituency in Scotland—apart from Edinburgh North and Leith—

No, because I know what the member will say. Peter Peacock pointed out that the motion was entirely unexceptional but then proceeded to make several objections to it, including that it was largely about rural artists—

In a moment. However, that is not entirely true. For example, the motion mentions Alasdair Gray, whose latest book I happened to read in the October recess. Although he votes SNP, I do not hold that against him and I can certainly recommend "Old Men in  Love", which will appeal not just to old men, whether in or out of love.

I actually agree with the minister and was trying to make that very point to Peter Peacock, but I thank the minister for reinforcing the point. Alasdair Gray also has a strong sense of place—in his case, the west end of Glasgow. We are very lucky, of course, to have with us as distinguished a cultural historian as Christopher Harvie. He gave us an historical perspective, from the sociology of Patrick Geddes to John Muir, Thomas Carlyle and John Ruskin. Mid-way, he turned to his C P Snow moment, which involved wave power and carbon capture. We all agree that those are vital technologies that we must develop to combat climate change. I remind members—if I may have my C P Snow moment—that the Scottish scientist Joseph Black isolated and identified the properties of carbon dioxide. Cathy Jamieson showed her expertise on artists. She emphasised environmental justice with a specific example relevant to her constituency and gave examples of modern art in Ayrshire, which is often community led. The Andy Scott who is referred to in the motion is such an artist, known for his "Easterhouse Phoenix". The justice aspect was also emphasised by Helen Eadie. In addition, she mentioned coastal erosion, which is clearly an issue on which we must take action. Roseanna Cunningham gave an excellent speech that highlighted the importance of Walter Scott and the enormous influence that he had on how Scots saw themselves and how others saw them. He was also mentioned by Jeremy Purvis and Des McNulty. Scott is an important example of how someone can be a cultural nationalist as well as a political unionist. I was delighted to hear Ted Brocklebank begin his speech with a reference to the view of the Black Cuillin from Elgol, which is indeed the most superb view in Scotland and was, I think, captured in one of Sorley MacLean's poems. I will not say too much today about cultural entitlements as we will have a statement on the issue next week, but I flag up our concern if that  crucial concept is no longer to be central to culture policy. Environmental justice is conceptually similar to cultural entitlements, as it involves the right to live in a good environment. That is why we have emphasised that point in our amendment. Clearly, the emphasis in today's debate has been on the beautiful landscapes of Scotland, but we must also emphasise how we will support and protect them. For example, will the Government implement the national scenic areas legislation that is contained in the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006? Finally, we need to ensure that everyone has access to the beautiful environments of Scotland. That issue is partly about the access legislation that, as Sarah Boyack argued, badly needs to be strengthened. However, given the number of people in urban Scotland who—it saddens me—never see those beautiful places, there is also an issue about public transport and the provision of information. That is partly a personal plea to Stewart Stevenson—if he is present—from someone who has spent every summer visiting the north-west Highlands by public transport.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will establish a domestic abuse court in Edinburgh or support one if proposed by local agencies. (S3O-1038)

I have of course read the written answer, but I am sure that the cabinet secretary knows the disappointment of the groups to which he referred that a domestic abuse court would not be established in Edinburgh. Does he agree that the Glasgow domestic abuse court has been an outstanding success through its use of dedicated sheriffs and a comprehensive support package for women who are going through the court? Although I accept that there may be difficulties in replicating the Glasgow model in more sparsely populated areas, a similar domestic abuse court in Edinburgh would surely bring the same advantages of speed, support and judicial specialisation to women in Edinburgh who are suffering from domestic abuse.

Does the minister realise that tourism in Edinburgh generates £1.6 billion annually and sustains more than 30,000 jobs? Recently, it has been promoted successfully by VisitScotland Edinburgh and the Lothians, which was set up only two years ago. Did the minister notice the comment that the director of city development in Edinburgh made this week on the proposed reorganisation? He said: "We have a real concern that the strength of Edinburgh's tourism promotion may be diluted by this new wider approach." Will the minister enter into discussions with the City of Edinburgh Council, so that he may understand its concerns about the reorganisation and reflect further on whether it is necessary, after only two years?

When she appeared before the European and External Relations Committee on 26 June, the minister stated: "We will also work closely with Scottish aid agencies to ensure that our international development aid support is channelled where it is most needed."—[ Official Report,   European and External Relations Committee , 26 June 2007; c 11.] What dialogue has she had with those agencies since 26 June? What views has she heard about the focus of the Scottish Government's international development policy?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it will provide to organisations and initiatives that are seeking to combat violence against women to support the women affected. (S3O-764)

Will the Scottish Government support the statement of intent that the women's coalition yesterday sent to all members of the Scottish Parliament, which asked for a commitment to tackle violence against women in the next four years? Can the Government reassure the many organisations that support women who are affected by male violence and which are increasingly concerned about funding beyond April 2008? Will the Government build on current work to change public attitudes and behaviour? Will it also, as part of ensuring effective legal protection, extend the successful Glasgow domestic abuse court to other parts of Scotland, and take action to address the appalling findings of last week's report about the use of sexual history and character in rape trials?

As predicted, most of the Tory speeches were about a referendum, although the standard of the arguments left a bit to be desired. The talk of the duck test sums up the matter. In form and substance, the proposed treaty will be a traditional amending treaty and will involve far less transfer of powers than any of the four previous European treaties, particularly the Maastricht treaty and the Single European Act, which were passed under the last Conservative Government. However, Ted Brocklebank helpfully reminded us that the Prime Minister is against building a European superstate. The Labour Party is totally against such a state, which is why we support the proposed modest and evolutionary reforming treaty. Ted Brocklebank repeated the scare stories about the proposed high representative for foreign affairs, but he omitted to say that he or she will express a view only when it has been agreed unanimously by the European Union foreign ministers. He also talked a lot about the proposed president of the European Council, but omitted to say that he or she will have no executive powers. Indeed, the Commission opposed the idea, because it will increase the powers of the Council of Ministers. As anticipated, we have heard a lot about the 90 per cent test. As someone said, humans and mice are 90 per cent identical genetically, but the other 10 per cent is rather significant. That apart, we should remember that the proposed treaty is different. Some people may not be happy about the specific arrangements that the UK Government has negotiated, but the President of the European Parliament has said: "Since making the Charter legally binding and extending Community competence to" justice and home affairs "were two of the most important features of the original constitution, the deal struck by Tony Blair in June means that—for better or worse—much of its substance will simply not apply in Britain." The truth is that, to quote Kenneth Clarke, the Eurosceptics in the Tory party would have "demanded a referendum just about the date on the top of the piece of paper". It is sad that David McLetchie, after his yes campaigning in 1975, has descended to that.

I say for Christopher Harvie's and David McLetchie's benefit that I voted yes in 1975. Margo MacDonald was concerned about qualified majority voting, as were the Tories. The  extensions that apply to the UK are modest but sensible. For example, future decisions on emergency humanitarian aid to third countries will be taken in that way. The extensions are limited in comparison with Baroness Thatcher's Single European Act, which was the biggest move to qualified majority voting in the history of Europe. I reassure Margo MacDonald that there is a triple lock on any extensions of qualified majority voting, comprising the Council of Ministers, national Parliaments and the European Parliament. Any of those can object to an extension. Linda Fabiani omitted to mention the third part of the lock. On the subsidiarity point that Margo MacDonald raised, there will be new procedures for national Parliaments to object to proposed laws on grounds of subsidiarity, and enhanced opportunities for national Parliaments to feed into legislation at an early stage. That is an opportunity for us as well.

The European treaty will be European legislation.

I have one minute left for the SNP, which should not be difficult. Christina McKelvie said that she supports the Scottish Government's position, but we still do not know what that is. The only thing that is clear is that having exclusive competence in marine conservation is a red-line issue, but, as Irene Oldfather said, and as I said in my opening speech, that is the position at the moment, so what is the point in demanding a referendum? If it is rejected, we will still have exclusive competence over marine conservation. We must have some answers from the Government in the summing-up speech. What is its position on withdrawal from the common fisheries policy? What is its position on the treaty? We have a draft of the treaty, which presumably the Government has read. Does it like the draft, apart from the one line about the extension of exclusive competence in marine conservation? Does it support a referendum? If so, how would it vote? Linda Fabiani said even less in the chamber today than she did at the European and External Relations Committee yesterday, so I hope that whoever is summing up will fill in the gaps.

I have a sense of déjà vu, as I find myself on the Opposition front bench for the first time since the Tory Government in the 1990s—even more so as I once again debate a European treaty. I am pleased that this time we are having an afternoon debate rather than the hours and hours of all-night sittings that we endured with the Maastricht treaty in 1992. I point out to Conservative colleagues that the Maastricht treaty was infinitely more significant in its transfer of powers and its extension of qualified majority voting than the treaty that we are debating today. I also point out to them that the Tory Government at the time was implacably opposed to a referendum, as Baroness Thatcher had been on the even more far-reaching Single European Act six years before. I thank Linda Fabiani for giving us some limited pointers today and at the European and External Relations Committee yesterday about the Government's attitude to the treaty. I must say that before that I was completely in the dark about SNP policy. All I had to go by was The Herald on 7 September quoting a senior source, who said: "The party is not sure whether it wants a referendum, and if there is one, it is not sure which way it would campaign". Come to think of it, Linda Fabiani addressed neither of those issues in her speech. We in the Labour Party believe that the amending treaty will allow the EU to move on from debates about institutions to creating an outward-looking Europe, which we desperately need to meet the fundamental challenges of globalisation, climate change, terrorism and international development. The treaty does not embody a far-reaching European constitution, although no doubt the next speaker will argue that it does. It is a traditional amending treaty, with some pragmatic evolutionary changes that streamline decision making, improve efficiency and safeguard  democratic accountability through providing an enhanced role for the Parliaments of member states. As the Conservative MEP John Purvis said at the European and External Relations Committee yesterday: "We need to do something to modernise the Community so that it works properly."—[ Official Report , European and External Relations Committee , 18 September 2007; c49.] The treaty does precisely that: it sets out the EU's powers and their limits without changing fundamentally the relationship between the EU and member states.

There are obviously limited transfers, but the significance of the UK position is that the UK Government has not bought into the whole treaty, so the treaty that it has agreed is different in significant respects from the treaty in Luxembourg or other European countries. I thought that Margo MacDonald was going to ask about qualified majority voting, which is one of the more controversial issues that has arisen in connection with the treaty. In that regard, the extensions that apply to the UK are modest but sensible. I turn to the issue of a referendum, which I suspect will dominate the debate. As I have said, the treaty is not a constitutional treaty as originally envisaged, but a standard reforming treaty. There is therefore no case for holding a referendum on the basis of precedent, and no such case arises from the Labour UK manifesto; neither do I believe that there is a case in principle, given that referendums should be reserved for areas of substantial constitutional change.

As my friend indicates, that would take a great deal of time, because many significant changes have been made. Crucially, the UK has decided not to be part of areas of the treaty, particularly in judicial and home affairs, which Linda Fabiani welcomed, and in many other significant areas such as tax, social security and the protocol on the charter.  It will be interesting to hear the views of other parties on that—although I fear that their views will be predictable. The Tories' call for a referendum is pure game playing and is born of political desperation. It makes a nonsense of the strongly stated previous position that they had when they were in Government and is based on a misrepresentation of what the treaty involves. There is far less transfer in this treaty than in the previous treaties and the constitutional concept has been abandoned. In a brief note submitted yesterday, the Scottish Government seemed to indicate that it would support the treaty "but not if the Government's red line concerning exclusive competence over marine biological resources under the CPF is ignored." Linda Fabiani seemed to indicate yesterday in evidence to the European and External Relations Committee—although, again, not today—that that would trigger support for a referendum. However, there is nothing new in the treaty that changes the current situation in that regard, so it is not clear to me why the SNP would support a referendum—and, presumably, a no vote—merely to end up with the status quo in relation to the common fisheries policy if the treaty was rejected. Perhaps the SNP needs to clarify its position on the common fisheries policy more generally. Does it still support withdrawal from the CFP, with the inevitable consequence of withdrawal from the EU, or has that policy gone to the shredder as well? The trouble is that the SNP's whole position on Europe is weak, inconsistent and full of contradictions, quite apart from the serious difficulties that were highlighted by Commissioner Borg in his interview in The Scotsman today. It is clear from that interview that it might take months or even years for an independent Scotland to renegotiate entry into the EU, assuming that that was still SNP policy.

I am in my last minute, so I cannot take an intervention.

I accept that there are a range of views. I was merely quoting the views of a commissioner, whose views obviously have to be taken seriously. The truth is that while the SNP prevaricates, Labour has taken decisive action to negotiate a progressive and evolutionary treaty that is good for Scotland, good for Britain and good for Europe. I commend it to the chamber.

I welcome the substantial—in fact, more or less complete—continuity in carrying forward the previous Administration's policies on the national planning framework and planning more generally. A fundamental principle of planning reform was early participation. Will the cabinet secretary say a little more about the forthcoming participation statement—the timing and possibly the substance? I also welcome in particular the climate change criterion, but will the cabinet secretary explain whether it refers to specific developments or  whether all developments will be expected to contribute on climate change?

Will the minister make support for the arts in regeneration areas one of her priorities for culture? In connection with that, will she read carefully a letter that was sent to her today by the north Edinburgh arts centre, which serves a regeneration area in my constituency and in that of Margaret Smith? In that letter, she will read of the funding difficulties that have suddenly arisen for that body and of a report that is to go to the City of Edinburgh Council from officials, recommending the withdrawal of funding. Will she prevail upon her SNP colleagues in the administration of the City of Edinburgh Council to reject the report and support that highly valued project? Will she also raise the matter with the Scottish Arts Council, which has also been approached for funding support?

The Cabinet Secretary for Justice is aware of the highly successful domestic abuse court in Glasgow, which I hope he will continue to support and fund. Does he think that a place may exist for special courts to deal with rape, given the well-known difficulties in the past with the mainstream courts' procedures and processes?

Will the First Minister tell us why his SNP colleagues on the City of Edinburgh Council were so ignorant of their party's policy on class sizes that they thought it right to close 22 schools and make the implementation of that policy impossible? While welcoming their U-turn—the fastest U-turn in political history—will the First Minister ensure that in the future his SNP councillors have some minimal acquaintance with party policy, or do his councillors believe that the class-size policy, like many other SNP election promises, will never be implemented?

I was one of the members who very much welcomed the talk of new politics after the election, which was variously described by ministers as including the Parliament, co-operating with other parties, and deploying rational argument instead of mere assertion. We will see how the Government includes Parliament later on in the day, but there was precious little sign of rational argument against the tram and EARL in the statement today. There were only some spurious points about Glasgow to Edinburgh rail electrification and a new Forth bridge, both of which Labour supports, but neither of which will involve any capital expenditure in this parliamentary session. I suppose that the Government tried out those new spurious arguments because its old spurious arguments were blown out of the water by the Audit Scotland report. On trams, emphatically nothing in the report said that the cost of the trams was running out of control, as the transport minister rashly put it a week or two ago. Indeed, Audit Scotland said that there were sound arrangements in place to manage the project. Of course, Audit Scotland made different points on EARL but, in our amendment, we take on board the recommendations for governance arrangements that are proposed in the report. In flapping about to find arguments about the trams—in the past few weeks in particular—the Government has continually confused EARL and the trams. It has also rolled up the costs of phases 1a and 1b of the trams project although it is phase 1a for which Parliament has given money and there is £45 million more than is required for the completion of that phase. It has also ignored Audit Scotland's evidence that there is a series of measures in place to keep the price of the trams project under control, including fixed-price contracts. All that it has been able to refer to in the past week or two is the cost of utilities diversion,  but there are significant contingencies in place for that. Indeed, nobody with more experience of digging up Edinburgh can be found than the company that has been awarded that part of the contract. I am astonished that the Government is ignoring all the evidence and the long list of supporters of the trams that TRANSform Scotland sent to us in its briefing today. It is also ignoring the long list of countries that have developed trams—countries that, in other circumstances, the SNP has been pleased to praise. I mentioned the example of Dublin to the First Minister three or four weeks ago. I seem to remember that he said that he would examine the trams there, so I hope that he will do that quickly. I remind members that the tram network in Dublin was built only two years ago and is now being developed. The trams there are becoming longer and more frequent, and new lines are being developed, some of them with the help of the private sector. Congestion in Dublin is down and economic development that is directly attributable to the trams is up.

There is a valid discussion to be had about that point, but it is of no relevance to the point that I am making about the Edinburgh trams project. We cannot say that inevitably there will, because there have been cost overruns on one project, be cost overruns on the other. The people who are involved in developing the Edinburgh trams project have learned the financial lessons of other such projects. They have also learned the lesson of the necessity of integrating trams with buses, which is at the heart of the proposal. Buses alone, which seem to be the SNP's favoured option, will not in themselves solve Edinburgh's congestion problems. We all know that Princes Street and Leith Walk, both of which are in my constituency, are already at saturation point with buses. We need trams to complement buses in order to stop Edinburgh and Leith from grinding to a halt in the years to come. That might not happen tomorrow, but we must look to the future.  Trams are also catalysts for investment, jobs and regeneration. The pace and scale of the waterfront development in my constituency will be curtailed if the trams do not go ahead. They will bring jobs to the people and connect people to the jobs. The other crucial issue is the environment and climate change. I praise the new Government for the emphasis that it has placed on climate change, but it is utterly inconsistent to speak of that and to scrap a project that will reduce emissions, run on renewable energy once the Government's policies on renewable energy have been implemented and is proven across the world to be the most effective way of getting motorists out of their cars. Today is a defining day for the Parliament. It is a defining day for being serious about climate change, congestion in Edinburgh and economic development throughout Scotland. It is also a defining day for the new politics and responsible minority Government. For all those reasons, I hope that the Government will accept Wendy Alexander's amendment.

I will concentrate on the supply of affordable homes, first considering Scotland as a whole, and then concentrating on Edinburgh and Leith. The previous Administration was planning to build 8,000 affordable homes Scotland-wide this year. The annual total build has increased steadily, and 8,000 is the highest number for many years. The figure was based on analysis done by Professor Glen Bramley for the most recent spending review, which he updated last year for the forthcoming spending review. In his most recent, detailed and complex piece of work, "Local housing need and affordability model for Scotland: Update", Professor Bramley emphasised that need has increased substantially since his previous report, as a result of market changes. That is why the number of new affordable homes built each year must continue to increase. Like Stewart Maxwell, I signed the Shelter-inspired motion that was lodged before the election, which called for 10,000 affordable homes for rent to be built in each of the next three years. Patrick Harvie lodged the same motion this week. As well as the market changes that Bramley emphasised, I flag up our ambitious 2012 homelessness target, which has been widely admired internationally. We should all be proud of the target. The forthcoming spending review will be critical in the successful delivery of the target. The Government needs to consider capital spend throughout the Executive and must give the utmost priority to our flagship homelessness commitment. One of the most striking tables in Bramley's authoritative report appears on page 8. It shows the positive net need for new affordable homes in each local authority in Scotland. The positive net need in Edinburgh is shown to be five times that in any other local authority in Scotland. Despite the budget allocation for affordable homes in Edinburgh being twice what it was three years ago, it is still well below the per capita Scottish average. That historic imbalance has begun to be corrected, but there is a long way to go. According to Professor Bramley, Edinburgh has a shortage of 2,500 affordable lets each year—and that is before we consider new homelessness rights and a projected 11 per cent population increase and 22 per cent household increase over the next 15 years. This is an urgent social issue. A large number of individuals and families are excluded from the social rented sector and are unable to buy because the average house price in Edinburgh is around eight times the average full-time wage in  Edinburgh. It is also a pressing economic issue. Employers in both the public and private sectors feel the impact of people's inability to access housing. The minister will have noticed that the Edinburgh problem is highlighted in the report issued today. Some have argued that the problem in Edinburgh is not resources but land. Land is certainly an issue, and more has to be released for housing, both market and subsidised. We also need to find out urgently why the affordable housing contributions in private developments have been slow to come on stream in Edinburgh. However, the key land issue is cost. Land in Edinburgh costs three and a half times the Scottish average and therefore takes up a higher proportion of housing grant than anywhere else in Scotland. In Edinburgh and elsewhere, the bulk of resources has to go into affordable rented housing. However, we also have to continue the very successful shared equity homestake scheme, which has helped hundreds of first-time buyers and others in Edinburgh, Leith and elsewhere in Scotland. That will be a much more effective way of subsidising first-time buyers than a blanket £2,000 subsidy, which has been condemned by all the well-known housing organisations. I look forward to the autumn consultation on better value that Stewart Maxwell announced. I hope that a way will be found to spread housing subsidy over a longer period, without going down the private finance initiative route. Will Stewart Maxwell follow through the logic of the Bramley report and of the report issued today? Will he ensure that, in the distribution of resources for new affordable homes, the particular circumstances of Edinburgh are taken into account?

When the review is completed and, as was agreed last week, a motion is put to the Parliament, will the Scottish Government accept the Parliament's decision?

Over the past few months, I have read a great deal about the issue, and it is clear to me that the alliance against the renewal of Trident and in favour of nuclear disarmament is bigger and wider than at any point since the second world war. For many, including myself, the issue is still rooted in the fundamental moral objection to nuclear weapons. I applaud in particular the leadership of the churches and other religious leaders in putting that view so strongly in recent times. However, many people will not be persuaded by those arguments, which is why we have also to consider the strategic and security arguments. That is where I am struck by the number of people who have changed their minds since the 1980s, including many in the Conservative party—members can read Michael Portillo in last week's Sunday Times , and Michael Ancram is even stronger on the subject. Lord Hattersley, who supported nuclear weapons in the 1980s, has said that "to posture about the importance of nuclear independence is to fight the battles of the past." Henry Kissinger and three other high-level architects of the cold war, in a remarkable article in The Wall Street Journal on 4 January, said that the reliance on nuclear weapons for deterrence "is becoming increasingly hazardous and decreasingly effective" in the modern world. They called on nuclear weapons states to engage seriously in nuclear disarmament. Former chief of the defence staff Lord Brammall, speaking before George Foulkes in a recent House of Lords debate, said: "it is difficult to see how the United Kingdom can exert any leadership and influence on the implementation of the non-proliferation treaty ... if we insist on a successor to Trident".—[ Official Report , House of Lords , 24 January 2007; Vol 688, c 1137.] The non-proliferation treaty is crucial to the debate. The treaty is a bargain: nations without nuclear weapons promised not to develop them and, in exchange, nuclear weapons states promised to pursue negotiations towards nuclear disarmament in good faith. As Mohamed ElBaradei, head of the United Nations nuclear watchdog, asked recently, how can Britain expect other countries to refrain from acquiring nuclear weapons if it upgrades Trident? It is supremely urgent that we stop nuclear proliferation, which is  why the UK Government must change its disastrous policy decision. I supported Elaine Smith's amendment, as I preferred its wording, but it was not selected for debate, so, given the urgency, I will vote for the Green party motion.

Will Rob Gibson give way?

Will Rob Gibson give way?

Perhaps Brian Adam should read today's motion. The key question that it raises is whether or not—after we have read the Audit Scotland report and heard the results of anything else that the Executive wants to do in the next two to three weeks—the SNP will follow the will of Parliament. What does Brian Adam think about that? Will he ask his minister to respond to that key point in his winding-up speech?

To ask the First Minister what assessment the Scottish Executive has made of the consequences for the environment, economic development and traffic congestion of cancelling the Edinburgh tram scheme. (S3F-17)

Given the First Minister's doubts about the tram scheme and his admiration for the economic policies of the Republic of Ireland, will he pay a visit to Dublin in the near future to see how the tram system there has, over a short period, reduced congestion, significantly promoted economic development and proved so popular that a major expansion is already under way? Does not he realise that the Edinburgh and Leith tram is the best option for the environment and for getting people out of their cars; that the scheme is essential for development of the waterfront in my constituency; and that it is being progressed through fixed-price contracts, under which the contractor bears the financial risk? Nobody is a greater fan or user of buses than I am, but does not the First Minister know that Princes Street, with a current level of 320 buses per hour, is fast approaching the saturation level of 400 buses per hour, and that only an integrated bus and tram network can stop Edinburgh and Leith from grinding to a halt in the years to come?

The themes on the approach to government that we heard about before today's debate were based on more joined-up government and the new-politics principles of the consultative steering group. Today, we have heard about an additional dimension, which is that of addressing what John Swinney described as the "crowded public sector landscape". I will deal with each of those issues in turn. The basic assumption about joined-up government is that it is essential to make ministers responsible for larger policy areas, but that is misguided. If that were the case, the acme of good government in Scotland would be the old Scottish Office, in which there were five ministers and a secretary of state. I believe that the changes in 1999 were a big advance on that, not just because of the accountability and scrutiny arrangements in the Scottish Parliament, but because the changes ensured that the balance of power between ministers and civil servants was changed and meant that ministers had far more time to engage with stakeholders, which is absolutely vital to the new politics in Scotland, which actually began in 1999. I wish John Swinney and his colleagues well, but there is a fundamental problem with dealing equally with the details of a large number of subjects. I have fears for some aspects of his portfolio. For example, I know how much time Jackie Baillie, Wendy Alexander, other ministers and I spent with the voluntary sector when we had responsibility for it. I know that John Swinney regards the voluntary sector as important, but I fear for it, in the midst of all his other responsibilities. I could give several other examples, but I will mention only one, as it has not been highlighted so far: the moving of the equality unit to the Justice Department. The unit has been essential to many successes in the Parliament and there has been widespread agreement in the Parliament about its achievements. The ministers who have been responsible for the unit have devoted a great deal of time to it. I wish Kenny MacAskill well in that work, but I have fears about the unit being joined up with the justice portfolio, which is already very large.  Some of the new arrangements are in principle welcome, such as the introduction of the broader remit of health and well-being. I welcome the fact that housing is to be included in that remit, which is one connection with the post-war Labour Government. However, even in that new remit, there are problems, because it is an illusion to think that it will capture the totality of well-being, which is an issue that must be addressed throughout the Executive. That is why I welcome the appointment of a Minister for Public Health, which may be a more significant development in that regard. One of the oddest features of the changes is the way in which the responsibilities for climate change and the environment have been put in separate places. I understand the rationale for that, because I asked John Swinney about the matter—perhaps he will say something about the issue later—but I still think that having those responsibilities in two places will create difficulties. It would be better to have a champion on climate change—the Minister for Environment—cutting across the work of the Executive, in the way that the Minister for Public Health no doubt will. It is difficult to disagree with many of the generalities that John Swinney expressed. The empowerment of front-line staff to deliver local services has been an objective for a long time. He said that the community planning partnerships are essential to delivery—they were set up by the previous Administration, so I am sure that we agree on that. However, the heart of what John Swinney said was about "crowded public sector landscape" and simplifying structures. We must be careful not to think that simply changing structures will deal with the many challenges in the public sector. That is not to say that such changes should not be considered, but I caution against assuming that they will be a panacea. I know that John Swinney wants to get rid of Communities Scotland. We will debate that issue, but my view is that simply bringing all the Communities Scotland civil servants into John Swinney's department and making it even bigger will not change fundamentally the delivery of housing and wider regeneration services. That must be considered carefully, but we need to have an open mind about the subject and about all that the Howat report says. I will not go into the details of the report, because I have not seen it for months, but I was critical of the recommendations that were made and of the group's understanding of how central Government and local government work. As for the new politics, I have always strongly supported the consultative steering group's principles. If they start to permeate our proceedings—there have been signs of that since  the election—that is entirely welcome. However, as the First Minister said yesterday, the new politics is not about "the mushy ground of false consensus."— [ Official Report , 23 May 2007; c 58.]  That is one danger of the new politics, so people still have to put their views vigorously. Another danger is the risk of incoherence and inconsistency, as one policy is voted in and out without a clear direction from the Government. The key issue is how the Government will use executive power. Traditionally, Governments at Westminster and here have had great ability to use executive power without reference to Parliament and I welcome the fact that the Government has said that it will not do that. The first big touchstone of that will be the Edinburgh tram. I was shocked and disappointed by what the First Minister said about that yesterday. I do not for the life of me see how scrapping the Edinburgh tram is consistent with his overall objective of fuelling "economic growth while reducing our impact on the planet."— [ Official Report , 23 May 2007; c 61.]  The tram is essential for the environment. Without it, Edinburgh will grind to a halt in years to come. The tram is also essential for the development of Edinburgh, Leith and—not least—the waterfront in my constituency. In his wind-up speech, perhaps the minister will tell us how he will involve the Parliament in the decision about the tram. Will he pay heed to Parliament's views? Apart from the SNP, everybody in the Parliament—all the other political parties and Margo MacDonald, the independent—supports the Edinburgh tram and realises its importance. In the spirit of the new politics and of involving the Parliament, will the minister at least indicate that he will listen to the views of the Parliament and of most people in Edinburgh and Leith on that issue?

On behalf of my constituents who are concerned about stopping ship-to-ship oil transfers in the Firth of Forth, I welcome Richard Lochhead to his new post. Despite his lack of detail, I also welcome his intention to carry forward the commitment that Sarah Boyack made before the election to amend the habitats regulations. How soon will any new measures be in place? Has the minister received any undertaking from Forth Ports to hold off until any new regulations are in force? If not, is there a possibility of any proposed legislation applying retrospectively? Marilyn Livingstone asked that question, but the minister sidestepped it. Finally, will he demand that Forth Ports fully consults on its proposals when the appropriate assessment on the implications for the Natura sites is available?

I congratulate Nicol Stephen on not setting a rate of local income tax of 3p in the pound, which would result in devastating cuts in local government services. However, will he tell us at what higher rate the Liberal Democrats will set a local income tax? How will that help young people who are saving up to buy their own home or students who are exempt from council tax but who might have to pay a local income tax if they are in part-time employment?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to ensure that the experience of patients informs the development of health care. (S2O-12362)

I welcome the programme described by the minister and the work that NHS Lothian has been doing in that area for some time. Will the minister ensure that there is a focus on the full range of patients' qualitative experience of care, rather than simply patient satisfaction surveys? Will he ensure that the initiative draws on the work of those who are already experts in the field, such as the team at the cancer care research centre at the University of Stirling? Crucially, will he ensure that the information about patient experience is acted upon to improve patient care further?

I know that the deputy minister cannot be involved in a decision about the Water of Leith flood prevention scheme, because it affects her constituency, as well as mine. However, will she convey to the minister, Ross Finnie, the extreme frustration and anger of many of my constituents that, three years after that vital and necessary scheme received planning permission, no Executive decision has been taken about it? What progress has been made since I previously raised the matter at environment and rural development questions? When exactly will Ross Finnie say something about it?

I apologise for being two minutes late for the debate, which I had thought would begin at the usual Wednesday afternoon starting time of 2.35. However, I managed to get the general drift of Jim Mather's opening speech, which Stewart Stevenson tried to back up. Their speeches showed three characteristics: first, they displayed the usual doom and gloom about the current state of the economy; secondly, they ignored all the action that is currently being taken to support small businesses in Scotland; and thirdly, they were completely silent about all the negative features of the SNP's economic policy and constitutional position. In relation to so-called doom and gloom, this very week, as it happens, the Committee of Scottish Clearing Bankers' quarterly statistics were released. They show that the number of new business start-ups last year was up from 21,383—in itself a significant figure—to 23,468. In fact, over the past seven years the stock of small businesses in Scotland has risen by over 33,000, which is in keeping with the general economic  good news that we have experienced during the years of the Scottish Parliament. More than 210,000 people have entered employment since 1999, which gives us the second-highest level of employment in the European Union. Growth is significantly above the long-term average and above that of the United Kingdom in the past nine quarters. I hope that that serves at least partially to redress the general analysis of the situation that we had from the SNP and, to a considerable extent, from the Conservatives. The Opposition parties were silent about the action that is being taken. I cannot go into the detail of all the support schemes that are available to small businesses, but among the grant schemes that we have are, for example, the small firms merit award for research and technology, or SMART, support for products under research, or SPUR, and SPUR plus, which are being improved and extended. Those schemes have already helped hundreds of small businesses over the past few years. Partly on the back of the debacle of the SNP's public procurement announcement a couple of days ago, we know that 22 per cent of public contracts already go to small businesses. I am not sure where that puts the SNP commitment to reduce to 20 per cent the award of such contracts to small businesses. We have a new model for the business gateway, a key principle of which is change that will make business support accessible to a larger number of businesses. We have a robust better-regulation agenda, which Scottish businesses are working in partnership with the Executive to deliver. I remind members that we will from April have a competitive advantage over English small businesses because of a change in the rate poundage. That is over and above the existing small business rate relief scheme, which is generous and is already helping nearly three quarters of small businesses.

As I said, the Scottish growth rate in the past nine quarters has been above the long-term trend. Even in an extended speech, I would not have time to go into all the obvious differences between the backgrounds of the Irish economy and ours. I am the last person to stand here and say that everything is rosy. I want to do better. Of course we want to do better, so I will describe how we intend to do that. My party has robust policies for the election that will build on existing success, but  it is not just the Government that must take responsibility. I was shocked by the news this morning—I am sure that members who saw it were, too—that women who start up small businesses appear to be charged higher rates of interest than men who start up small businesses. I was pleased that my Westminster Government colleague, Margaret Hodge, has said that she will address that issue vigorously in the next few days and weeks. We have to deal with various problems. Small businesses have flagged up the key issue of skills shortages. That is why that is at the heart of our election proposals. We recognise that Scotland's top economic priority has to be learning and skills, which is why investment in schools and colleges is at the top of our agenda. There will be 100 skills academies, regional science centres and more flexible modern apprenticeships to meet the needs of small and medium-sized businesses. Skills do not seem to be a priority for the SNP; it makes the wrong things its priorities. Were we to go along with the SNP proposal to offer further help with non-domestic rates to small businesses, that would cost £180 million. No doubt arguments can be made for that proposal, but we must again ask the SNP where, on top of all its other spending pledges, it will find that £180 million. The success of the Scottish economy depends on greater openness, improved competition and more flexibility, but very many SNP policies run counter to those objectives. For example, Murdo Fraser was quite right to point out the effect that a local income tax would have on unincorporated businesses. Moreover, if the SNP wants to start talking about a tax of 3p in the pound, it will have to explain where the corresponding £1 billion of cuts will have to be made. In any case, its stated plans for a local income tax of 6.5p in the pound would be bad for small businesses and worse for all the individuals who work for or use them. If the SNP believes in a competitive economy, why is it proposing to cancel the Edinburgh airport rail link and the Edinburgh tram project, which are fundamental to the city's economy? Why was it so opposed to planning reform, in spite of the fact that, before the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill was passed, its front-bench spokesperson was telling business groups something different? Why is it proposing in the long term a different regulatory regime for businesses in Scotland from the regime in England? Finally, why is it presenting policies that pose a direct threat to fundamentally important Scottish sectors such as financial services and life sciences, which are directly embedded in the UK market? The choice before us in this debate—and, more fundamentally, in the coming election—is between  maintaining stability and creating instability, between investing in skills and investing in statehood, and between building up Scotland and breaking up Britain.

Does the minister realise that there are more road works per kilometre in Edinburgh than there are in any other local authority area in Scotland and that 85 per cent of those road works are undertaken by utility companies? Given that the utility companies' inadequate reinstatement of roads, which results in outstanding maintenance and repairs, is an increasing problem in Edinburgh that is causing great public concern, will he increase from £120 to at least £5,000 the proposed fixed-penalty charge to be levied by local authorities against offenders under the regulations to be made under the Transport (Scotland) Act 2005? Will he also consider amending the existing legislation to ensure that any road works that utility companies want to carry out do not commence until the local authority's  approval has been granted, except in emergencies?

I warmly welcome the announcement from the Minister for Health and Community Care on the embedding and extension of keep well integrated, anticipatory care in local communities, which is already benefiting my constituents in Leith, Pilton and Granton. The keep well initiative is a key new part of the NHS's action to close the gap between the richest and the poorest, which is at the heart of the Executive's health policy. It is one of many exciting developments in integrated local care, many of which are mentioned in the motion, including dramatic improvements in the management of long-term conditions. One example that I read this week is that the optimum control of cholesterol levels in the Lothians has increased from 20 per cent to 75 per cent over the past 10 years. Many other examples could be given, including the exciting development of partnerships with the voluntary sector that the Minister for Health and Community Care emphasised in his speech. There have also been dramatic developments in the provision of local facilities. I am pleased that the minister mentioned the Leith community treatment centre, which I know he enjoys visiting. The centre has performed invaluable work for my constituents during the past three years. It has not just sorted my back; it has provided community-based teams and a community-based consultant, who offer regular appointments and community-based access to diagnostics. The centre is warmly appreciated by my constituents in Leith. The emphasis on anticipatory care that underlies the keep well programme was a key recommendation of the David Kerr report, which set out a more general vision in which continuous integrated care in local settings would take over as far as possible from reactive, episodic care in acute settings. One of my most important actions as Minister for Health and Community Care was the appointment—indeed, the hand picking—of the members of the David Kerr group. The clinicians, managers and patient representatives who formed the group were committed to the delivery of the maximum possible amount of care in local settings. The group delivered the blueprint  and "Delivering for Health", which followed, took the general approach that they had recommended. Members of the Parliament signed up to the David Kerr report. I have been interested to learn that many people across the border have been taking a great interest in the David Kerr report. Two or three weeks ago, I saw an advertisement in the Health Service Journal for a conference in England—where there is much controversy about the reconfiguration of services—at which a session on learning lessons from Scotland was to be led by David Kerr and a senior official from the Health Department. It is unfortunate that Opposition parties in the Parliament have not always learned the lessons in the David Kerr report—that might not be obvious in this debate, but it was obvious in the most recent parliamentary debate on health. A great deal remains to be done to make the NHS local. The motion mentions the role of community health partnerships. CHPs were a key development in the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Act 2004, which was passed after the most recent election. They are delivery agents for shifting the balance of care further, as the motion emphasises, and we look forward to their further development in that regard. CHPs will also be agents for more local decision making. I was interested to read that during the past couple of weeks NHS Lothian shifted the management of more front-line services to CHPs. CHPs are at the cutting edge of approaches to decentralise care and deliver it more locally. I hope that members and people further afield appreciate the strengths and achievements of the Scottish health system. Last week, I spoke to a senior clinician who has just moved up from England, who said, "You have a better system here. It is more integrated." Integration is the key word for the Scottish health service. We should appreciate the benefits of our system and, more important, we should appreciate the delivery that we have witnessed during the past few years. Tributes should go to the Minister for Health and Community Care, to the Health Department, to NHS boards throughout Scotland and, most important, to NHS staff throughout Scotland for their total focus on delivery, which brings spectacular results.

Does the deputy minister accept that an important factor in minimising flood risk for communities is timely decision making? Does she accept that it is high time that the Executive ruled on the City of Edinburgh Council's flood prevention scheme, which received planning permission in 2004? Although I recognise that the deputy minister cannot be involved in the decision, as it affects her constituency, will she urge the Minister for Environment and Rural Development to make a decision quickly? Will she also ensure that he puts the interests of my constituents in  Stockbridge and Bonnington before the self-serving interests of the Scottish Rugby Union?

Does the minister realise that, with the exception of one Scottish National Party council member, the whole of the City of Edinburgh Council voted in support of the whole of the tram network, including the spur from Haymarket to Granton? Does he realise that local residents often contact me to ensure that that part of the network is developed, and does he realise that the development of the Granton waterfront heavily depends on that part of the tram network being built? Will he therefore ensure that funding is made available for the whole network, including the spur from Haymarket to Granton?

In addition to the support provided by the UK Government arrangements, the Scottish Executive supports lone parents though a number of organisations and initiatives. Examples include: the lone-parent helpline, where funding of £450,000 has been awarded over three years to provide advice on money, child care, housing, debt and relationships; the parenting across Scotland consortium, which is currently piloting new ways of providing information and support to families; and the working for families programme, which is providing £50million over four years to help a range of groups, including lone parents, progress towards or into employment by tackling child care and other barriers.

I acknowledge the work that One Parent Families Scotland has done in relation to lone fathers. The programmes that I referred to—and other programmes that I could mention—benefit lone-parent fathers as well as lone-parent mothers. I could have added to my list sure start Scotland, which helps many families with young children, the Child Poverty Action Group tax credit project and One Parent Families Scotland's sitter service. All those initiatives help lone mothers and lone fathers and build on the significant progress that we have seen from the Westminster Government, including the increase in help with child care costs that lone parents can get from 70 per cent to 80 per cent this year.

I congratulate the committee again on the significant contribution that the report represents to the future direction of disability equality in Scotland. I pay particular tribute to Cathy Peattie for her leadership in driving the work forward and express my condolences to her on her recent bereavement. As I said in my opening speech, the Executive will respond to the report early next year, but now I will reflect on some of the issues that have been raised in the debate. Nora Radcliffe and Shiona Baird focused on employment issues. The report highlights the important role of work in assisting disabled people out of poverty and in many other ways. The Executive agrees. "Workforce Plus—An Employability Framework for Scotland" asserts the Executive's belief that, for most people and their families, work is the surest way of raising and sustaining people out of poverty. Many who depend on welfare benefits face a range of barriers to employment, including disability, poor mental and physical health, low levels of qualifications and caring responsibilities. The workforce plus strategy establishes local partnerships, which are being required to take action to ensure that the services that are needed to help people to go into work and to progress in employment are available. That involves mapping local provision and addressing gaps and duplication. We value the committee's investigation into supported employment. The Scottish Union of Supported Employment received funding from workforce plus to develop a "Blueprint for Supported Employment in Scotland", which was launched in October 2006. In addition, the workforce plus team has seconded a learning disabilities co-ordinator to lead on matters that relate to learning disabilities, which will include the role that supported employment can play. We will consider further the detailed supported employment recommendations in the committee's report. Our support for the blueprint shows that we recognise the part that supported employment can and should play in helping disabled people and others into the labour market. Sandra White, Carolyn Leckie and Jackie Baillie highlighted transport. The Mobility and Access  Committee for Scotland advises the Scottish ministers on matters that relate to accessible transport for disabled people. I thank MACS for the work that it has done and the contribution that it has made since its establishment in 2002. The new regional transport partnerships will be key to helping to deliver disability equality. They are subject to the general duty to promote disability equality and, in addition, guidance has been issued to all regional transport partnerships about undertaking an equality impact assessment as part of the development of their regional transport strategies. We note the committee's findings on the abuse of parking spaces for disabled people, about which Jackie Baillie and Jamie McGrigor spoke. We are aware that the issue is frustrating and needs to be tackled. We are conducting research on the subject of tackling the abuse of off-street parking for disabled people and the report of that research will be available in the spring. I move to leisure and public life, on which Marlyn Glen majored. We want Scotland to be a tourist destination for disabled people. VisitScotland produces an accessible Scotland guide that lists almost 1,000 attractions and accommodation providers that are members of its disability access scheme. It is also establishing a focus group that will help to inform it how it can further develop the content and delivery of its information service in order to continue to promote and market Scotland as an accessible destination. We shall, of course, consider the committee's recommendations relating to VisitScotland, including those that seek to expand its activities. The culture (Scotland) bill and guidance will strengthen access to culture. Consultation on the draft bill was launched on 14 December. Among other things, the bill and the guidance will highlight the need for local authorities to engage and consult equalities groups, including disabled people, throughout the process of determining the provision of culture in their area. In preparation for the legislation, the Executive will match fund cultural entitlement pathfinders in order to explore approaches to developing cultural entitlements and cultural planning activities. Yesterday, we announced our support for cultural pathfinders focusing on particular communities and sections of society that are known to be underrepresented in cultural participation and our support for a pathfinder programme for disabled people. We accept the committee's recommendation, to which Marlyn Glen and Elaine Smith referred, that the Executive should work with the commissioner for public appointments to develop mechanisms to increase the participation of disabled people in public life. Indeed, I have already started a dialogue with the commissioner for public  appointments on the development of her diversity strategy. More generally, the Executive accepts the social model of disability and the principles of independent living. We want to work with disabled people to develop our approach and identify the best ways in which we can support independent living. We said that in our response to the disability working group's report and will say more about it in our formal response to the committee's report next year. Elaine Smith majored on attitudes. She referred to the highly successful see me campaign, with which I was pleased to be associated in my previous portfolio. She emphasised the importance of disability equality training. We recognise the value of such training and will establish an expert group of disabled people to work with us to develop our approach to it.

I certainly congratulate the T&G; we have also had a successful partnership with the STUC on the campaign that Elaine Smith mentioned. Obviously, the matter to which she referred is a matter for the trade union movement to deal with, but I am confident that it will respond positively. John Swinburne mentioned physical access. We expect that the revised building standards regulations that will come into force in May 2007 will improve the accessibility of buildings. The committee recommended that the impact of the new regulations be closely monitored and that disabled people should be involved in that process. We will do that; indeed, the Scottish Building Standards Agency is currently looking at how best to achieve that aim. We are committed to supporting the Scottish Disability Equality Forum and, through it, the access panel network. Access panels have an important role to play. We look forward to discussing the committee's recommendations with the forum in the new year. How much time do I have left, convener?

: I should say something about lifelong learning, which has not featured too much in the debate, although I am sure that it will feature in Marilyn Livingstone's closing speech. Lifelong learning is an important part of the report. We agree with the committee that unequal access to lifelong learning is a major issue. Our current lifelong learning strategy seeks to promote the mainstreaming of equality in the development of policy and the shaping of legislation.

I acknowledge the invaluable sign language work that is being done in the Parliament and throughout Scotland. We have recently sought to support and expand the training for that work. To help to support the mainstreaming of equality in the further and higher education sectors, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has launched the equality forward unit, which will support the FE and HE sectors in delivering the equalities agenda. The unit includes a specific disability strand that will work to support disabled students and disabled staff. In addition, "Partnership Matters: A Guide to Local Authorities, NHS Boards and Voluntary Organisations on Supporting Students with Additional Needs in Further Education", which the Executive published in 2005, helps to promote understanding of disability in FE institutions and sets out the roles and responsibilities of all the agencies that are involved in providing support for students with disabilities. We will work to extend guidance to HE institutions; indeed, recommendations on that have been made. Everyone acknowledges that the publication has resulted in improvement in the FE sector. We are committed to ensuring that appropriate support is provided to enable students to undertake their studies successfully. The funding council is currently considering developing and implementing a needs-led approach to identify students with additional support needs and is progressing a needs-led assessment model in a pilot project involving 11 colleges. The report makes important points about transitional support. Our work includes addressing the needs of young people who are not in education, employment or training through our more choices, more chances NEET strategy. We aim to understand fully who those young people  are and to put together the right package of learning and support for pre-16-year-olds and those who are 16 and over. Our NEET strategy identifies young disabled people as one of several key groups that local partnerships should target in implementing the strategy. I heard what Shiona Baird said about WEETs. Obviously, what she said must be addressed in the context of considering the report. Again, I commend the committee for its work. Its report will form part of the legacy of this session of Parliament, inform policy for years to come and help to drive far-reaching change across Scottish society. The Executive will respond to the report in detail early next year. However, I hope that we have signalled our appreciation for the contribution that the committee has made and I hope that we have made it clear that we will work with it to realise our shared goals for disability equality. The new disability equality duty, the disability working group report and the committee's inquiry report will help to increase the pace of change and deliver equality of opportunity for disabled people throughout Scotland.

I thank the Equal Opportunities Committee for the fantastic job that it has done in the past two and a half years in its disability inquiry. I commend the thorough approach that was taken, particularly the engagement with disabled people throughout the country to ensure that the findings were properly informed by and correctly reflect disabled people's views and experiences. I am delighted to have the opportunity to explore the issues in the debate. I will deal with essential general issues in my opening speech and with specific policy areas later on. A full response to the committee's report will be available in the new year. The committee's focus is on removing barriers and creating opportunities for disabled people. I acknowledge that we still need to do significant work on that, but it is important to recognise that the Scottish Executive, which has a long-standing commitment to disability equality, has an appetite for and a commitment to the agenda. We believe that disabled people should have the opportunity and choice to play an active part in Scottish society, to improve their quality of life and to be respected and included as equal members. These are essential ingredients in achieving a just and inclusive Scotland and in forging a successful, civilised and fair society in which we all feel proud to live. To achieve that, we all need to make changes in the way we work and become more responsive to disabled people's needs. The public sector has a major role to play in securing improvements in the lives of disabled people, whether that is done through delivering services, shaping the nation's infrastructure or protecting and providing for our citizens. In particular, the new public sector duty to promote disability equality, which came into force on 5 December, will help the public sector to deliver the changes that are needed to improve people's lives. The Scottish Executive also has a key role in ensuring that the frameworks that we create help to deliver disability equality and that the policies that we develop take account of disabled people's needs and experiences. Since 2000, we have been pushing forward activities to embed equality, including disability equality, into all our activities. We established an equality unit, which has been working to encourage all departments to think about equality issues in the development of their policies and programmes and to ensure that the  systems of the Executive are geared to supporting staff in this. That mainstreaming approach, where disability equality is integrated into the everyday work of the organisation, has allowed us to make significant progress on disability equality through a number of routes, including legislation introduced through the Scottish Parliament, such as the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004; improving data, information and research through initiatives such as the "Social Focus on Disability 2004"; increasing consultation and dialogue with equality groups through our support for Inclusion Scotland and the Scottish Disability Equality Forum; and raising awareness of equality through campaigns such as the see me campaign to tackle stigma and discrimination in relation to mental ill health. However, there is more to do and this is an important moment for setting the agenda for the next phase of work. Not only do we have the introduction of the disability equality duty, we also have the committee's disability inquiry and the Executive's disability working group report. The disability working group was established by the Scottish ministers at the end of 2004. The group determined its own remit, which was "to establish priorities for the Scottish Executive and partner organisations to promote equality for disabled people in Scotland". The group reported in November 2006, making 48 recommendations aimed at changing institutions, tackling attitudes and promoting participation. The final objective of all the recommendations is to achieve improvements in disabled people's lives so that they can participate in society as equal citizens. That does not just mean tackling issues in particular policy areas, because some barriers are strategically significant and cut across initiatives. Addressing those barriers has scope to make a particularly positive difference in wide-ranging ways. For example, independent living is about disabled people having the same choice and control in their lives that non-disabled people take for granted; accessible and inclusive communication is clearly essential to social inclusion and empowerment and is an integral part of day-to-day interactions and relationships; the promotion of full citizenship demands tackling negative public attitudes and ensuring access to public life in its widest sense; and we are keen to develop disability equality training. The working group's recommendations include many on specific policy areas such as employment, education, health and community care. However, all are set in the context of the need to move towards full citizenship in which disabled people can access information and services and live independently. In the main, we  have accepted its recommendations. We have also announced £1 million to make a start on delivering some of the key strategic changes that were called for by the working group. I am pleased to see that the findings of the working group are consistent with those of the committee's inquiry, which also stress the importance of tackling the strategically significant barriers that prevent full participation. However, the committee's report goes further than the disability working group's report. It encompasses a much broader range of issues and makes detailed sets of recommendations across employment, further and higher education, transport, access to leisure, information, awareness raising and physical access.

Absolutely. As I said earlier, we cannot give a full response at this point. Members of the committee will accept that the report has been available to us for only four weeks and contains what is probably the largest set of recommendations that has ever been presented to the Executive. Further, it cuts across the work of many departments. Clearly, we will need more time in order to present members with a detailed response. However, in general terms, I am responding positively to the report and am acknowledging that it has a wider reach than the report of the disability working group. Of course, we will deal with its recommendations in our detailed response in the new year. Both reports emphasise the need for joined-up working across a range of services and on the part of a host of providers in order to deliver solutions that respond effectively and coherently to disabled people's needs. There will certainly be challenges in implementing the findings of the reports, but what is heartening is that the separate pieces of work are clearly moving in the same direction and both clearly fit well with the aims of the disability equality duty, which establishes a framework that will help us to measure progress. Public bodies will report in December 2007 and every year thereafter on the progress that they are making towards equality of opportunity for disabled people. The specific duties set out in the Disability Discrimination (Public Authorities) (Statutory Duties) (Scotland) Regulations 2005 (SSI 2005/565) require the Scottish ministers to publish reports by 1 December 2008, and every three years thereafter, giving an overview on the progress that public authorities have made  towards equality of opportunity for disabled people. That duty also requires ministers to set out proposals for the co-ordination of action by public authorities to progress disability equality. The Scottish Executive will work with the Scottish public sector to develop a strategic approach to that. Of course, there is much to do to realise our goals for disability equality. The new duty will increase the pace of change on disability equality and will make a real difference to the lives of disabled people. It will begin to shift the disadvantage and discrimination that can occur when organisations and institutions fail to take account of disabled people in the development of policies and services. The committee's report and the 156 recommendations that it makes will also help to set the agenda for the coming period. The inquiry will have found areas where we—that is, the Parliament, the Executive and the public sector—need to improve, become better attuned and deliver more effectively. I am enthusiastic about meeting the challenge and understand the need for long-term, sustained commitment and hard work. Our close relationships with disabled people and their organisations will help us and the committee's detailed inquiry will provide opportunities for us all to focus our energies and work together. Again, I commend the committee's approach and the extensive and far-reaching recommendations that it has made. It will take some time for the Executive to develop a full response to the report and we will submit this to the committee early next year. Through our response, we will aim to maximise the opportunities for the full participation of disabled people in Scottish daily and public life and to remove the barriers to that participation.

I join with others in congratulating Sarah Boyack on an excellent choice of subject for  debate. It provides a good combination of history and issues that are very much of the moment. I must also offer my congratulations to the Living Memory Association and the Edinburgh Volunteer Centre on an excellent exhibition, which I enjoyed very much when I saw it this week. One comment in the visitors book said: "You can hear the voices coming off the walls". I certainly agree with that. The photographs, the artefacts on display and the stories of volunteering through the ages, told mostly in the volunteers' own words, are exceedingly evocative. Another visitor had added: "Great to see the changes in the Scottish Way of Life". The exhibition certainly highlights the changes that there have been in volunteering. However, I was also struck by the similarities. For example, the reasons for volunteering seem to have remained fairly constant over the years: to do good for others; to deliver mutual aid; to participate; and to be part of a movement or a community. Of course, many people initially volunteer for the simple reason that they have been asked to do so. I was struck by the story of Sheina Wardlaw who, back in 1953, was asked by a friend to help out with the cubs one night a week and continued to volunteer for over 40 years. Today, being asked by a friend is still the main way in which people get involved in volunteering. I would recommend to all voluntary organisations the Volunteer Development Scotland leaflet "20 top Tips for Asking", which of course gives top tips on how to use that most traditional method of recruitment to maximum effect. For example, it suggests using word of mouth to increase the number of potential volunteers that can be appealed to and outlines ways of finding routes into different age groups, those with disabilities and different ethnic groups. We are proud that people from many different countries have chosen to work, study and often make a home in Scotland. That is, among other things, a huge opportunity for the voluntary sector. Those who are settling in Scotland appear keen to give something to their new communities. In Edinburgh, for example, one in five new volunteers is from European Union accession countries, particularly Poland. So what has changed? I wonder whether members were struck by how little government was mentioned in the exhibition. Given the success story that is so well illustrated in the exhibition, what, we might ask, is the Executive's role? In the past, the voluntary sector has done a great job alongside us, but quite often without us. When I think about the possibilities for change,  and of the benefits for individuals and communities, for service delivery, for personal development, and for training that we can achieve by working together, I get very excited. Such a change does not come from government but from working together with voluntary organisations, social enterprise and the social economy—what we are increasingly calling the third sector. As I said at our first—and, may I say, very successful—third sector summit just two days ago, I use the word "third" not to suggest that there is a pecking order of first, second and third but to mean that the sector is a third force for action, alongside and fully comparable to the public and private sectors. I want to mention two key documents: the Scottish Executive's "Volunteering Strategy" and "A Vision for the Voluntary Sector", which is rightly subtitled "The Next Phase of Our Relationship". Before I talk about the Executive's volunteering strategy, I also congratulate those who are involved in producing "Inspiring Volunteering: A Volunteering Strategy for Edinburgh", which has just come out. With the Executive's volunteering strategy, we want to open up the benefits of volunteering to all and to create a Scotland where everyone who wants to volunteer can do so readily in a high-quality volunteering placement where the volunteer gives something, but also gains. Volunteering has always provided a chance to socialise, an increased sense of self-worth, and a sense of belonging. That is still true today, but increasingly we see properly developed and resourced volunteering opportunities as a way of gaining skills and as a way into work or further training or education. "A Vision for the Voluntary Sector" sets out the roles that we recognise that the sector performs in Scottish life: it is a service delivery partner; it contributes to building strong communities; it is an advocate and develops policy thinking; and it is an agent of change. I look forward to working in full and equal partnership to support those roles. The sector has already achieved a great deal and by working together I think that we can achieve much more. A particular focus of the speeches tonight has been on young people. Mary Mulligan talked about young people giving of their time to be volunteers, whereas several other members talked about people working with young people. Sarah Boyack very even-handedly talked about the origins of both Hearts and Hibs—people working with young people more than 100 years ago. Mike Pringle talked about bfriends, a project in his constituency in which people of various ages work with young people in a one-to-one relationship. Many of the projects mentioned are examples of the  intergenerational work that we are so keen to support and that will feature in the forthcoming strategy for a Scotland with an aging population. I have an example of people working with young people. On Monday night, I presented a trophy to the Pilton youth and children's project, which is in a league for various youth teams in the greater Pilton area. I was struck by the many people working as volunteers with those groups either on their specific activities or in the management groups. It would be wrong not to mention other volunteers, particularly this week when we had a magnificent reception in Edinburgh Castle on Tuesday night for many hundreds of the women throughout Scotland who give of their time to work with women's aid groups, rape crisis groups and others. We were saying thank you to as many of them as we could. We should not forget Robin Harper's reference to the retired and senior volunteers programme. Volunteering for older people will feature strongly in the forthcoming strategy. Sarah Boyack mentioned Project Scotland, which has been hugely successful in building its brand and raising awareness of volunteering and which has provided more than 800 young people with high-quality volunteering placements. Speaking for the Labour Party, the First Minister pledged that we would have a commitment to expand Project Scotland in the manifesto for the next parliamentary elections. Sarah Boyack, Robin Harper, Donald Gorrie and Mark Ballard all talked about funding. We are fully committed to the principle and practice of full cost recovery. Guidelines for funding will be published shortly and will include a presumption of three-year funding. I made that clear at the third sector summit this week. In conclusion, I return to the exhibition. I was struck by one more thing that does not seem to have changed in the past 100 years—the fact that some volunteers do not think that they do volunteering. For example, Anne Cain, who organised older people's lunches in Leith and harangued her shop customers to leave small change in order to throw a party, thought that she was just "helping out". She certainly did not think that she was doing anything extraordinary. We recognise that that continues to this day. People who do good in our society do not much like the do-gooding label. In our you won't believe what you can do! campaign, we show that volunteering is not about selfless sacrifice or superhuman efforts—we know terms of that sort make volunteers or potential volunteers curl up into a ball of embarrassment.  However, much as many may dislike it, today I would like to say on the record that volunteers are doing good. Without their time and skills and effort, voluntarily given, our communities, our country and many individuals would be a lot worse off. In the words of Harriet Eadie, director of the Volunteer Centre Edinburgh, "We are a much richer society if we help each other". I am happy to support the motion and urge all members to visit "A Century of Change" at the earliest opportunity.  Meeting closed at 18:16.

A ministerial meeting with Scottish Gas is being arranged in the near future to discuss the central heating programme and the warm deal. Officials in Communities Scotland are in frequent contact with Scottish Gas.

As I have emphasised on more than one occasion in the chamber, there is an issue about increasing demand for what is a very successful and popular programme. However, now that all the people who were inherited from the Eaga Partnership have been surveyed, the number who are eligible is significantly less than the 10,000 to which Margaret Mitchell refers. Therefore, not nearly as many people are waiting as was thought until fairly recently. Of course, there is an issue of demand, which is why we announced about 10 days ago the injection of extra money into the programme for this year. I am also seeking to get extra money into the programme next year. Let us recognise how successful the programme has been. The target of installing 12,000 systems that was set for this year will be met; indeed, under the warm deal, we will install more systems than we did last year.

The guidance makes provision for prioritisation, but we are seeking to build on and formalise that to a greater extent. Members will realise that because all the people whom we are talking about are older people, a significant number of them will have health and other problems, so it would be extremely difficult to implement a wide-ranging priority system. I accept that provision ought to exist for dealing with extreme cases. The current guidance contains such provision and we are seeking to build on that.

That issue will be raised at the ministerial meeting. The principle of a degree of prioritisation is certainly accepted; I am merely pointing out that it would be difficult to have a wide-ranging priority system. In many ways, the fact that the central heating programme was set up as a universal programme has been the secret of its success. It was set up as a universal programme because we knew that the majority of people who did not have central heating systems were people who found it difficult to afford them. That is why so many people who have had central heating systems installed have been lifted out of fuel poverty as a result. Indeed, the central heating programme is one of the main reasons why the number of households in fuel poverty has fallen from 35 per cent in 1996 to 14 per cent at the latest count. The programme has been successful, but of course we want to develop it. Starting in January, people on pension credit will have extra entitlements and, beyond that, we will review the whole system and how it will develop in time for the next spending review.

I do not want to be too party political, but I could begin by saying that there would not be a list at all if the Tories had remained in government. As I have said, the surveys that have been done indicate that a significant number of the people who were on the list are not eligible, so the figure is smaller than John Scott suggests. We are taking every action that we can to ensure that people get the systems to which they are entitled as quickly as possible. Most of the increased demand has been for replacement systems. That was not foreseen in the first days of the programme, when the priority was to provide systems to people who did not have them. The fact that the programme is universal means that any eligible person whose system breaks down—even if they live in the largest house in Scotland—is entitled to a new one. That situation is new. We are responding to  the new demand as quickly and effectively as possible.

New repair arrangements are coming in and one of the new conditions that will be introduced in January is that, if a system can be repaired up to a value of £750, it will be. That did not happen in the past. I should point out that the system has never worked on the basis of reimbursement. There is a great deal of demand, which we are trying to deal with as quickly and as effectively as possible; in fact, so many people are applying to the scheme because it has been so successful. However, it will improve in several significant ways from January onwards, especially with the introduction of entitlement to repairs where they can be carried out. Of course, any such repairs will be carried out quickly.

At the time of the original transfer, it was envisaged that second-stage transfers would take place over a period of about 10 years. Ministers remain committed to second-stage transfer and want some transfers to move forward in the near future. However, as we recognised at the outset, the bulk of transfers might well take place over a longer period. We should also remember that, while issues around second-stage transfers are under discussion, the investment that we have released is transforming the living conditions of thousands of Glasgow Housing Association tenants.

If Tricia Marwick is going to repeat part of her question, I will repeat part of my answer. We want some second-stage transfers to move forward in the near future. Indeed, that will be an absolutely central priority for me over the next few weeks, and I am having on-going meetings with the different players in Glasgow to ensure that that happens. The joint team report, which was commissioned to unravel and analyse some of the genuine financial complexities associated with disaggregating the GHA business plan, will be published before Christmas and will help us to map a way forward. I make it clear again that we are determined to see progress on some transfers in the near future.

We are doing a great deal to provide affordable housing in rural and remote communities. This year alone, our investment in new affordable housing in rural Scotland is some £139 million.

Scottish Water has a massive budget specifically for unlocking the constraints that sometimes prevent housing development. In parallel, and even more significantly, the budgets for new affordable homes are increasing. The numbers will rise into next year, when there will be 8,000 starts compared with 7,000 this year. Nora Radcliffe represents part of Grampian. In Grampian, we have a £29 million budget to provide 847 affordable homes. That budget is £11 million up on the figure at the start of last year. Indeed, we supplemented the budget by £4 million earlier this month, bringing this year's total across Grampian to £33 million.

The Building (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2006 were laid on 3 November.

I am glad that Mark Ballard acknowledges the tough new standards that will apply from next year, which will result in CO 2  reductions of about 25 per cent and the best levels of thermal insulation in the United Kingdom. Like the member, I am concerned about enforcement. I have been looking into the Aberdeen study to which he refers but I have further work to do on that, so I will not give a conclusive view. However, when those houses were built, older standards applied, which we would now describe as inadequate, given our awareness of the issue. It is not clear to me that when the houses were built they did not comply with the standards of the time, but I remain open-minded and will consider the matter further. I will  certainly do further work to ensure that the standards are rigorously enforced. In principle, I cannot disagree with Mark Ballard when he says that there is little point in having the best standards in the UK if they are not rigorously enforced.

Strict standards and sanctions must be part of any regime. We are all conscious of the importance of the area and we must intensify our efforts in relation to insulation and energy efficiency. New building standards are a key part of that. As I said, I am actively pursuing and investigating the matter, to ensure that inadequacies and loopholes are dealt with.

I must begin with a statement on Crown consent. For the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I wish to advise Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, in so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of Parliament for the purposes of the bill. I place on record my thanks to the Communities Committee and its clerks for their exceptionally thorough consideration of the bill at stages 1 and 2 and, in particular, to Karen Whitefield for her leadership, which ensured that that happened so successfully. I also thank my officials for their superb and continuing work on planning legislation. Finally, my deputy Johann Lamont, who is the best deputy that anyone could ever wish to have, has made an outstanding contribution to the bill's passage. The year 2006 has been a watershed year for planning in Scotland. This year, all the consultation, engagement, policy development and debate have culminated in a parliamentary process that has laid the foundation for years to come. As I have said before, the planning system in Scotland is undergoing its most fundamental and comprehensive modernisation since its creation in the immediate post-war period. I have been struck by the consensus on the bill's core provisions. Of course, legislation of this size, importance and complexity will raise controversial issues, but much of what we have proposed has been welcomed across the board. Few people, if any, have dissented from the introduction of a statutory national planning framework; of the revitalisation of development plans that embrace the ambitions of sustainable development; of the creation of a hierarchy in planning to allow more proportionate processes; of a tighter approach to appeals; of a raft of measures that will ensure that planning decisions take local people's interests fully into account; and of an enhanced enforcement regime. Yes—there have been debates about the detail and some of the substance, and some interests feel that more could be added to the bill but, in general, all parties recognise that a great deal of the bill has got it right. I believe that it is a well- balanced package that contains measures that will promote efficiency and inclusion. It represents a bold and challenging programme of modernisation that will put planning back at the heart of Scotland's growth and development. We need to remember three key messages as we reach the end of the legislative process. First, the purpose of the planning reforms is to improve the quality of outcomes. The best processes in the world are worthless unless they are used in a way that delivers what we really need: good-quality and well-serviced affordable housing; sustainable businesses that provide jobs and economic growth; and the infrastructure that is required to deal with our waste as cleanly as possible and to provide safe, efficient and sustainable modes of transport. Our modernisation measures should help to unlock planning's potential. The national planning framework is a key element in the reform package of the planning system. I am strongly committed to ensuring that all interested parties are fully engaged and involved in the preparation of the second national planning framework and that participation arrangements are inclusive, open and transparent. Before that process begins, I will publish a participation statement that will set out when and how it will take place and the steps that will be taken to ensure that the public are fully involved. I expect that formal consultation on the scope and content of the second national planning framework will begin early in 2007 and that the consultative draft will follow in the autumn. A crucial feature of the bill is that it will place on planning authorities a duty to exercise any development planning function with the objective of contributing to sustainable development. A similar duty will be placed on Scottish ministers in their preparation of the national planning framework. Scottish ministers may issue guidance on that to planning authorities. The preparatory work that has begun on the statutory guidance for sustainable development is focusing on an analysis of existing published material. We intend to consult on the draft early in the new year. The second key message that I want to emphasise is that one of the most important lessons of the past few years has been that proposals are always improved when there has been extensive engagement with and consultation of everyone who has an interest in them. The Communities Committee commended the Executive for the range and extent of its engagement with all stakeholders as the modernisation proposals were developed. It has been hard work, but the broad consensus behind much of the package reflects the value of that engagement. A central feature of our vision for the modernised planning system is that early  engagement and discussion—not least on development planning—are the keys to success. The reinforcement of the central role of development plans in guiding and shaping the development of our towns and cities and in ensuring that local people and other stakeholders have a wide range of opportunities to influence change in their communities is crucial to the success of the reform agenda. Plans must be up to date and communities must be able to engage at an early stage in the process if we are to create a successful Scotland that will grow and develop in the right places at the right time. My final message is the inevitable comment that the passage of the bill is just the beginning—it will take a great deal of effort to turn the bill's ambitions into reality. As with all modernisation that is initiated by primary legislation, many of the fundamental measures—if they are approved by Parliament—will take time to come into force. An intense programme of modernising and updating regulations, circulars, statutory guidance, Scottish planning policies and planning advice notes will need to take place. Some of the groundwork for that has begun, but further consultation of and debate with stakeholders is essential in ensuring that the detail is practical and effective and in enabling key areas of planning modernisation to be implemented as soon as is practical. However, the modernisation of the planning system goes much wider than just the changes that are being made through the bill. The bill's enactment should herald a change not just in processes, but in attitudes, behaviours and practices.

The new planning system can and must be a positive tool that will add value to the communities in which we live and work by enabling the right developments to be built in the right places and by protecting what is special.

I am in my final minute, so I cannot. Planning's potential needs to be unlocked by all the organisations and individuals that operate and interact with the system. That means that applicants must demonstrate genuine willingness to consult, to understand the impacts of their developments and to comply with the decisions and conditions that are applied to them. Planning authorities must accept that planning is not just about control, but is the vehicle for driving forward their area's growth, prosperity and well-being. Communities must recognise that planning requires that hard choices be made and that early  engagement will maximise their chances of influencing outcomes. There are many other agencies that must take on the challenge of contributing positively to planning. The Executive has a key role to play in setting an example in its casework, giving a lead in its policy statements and promoting improvement through assessment and support. The challenge extends across institutional boundaries and requires the commitment of the Executive, planning authorities, communities, developers, business and the public. We should not be daunted by the task that lies ahead; instead, we should celebrate the success of the process so far and treat it as the platform for achieving the ultimate aim, which is to make planning a proactive force for positive and sustainable change. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Amendment 153 would give ministers a power to make regulations to promote the use of mediation. There is no doubt that mediation is a useful tool—a non-adversarial approach that helps to build consensus and to improve relationships around potentially difficult issues. Although mediation can be a useful process in areas such as family law, where couples might agree to use an independent third party to help them to discuss and resolve areas of conflict, there is little evidence of the benefits that it could bring to the planning system. That is why we have said that we will run a pilot to see whether formal mediation can be applied effectively to the planning system and to evaluate its potential impacts and costs.  Mediation is just one of a number of tools for involving communities in the planning process. The planning advice note on community engagement proposes a number of engagement techniques, including mediation. I do not wish one method—especially a method that is relatively untested in the planning system—to be given prominence in the bill, potentially at the expense of others. It could also be counterproductive to require in law something that should be approached on a voluntary basis, with the agreement of both sides. I do not support amendment 153 and urge members to reject it.

I therefore recommend that amendments 89, 89A, 90 and 159 be accepted. In response to Fergus Ewing's question, the weighting of the levy depends on the weighting of the vote. It is possible that a person will vote and pay as both a ratepayer and an owner. However, the vote and the burden are weighted accordingly.

Amendment 149 is unnecessary and would undermine BIDs fundamentally. In effect, it would allow businesses to vote yes to a BID but then never make a contribution through the levy. As was explained to the Communities Committee at stage 2, the  proposal is misconceived because, under section 33, businesses will decide for themselves whether they want to set up a BID and will then work together for the benefits that it can bring, in consultation and agreement with their council. Mary Mulligan made a good intervention on David McLetchie, who must know that a BID will be set up only if businesses are convinced of the need for it. The policy seeks to empower businesses. Most business organisations support the introduction of BIDs and many of them were represented on the working group that came up with the proposals. I am aware of reports in some quarters that the BID levy could be as much as 10 per cent of rateable value, but we have made it clear that the levy should usually be no more than 1 per cent of rateable value. Amendment 149 would be bureaucratic, as it would require a written undertaking from every business that was to pay the levy; it would undermine the financial viability of BID proposals, because the number of businesses that would pay would be unknown; and it would be unfair, as some businesses in a BID would subsidise others, after the BID had been properly approved and agreed by businesses in the area. We believe that businesses will benefit from being part of a BID. I repeat that, at the end of the day, businesses will decide on the matter. The majority of business organisations in Scotland, based on experience elsewhere, agree with our view. I therefore ask members to reject amendment 149. Amendment 150 would place formally in the bill an ability for owners of property to pass on their liability to non-domestic ratepayers, thus ensuring the owner's non-payment of the levy. The bill already allows for owners to be excluded, provided that the BID proposer—and not the Executive, as David McLetchie suggested—considers that to be the best approach for the area. I am satisfied by that approach but not by the restrictive one that David McLetchie proposes.

As I am not responsible for the policy area, it would be fair if I got a note to give me the answer to that. The proposals are in the bill, but they are the responsibility of the Scottish Executive Finance and Central Services Department and the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform. I will not give a hasty answer to that without having received advice.

The reason why I said that I would not give a hasty answer is that an answer will be given before the end of this speech. Members must understand that part 9 comes from another department. Obviously, I understand the generality of the policy but, if there is a detailed question to which I do not know the answer, I will seek advice on it. There is nothing unusual about that. Through the BIDs working group, representatives from the public and private sectors urged us to legislate for owners to be part of BIDs, as did the majority of responses to the public consultation. The bill reduces the risk that owners will benefit from a successful BID project at the expense of occupiers who pay the levy. At stage 2, the committee rejected an amendment with the same outcome as amendment 150, which I ask members to reject as well.

Indeed. We have asked for an order on that under section 104 of the Scotland Act 1998 and it has been granted. Amendment 34, together with amendments 35 and 36, provides for the allocation of a vote to each property that is liable for non-domestic rates. Those amendments will also allow the allocation of a single vote to each property owner or tenant who is eligible to vote. That voting arrangement best provides for the involvement of property owners  and is based on the views of the BIDs working group. It will usually give greater weight to the votes of the more numerous, smaller non-domestic ratepayers participating in part 1 of the ballot, compared with part 2 of the ballot, which weights votes and could be dominated by larger interests of owners and tenants. The result will be a balancing of different voting interests over the first and second parts of a BID ballot. Amendment 36 acknowledges that voting arrangements for BIDs are not straightforward. We will include in secondary legislation the details of the allocation of votes between non-domestic ratepayers and other owners and tenants who are entitled to vote. Putting those requirements in regulations will allow scope to reflect the variety of permutations of owners, tenants, non-domestic ratepayers and so on in a BID, especially where those persons may be interchangeable or overlap. The level of detail that is required to cover those permutations is not appropriate for primary legislation, and amendment 36 provides for it to be covered in secondary legislation. I recommend that members accept amendments 34 to 36. Although I agree that councils should work together with businesses throughout their areas and should not do anything to undermine or cut across existing BID projects, I cannot understand the rationale for amendment 151. I can illustrate the issue by referring to the BID pilot that is taking place in Inverness city centre. If amendment 151 were agreed to, it would prevent Highland Council from undertaking work in another part of its area—for example, in Wick or Thurso, which are more than 100 miles from Inverness—simply because a BID is already doing similar work. Where is the logic in that? As we explained at stage 2, when a virtually identical amendment was rejected, I am open to any amendment to make the bill stronger; amendment 151 does not do that, so I ask that it be rejected. The Executive will monitor the effectiveness of BID arrangements on behalf of the Scottish ministers. To improve BID arrangements, the Executive may propose to alter the groups that are eligible to vote in the BID ballot; the veto criteria that local authorities will apply to BID proposals; and the allocation of votes between non-domestic ratepayers and owners and tenants. Amendment 90 and amendment 159, which takes account of the Subordinate Legislation Committee's views, make such important changes possible only by regulations under affirmative procedure. Parliament, therefore, will have the opportunity to approve such recommendations and improve the workings of BID arrangements. Related amendments 89 and 89A are consequential on those amendments.

I have it noted down that the related amendments, amendments 89 and 89A, are consequential.

Amendments 16 and 17 will require the publication of the formal documents for which the proposed statutory assessment regime provides. In amendment 17, it is made clear that publication can be in electronic form. Amendments 16 and 17 pick up points that were made during the discussion on an amendment that Christine Grahame lodged at stage 2. We accept that although it was always our expectation that such reports would be published, there is merit in a statutory requirement for proactive publication. We support measures to improve both the transparency of planning processes and the accountability of people who have a key role in making the system work better. I commend the amendments to the Parliament. I move amendment 16.

We are aware of the very many concerns raised by local authorities, developers, professionals and others about the outline proposals. We have continued to discuss those concerns with the Treasury as it develops the proposals further. Our aim is to secure a sensible and workable solution for Scotland.

I acknowledge the success of section 75 agreements in capturing the planning gain supplement in support of related developments. Euan Robson will know that expenditure under existing section 75 agreements will be taken into account in the proposals that have been made. However, we must wait to see the detailed Government proposals. We raised concerns in our response to the consultation about how the gain would be calculated, how funds would be distributed and various other matters. We await further news from Westminster about what is proposed.

I do not have such information about the oil and gas companies, but I will write to the member about the matter.

Information is held by postcode area, not by parliamentary constituency. According to Scottish Gas there are in the HS postcode area currently 79 applications for the central heating programme and 11 applications for the warm deal, although actual eligibility is likely to be lower once those applications are assessed. Both programmes remain highly successful. This year we are on track to install 12,000 central heating systems in the private sector and to insulate 12,800 homes in all tenures across Scotland. In addition, I announced yesterday to Parliament that we have allocated another £5 million this year to support both programmes.

There are two issues there. Dave Petrie referred to the warm deal rather than to the central heating programme, although I am not sure that that is what he meant. I will cover both, to cover both eventualities. There has been greatly increased demand for the central heating programme; I said that the figure for which we have planned this year is 12,000, but I was being cautious because, in the light of this week's announcement, we should get more than 12,000 central heating systems installed this year. On the warm deal, we plan for a figure of 12,800 but, given this week's announcement, we should get significantly more than that. There is a problem because of increased demand. We have responded to it and we will continue to respond to it.

There have been transitional issues. I had a meeting on the warm deal with a particular contractor this week and we are in touch with Scottish Gas about the issue. It has been concentrating on the central heating programme and we are taking up with it some of the concerns that Alasdair Morrison raised in his letter.

As I already indicated, I am not saying that there are no arguments for a non-statutory register, but we just do not think that it would be appropriate for that to be dealt with in the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill. Robin Harper said that a tree preservation order does not protect against vandalism. Self-evidently, a register would not, in itself, protect against vandalism either. In that sense, a register would not add anything to the enhanced tree preservation order powers that we are putting into the bill. Robin Harper acknowledged that the site of special scientific interest mechanism could work. He objects to it because he feels that it is bureaucratic, but the SSSI mechanism is no more bureaucratic than what he proposes. We all support the objectives that Robin Harper has outlined, but we think that the measures that we have put into the bill, complemented by Executive amendments 14 and 15, will serve to achieve them.  Amendment 14 agreed to.  Amendment 15 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.  Amendment 142 moved—[Robin Harper].

Amendment 87 will ensure that the reduction in the statutory time period that is attached to some applications for listed building consent, within which development must be begun, does not apply to consent that is granted before the date on which the change in the law is made. The amendment is similar to stage 2 amendment 147, which related to planning permission. At present, planning authorities can specify the period within which work that is permitted under a listed building consent must be begun. If they do not specify a period, a statutory time limit of five years applies. Section 19 will replace the existing provision and reduce the statutory time period to three years, which will avoid some of the uncertainty about when extant listed building  consents might be implemented. Without amendment 87, consents that are granted prior to the commencement of section 19 could suddenly have their time period for starting development reduced from five years to three, which would, for example, mean that consents that previously had another two years left to run lapsed rather abruptly. To avoid unfairness to developers who planned on the basis of the existing time limit and to avoid a glut of listed building consent applications for replacement consents or extensions to time periods, we consider it appropriate to amend the bill. I therefore ask members to support the amendment. I move amendment 87.  Amendment 87 agreed to.

The effect of amendments 14 and 15 will be that, in cases where the Scottish ministers grant planning permission—such as appeal cases or cases that have been called in—they will be required to ensure that adequate provision is made for the preservation or planting of trees by the imposition of conditions. Therefore, I recommend that amendments 14 and 15 be accepted. Amendments 142 and 143 seek to alter and extend the circumstances that could trigger the making of a tree preservation order. As we said at stage 2, the bill introduces additional circumstances for making tree preservation orders, based on cultural and historical significance. That came out of consultation with a wide range of stakeholders in 2004 and 2005 and will allow, for example, for old trees, rare trees or trees that are connected with particular historical events to have special protection. The first proposed paragraph in amendment 143 relates to the appearance of the locality, which is already covered by the principal act's existing powers on the interests of amenity. "The interests of amenity" is a long-standing term, but it is also a broad term, and we intend to provide further guidance on its interpretation in future. Although the first two subparagraphs of the second  proposed paragraph in amendment 143 are covered by the new provisions in the bill on cultural and historical significance, the final subparagraph, which concerns biodiversity, is new. However, biodiversity is better protected by other policy mechanisms, such as sites of special scientific interest. The bill's new provisions on cultural and historical significance offer new powers to protect a wider range of trees. The additional measures that Robin Harper seeks to introduce are not justified, therefore I recommend that amendment 143 be rejected. Amendment 144 is a repeat of Robin Harper's stage 2 amendment 213, which sought to give the Scottish ministers powers to compile a register of trees of special interest and the ability to approve, with or without modifications, a register of such trees compiled by another person. Having given further thought to the proposal following the stage 2 debate, we are still of the opinion that the measures should be rejected. The bill introduces provisions that will allow tree preservation orders to be made in respect of trees, groups of trees and woodlands if it is expedient to do so in the interest of amenity and/or the trees, groups of trees or woodlands are of cultural and historical significance. Therefore, for the first time, tree preservation orders will be able to be made to preserve trees with cultural and historical merit that are not under threat. In addition, the bill introduces provisions that will make all tree preservation orders have immediate effect and allows for an emergency power for planning authorities to prohibit tree operations. The provisions in the bill offer new opportunities to protect special trees, strengthen powers of protection and are pro-active on the protection of cultural and historical trees, therefore the case for a statutory register of trees of special interest is not justified. I recognise that having a non-statutory register may be attractive for the purposes of funding, managing or promoting trees, but that is not a matter for the bill, therefore I recommend that amendment 144 and amendment 145, which is consequential, be rejected. I move amendment 14.

Amendment 13 is a technical drafting change to ensure consistency with other provisions in the bill. It clarifies the relationship between proposed new section 43A(11) and proposed new section 43B, both in the principal act, and brings the wording into line with equivalent provisions relating to appeals in section 18 of the bill. The thrust of our proposals for handling appeals and local reviews has always been that procedures should focus on a review of the original decision rather than on fresh, full consideration of the proposal. That means that,  apart from exceptional circumstances, new matters should not be introduced, nor new information provided that was not put before the authority when the original determination took place. Amendment 13 underlines the fact that proposed new section 43B applies to the regulations in which the form of and procedures for local reviews will be set out—namely, that apart from the general entitlement to have regard to the development plan and to other material considerations, a party to a review should not raise a new issue unless it was impossible to do so beforehand or exceptional circumstances apply. Amendment 32 will ensure that regulations covering the review of decisions that are taken under schemes of delegation provide planning authorities with a level of discretion as to how the review, or any stage of it, is carried out. That is consistent with our approach that local issues should be considered locally. It will enable planning authorities to determine the circumstances in which, for example, they may wish to take oral evidence or additional written evidence. Although the focus should be on the efficient review of a case, it is important that planning authorities have discretion within the framework of the regulations to apply the procedures that they consider fit the circumstances of each case. Amendment 32 will enable regulations to be made under which discretion can be conferred on planning authorities. Finally, amendment 33 is a general provision to ensure that regulations that are to be made setting out the procedure for appeals under the legislation may confer discretion on ministers or on reporters over the manner in which appeals should be handled. That is of key importance in ensuring that our proposals for reforming the planning appeal system ensure that the procedures become less adversarial but no less robust. I ask the chamber to support the three amendments in the group. I move amendment 13.  Amendment 13 agreed to.  Amendment 32 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

No one would dispute the importance of health or public health. As we said at stage 2 in relation to such amendments, existing legislation already ensures that all material considerations are taken into account when planning applications are determined. Those considerations would include health issues, where relevant. It would not be appropriate to single out specific issues in legislation, particularly when they are often addressed by control regimes outwith planning. The Executive already includes, in its planning policy statements and advice, guidance on how the planning system should deal with health concerns in relation to certain developments. I understand that there may be an impression among some MSPs and members of the public that planning legislation prevents planning authorities from treating health as a material  planning consideration. I want to make it absolutely clear that that is not the case. Health considerations are often likely to be controlled by legislation other than planning legislation. There may be specific controls on pollution, for example, or more general duties in relation to environmental health, such as statutory nuisances or health and safety legislation. Matters that are addressed by other statutory controls can still be material considerations in planning applications. Therefore, I recommend that amendment 79 be rejected. Amendment 80 would enshrine in legislation the promotion of energy efficiency and microgeneration in new buildings as a material consideration. Donald Gorrie lodged a similar amendment without success at stage 2. That was not because the issues are unimportant—they are vital—but because there are better ways of promoting energy efficiency and microgeneration. In any case, existing legislation already ensures that all material considerations are taken into account when determining planning applications.

I do not think that I have time.

The Executive is strongly committed to the promotion of sustainable development and we are taking forward work in a range of areas. Sarah Boyack invited me to talk in detail about those areas; I do not have time to do so, but I must mention some of them briefly. Scottish planning policy 6 on planning and renewable energy has a key recommendation on renewables energy equipment and reducing carbon dioxide emissions by a fixed percentage. We are keen that that recommendation be as strong as possible. Starting in April, there will also be new building standards—another issue to which Sarah Boyack referred. Those standards will have a significant effect on CO 2 emissions from new buildings. Permitted development rights are being consulted on. I have made it clear that I am positive about that and we want to act on it in relation to renewable energy as quickly as possible. There will be a wider raft of energy and environmental efficiency measures to ensure that the principles behind amendment 80 are more appropriately integrated into the relevant processes. Therefore, I recommend that amendment 80 be rejected as well. Amendment 84 would require planning authorities to consider attaching appropriate conditions in relation to health. That raises some  of the issues that I have mentioned about specifying in planning legislation the handling of certain topics. In many circumstances, those topics are dealt with under other legislation. As I have said, the Executive already includes, in its planning policy statements and advice, guidance on how the planning system should deal with health concerns in relation to certain developments. Therefore, I recommend that amendment 84 be rejected. I turn finally to amendment 155. We are strongly committed to the promotion of sustainable development, which is why we introduced it in relation to development plans and the national planning framework. However, I do not think that amendment 155 is the best way to encourage a more sustainable approach. It would carry a risk of great uncertainty and delay and would greatly increase the scope for legal challenge. We have always said that development plans, in which all relevant issues are considered in the round, are the best place to consider sustainable development, and applications are determined in accordance with them. Moreover, when applications for developments are not in development plans, they will be subject to much greater scrutiny as a result of our reforms. In summary, we support all the objectives outlined in the group, but we do not think that the amendments are the way to deliver them.

Donald Gorrie's amendment 74 seeks the minimum requirement of a meeting between the prospective applicant, the planning authority and representatives of local community bodies as part of a pre-application consultation. It also seeks to define what constitutes a local community body. He lodged an identical amendment at stage 2. As we said then, the matter is one for subordinate legislation and guidance. If we try to address it in the bill, we risk introducing requirements that will be inappropriate to particular communities or developments. Also, if we try to define the interested local bodies in the bill, we risk excluding parties that have a relevant interest and we might end up with provisions that are vague and difficult to implement. I therefore recommend that amendment 74 be rejected. Donald Gorrie's amendment 75 seeks to require the planning authority to consider the applicant's past performance in consulting on planning applications before the authority decides who should be subject to pre-application consultation on a subsequent application. Again, the proposal was included in an amendment that Mr Gorrie moved at stage 2. As we said then, we believe that the planning authority's power to demand additional pre-application consultation and the obligation on the authority to reject a planning application if the requirement for such consultation has not been met are sufficient to protect the local community's interests. I therefore recommend that amendment 75 be rejected.  Christine Grahame's amendment 76 seeks to ensure that the planning authority is represented at all pre-application consultation meetings with the persons who are specified by the Executive in secondary legislation as requiring such consultation if those persons request such representation. It is an amended version of an amendment that was lodged but withdrawn by her at stage 2. I note that the latest version of the amendment attempts to limit the requirement, but the concerns that we voiced at stage 2 remain. Such representation might be appropriate at large meetings or meetings of particular significance, but it is not appropriate for the bill to state that the planning authority must attend every meeting that we specify in secondary legislation if their attendance is requested by the consultee, because that would tie up the planning authority's resources unduly.

We will issue comprehensive guidance in the planning advice note on community engagement, which we have taken incredibly seriously in the past few months. It is a shame that, this afternoon, we have had little opportunity to note that work, which has been going on behind the scenes. Meetings have been held throughout Scotland to engage communities in how they can be more meaningfully involved in the planning process. There will certainly be guidance on the issue that concerns Christine Grahame and on the many other aspects of genuine community engagement that are at the heart of the bill. When an application has been submitted with its accompanying report on the pre-application consultation, members of the public will have the chance to see to what extent the proposals and the report reflect their views. If the documents fail to reflect the public's views and do not give a reasonable explanation, it will be open to concerned groups or individuals to object, and I presume that they will do so vociferously. I therefore recommend that amendment 76 be rejected. Donald Gorrie's amendment 77 is the same as one that he moved at stage 2, when it was rejected by the committee. As we said then, there will be nothing to prevent community bodies or individuals from making their views about pre-application consultation and the resulting proposals known to the planning authority. Indeed, it is important that pre-application consultation is not seen as replacing the publicity and consultation on the application itself. Public involvement will not stop with the pre-application  consultation. I see no need for a statutory provision in that regard and I recommend that amendment 77 be rejected. Donald Gorrie's amendment 83 would allow a planning authority to decline to determine an application for a major development that is significantly contrary to the development plan if the pre-application consultation does not identify a suitable justification for the departure from the plan. It is a slightly amended version of an amendment that was lodged at stage 2. As we said then, the proposal would move the planning authority's consideration of a case from the application phase to the pre-application phase. That would undermine the consideration of planning applications, during which the development plan and all the other material considerations will be brought to bear in determining the application. The point of the pre-application consultation is not to judge the case, but to bring to the fore and perhaps deal with the potential concerns that surround the project. It is our stated intention to have pre-application consultations and pre-determination hearings on proposals for major developments that are significantly contrary to the development plan. Planning authorities will be required to report on how their decisions on such cases were reached and the applications will be subject to notification to ministers. That should allow sufficient scrutiny and consideration of any grounds for departing significantly from the development plan. I therefore recommend that amendment 83 be rejected.

I am grateful to Maureen Macmillan for raising the issue. It appears that developers who are not clear about the plans that they should be following are causing difficulties. If that is a widespread problem, we would be keen to explore what action could be taken. However, we are not currently in a position to support a provision on the matter in primary legislation. We do not know to what extent planning authorities perceive there to be a problem and there is little evidence of the implications for cost or health and safety, for example, which interested parties might want us to consider. If we establish that there is a problem that needs to be addressed, there might be more simple solutions than those that are proposed in amendments 114 and 115. Under planning legislation, developers are required to comply with the terms of the planning consent, including conditions that are attached. We might be able to promote appropriate planning conditions or to amend secondary legislation to deal with the issue. Amendments 114 and 115 are a little premature and I am not convinced that they would encourage compliance with planning control. I am happy to commit to exploring the issue further with interested parties, to investigate the extent of the problem and options for action, if action is required. I thank Maureen Macmillan for drawing our attention to the issue and invite her to withdraw amendment 114.

Amendment 9 and the four consequential amendments that are grouped with it will amend section 6 to introduce a requirement for a design statement to be provided at the planning application stage for certain classes of  development. The statements will set out the design principles and concepts, in a manner as specified by regulation or order, and will be included in planning applications. Scott Barrie raised the issue during the Communities Committee's stage 2 consideration of the bill. We supported the principle behind the proposal but were unable to accept his amendment as it stood because of some minor technical issues. However, we agreed to lodge an Executive amendment at stage 3 to address the committee's concerns. The bill contains a provision under which planning applications for certain types of development will have to be accompanied by an access statement that sets out how issues that relate to access for the disabled have been dealt with. We will of course consult key stakeholders on the exact nature of the scope of the design and access statements in advance of laying regulations or orders before Parliament. Although we envisage that, in most cases, a single statement containing design and access issues will be prepared, circumstances may arise in which only one or other of the statements is required. For example, an application to build a house in a rural area may not require an access statement if the home will be a private one, but it could require a statement about design. Amendments 9, 10, 12, 71 and 72 have therefore been drafted to allow flexibility, including the possibility that the statements may be combined or in separate documents. I ask members to support them. I move amendment 9.  Amendment 9 agreed to.  Amendments 10, 71, 72 and 12 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

I acknowledge and share concerns about the availability of land for affordable housing. Indeed, that is why I have been chairing a working group on the issue and why, earlier this week, I announced a review of SPP 3 on planning and housing to address the matter as effectively as possible and in every way we can. Amendment 22, in the name of John Home Robertson, seeks the introduction of a separate use class for affordable housing in order to allocate land specifically for such housing, either for rent or for sale, and to keep that stock affordable over the longer term. We took the issue very seriously; indeed, we went to the extent of commissioning independent research on the use class issue, which was published earlier this week and emphatically concluded that introducing a separate use class for affordable housing would not offer any significant advantages over planning authorities' current powers. In fact, the research also concluded that such a move would have some major disadvantages. For example, it would do nothing to encourage landowners to release land for the development of affordable homes and would not ensure that affordable housing provision would be retained for affordable use in the long term. As members have pointed out, last year we published PAN 74 on affordable housing, which outlined ways in which the planning system could support the delivery of affordable housing. The research found that the quota approach introduced by PAN 74 will deliver significant provision of land for affordable housing in mixed communities. The research also suggested that separate allocations of land can contribute to new affordable housing provision. SPP 3 and PAN 74 already provide for planning authorities to designate sites or parts of sites specifically for affordable housing. The issue will be examined further in the review of SPP 3. The research also found more effective ways of retaining the affordability of homes. For example, our homestake shared equity scheme operates a golden share mechanism that gives a housing association the first option to purchase a low-cost home when it is sold on. Of course, the pressured area mechanism can also be used to retain social rented stock that might otherwise be lost under the right to buy. The review of SPP 3 will consider, among other issues, how to secure a more generous allocation of land for housing in development plans and how  to release that land more quickly through the planning system.

I doubt that I have any time to give way; I think that I have to finish by 17:07. Central to the review will be the need to ensure that development plans identify sufficient land for housing where a need has been properly established. We will consider how guidance can more closely integrate housing needs assessments and development plans and look at the role of ministers in intervening in situations in which a development plan does not reflect housing needs. It is vital that development plans are up to date. Part 7 of the bill, on assessing planning authority performance, will greatly improve ministers' powers to raise performance across the whole planning service, including development planning, and ensure that specific steps are taken to make improvements if failures occur. The review will also consider issues surrounding housing quality and density that have an impact on overall housing provision, and I am pleased that the affordable housing working group has endorsed it. More immediately, I announced on Monday that a further £48 million is to be allocated to Communities Scotland to speed up the delivery of much-needed local projects and specifically to help housing associations to purchase strategic sites for the provision of affordable housing. I am pleased that £1 million of that will go Housing Associations in East Lothian, in part to purchase a site at Tranent to provide 48 new affordable homes. Our reforms to the planning system will improve the land supply for housing, but we are also taking action to make better use of public sector land. For example, we are working with Defence Estates to secure a national agreement similar to the one that we already have with the Forestry Commission. That will enable further transfers. I totally agree with John Home Robertson's objectives but I do not think that amendment 22 is the way to proceed. To give him time to sum up on amendment 22, I will not spend any time on amendment 69. Several members have re-emphasised the point that was made in committee—that amendment 69 is not practical. I recommend that amendment 69 be rejected.

I will be brief so that we do not lose time from the debate on affordable housing. Of course, I support the provision of the facilities that are mentioned in amendment 50, but I do not agree that the requirement for them should be included in primary legislation, especially as the amendment highlights only a small number of objectives rather than the full range of sometimes competing issues that must be addressed. That is more appropriately a matter for policy. We have discussed SPP 11 on physical activity and open  space and, in a moment, we will discuss SPP 3 on planning for housing. Also, as Karen Whitefield reminded us, it is not clear how a vigorous and balanced community would be defined, which could result in lengthy debates about whether a particular strategy would achieve that. Members should remember what we are proposing. Authorities will be under a duty to prepare a participation statement in their development plan schemes that will set out the steps that they will take to involve the public at large in plan preparation and review. Those statements will be updated annually and assessed at the examination to ensure that the planning authority has done what it said it would do. Therefore, amendment 51 is unnecessary. On amendment 52, we should remember that the thrust of our package of modernisation is to involve local communities more effectively in the planning process, especially in drawing up development plans. A range of other provisions in the bill support that—for example, the preparation of participation statements; neighbour notification of key proposals; and the requirement to involve the public at large at various stages of the plan process. I do not believe that further legal prescription is necessary or appropriate, as it could reduce the flexibility to find effective local solutions based on the nature of the community and the issues that it faces. I would not expressly encourage community groups to prepare their own versions of the plan, as is proposed in the second part of amendment 52, because of the complex legal and policy requirements that must be taken into account. We are encouraging the public at large to be fully involved in the formative stages of plan preparation, and we are encouraging planning authorities to be transparent with their information and to use a range of techniques to allow communities to help to shape the strategy and decisions on the location of new developments. Therefore, like the other two amendments, amendment 52 is neither necessary nor appropriate. I recommend that all three amendments be rejected.

I am afraid that it is a general remark and I cannot be more specific.  Amendment 20 agreed to.  Amendments 105, 106 and 107 not moved.  Amendment 2 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendment 108 seeks to require the spatial strategies of local development plans to identify areas of important open space and to introduce a presumption against development of such areas. Since the introduction of the bill, a review of the national policy on open space has commenced. Pauline McNeill reminded us of that. Earlier this year, we published draft Scottish planning policy 11 on physical activity and open space. I believe that draft SPP 11 is a robust policy document. The draft policy seeks to strengthen protection of open space significantly; for example, it will require local councils to audit their open space and introduces a new requirement for them to notify ministers of a much wider range of developments on open space, including those that involve smaller community sports facilities such as tennis courts and bowling greens. The consultation on draft SPP 11 closed on 3 November and received 130 responses from a wide range of interests. I thank Pauline McNeill for her comments in that regard and I agree whole-heartedly with the general thrust of her remarks about the importance of open space. However, given the review of SPP 11 and its aim of strengthening the provision and protection of open space, the legal requirements that are proposed in amendment 108 are not appropriate. Amendment 108 would create a presumption against the development of open space, but draft SPP 11 promotes such a presumption. That is the right policy route for dealing with that important issue. The draft SPP acknowledges that development plans are the proper vehicle for deciding where development should occur and will require plans to identify open spaces that are to be protected and enhanced. Although I support the aim of amendment 108, I do not support the legal requirement that it would introduce. Draft SPP 11 offers a more appropriate and effective opportunity to strengthen protection of open space. We will take on board the concerns that have been expressed in this debate when we finalise the policy, so I recommend that amendment 108 be rejected. Amendments 125 and 126 would oblige the Scottish ministers to call in every planning  application on an area of designated open space unless the planning authority refused permission.

The guidance would be a material consideration. SPP 11 will be important in determinations by local authorities and ministers on such issues. SPP 11 will be a robust document but, as I said, we are finalising it and will make it more robust if we can. We will take on board the comments that have been made in the debate. On amendments 125 and 126, I understand the desire to protect good-quality open space, but I do not agree that ministerial scrutiny and centralised decision making are necessary in all circumstances. Amendments 125 and 126 would undermine the principle of local democracy in planning matters by requiring that minor or non-contentious developments be taken out of the hands of local authorities. For example, ministers would have no choice but to call in and ultimately decide on a planning application for a sports pavilion that was needed to replace a dilapidated facility on a playing field. Not all developments on open space are offensive or require intervention at national level. As I said, we seek to widen notification requirements through SPP 11 and to back up our approach with an option for ministers to intervene if necessary to ensure that we strengthen protection of open space. We all share that important objective. We are acting on the matter, so I ask members to reject amendments 125 and 126.

Amendments 20 and 21 seek to require the principal physical, economic, social and environmental factors that affect local and strategic development plans to be monitored regularly and a report on that monitoring to be published from time to time and, in any event, when a main issues report is published. The amendments, which follow from a stage 2 amendment that was lodged by Scott Barrie and which related only to local development plans, seek to set a general monitoring requirement for both tiers of plan and to ensure that the monitoring  report is published in order to inform the preparation of the next main issues report. As these helpful amendments will ensure that the effectiveness of plans is regularly assessed and that any necessary changes are fed into the next plan review, I recommend that they be accepted. Following an amendment that was lodged at stage 2 by Donald Gorrie, we agreed to come back at stage 3 with an amendment that would require strategic development planning authorities to send a copy of the proposed strategic development plan to planning authorities that neighbour the strategic development plan area. That will be the effect of amendment 2. Given that the bill already requires the strategic development planning authority to seek the views of neighbouring authorities in drawing up the main issues report, the amendment represents a logical additional step in the process and I recommend that it be accepted. Amendment 3 seeks to ensure that notice of a local development plan examination is advertised just in libraries in the local development plan area rather than in the whole planning authority area. It acknowledges that some authorities will continue to be covered by more than one local development plan and that publicity is required only in the plan area. As it follows on from stage 2 amendments 33 and 34, which sought to make the same change at other stages in the plan process, and therefore ensures consistency with the remainder of the provisions, I recommend that amendment 3 be accepted. Amendment 4, which follows from a stage 2 amendment that was lodged by Scott Barrie and which sought additional publicity for development plan schemes, seeks to require planning authorities to publish, on adoption, their development plan schemes, to send copies to Scottish ministers and to make them available in local libraries. This sensible addition to the bill is consistent with other provisions that are aimed at increasing transparency and engagement in the system and I recommend that it be accepted. Amendment 5 is a technical amendment that seeks to replace the phrase "development control" with "development management" in order to reflect the new and more positive terminology that has been adopted in the modernisation package. I recommend that it, too, be accepted. Manuscript amendment 160 seeks to require the regulations that set out the circumstances in which planning authorities can depart from the reporter's recommendations on a local development plan examination to be made first under the affirmative procedure. Concerns have been expressed about the lack of detail in the bill, but it is more effective for such matters to be included in secondary legislation, in order to allow for later amendment.  We accept that there is much interest in the content of the regulations. As was stressed at stage 2, we will work closely with authorities and others to develop the detail. I am therefore happy for the regulations to be subject to the affirmative procedure to ensure proper scrutiny of the circumstances. I recommend that amendment 160 be accepted. I move amendment 20.

It is appropriate for the details to be a matter for the Government of the day, but the fact is that there will be thorough scrutiny, not just at the final stage but at earlier stages. There will be full debates on the matter at meetings of the Parliament's committees and in the chamber, and there will be debates on the  individual policies that are implicit in much of the framework in connection with many other policy documents. There will be an exhaustive process of parliamentary involvement. The bill also places a duty on ministers to make a statement to the Parliament on the actions that they take to address issues that the Parliament raises in any resolution or report on the framework. We are strongly committed to ensuring that all interested parties are fully engaged and involved in the preparation of the national planning framework and that the arrangements for participation are inclusive, open and transparent. At the end of the process, ministers will report to Parliament on how they have engaged with stakeholders and taken account of their views. We consider that the provisions on reporting to Parliament are appropriate for a broad, strategic policy document such as the national planning framework. Patrick Harvie's amendment 96 is flawed because it presupposes that the only means of participation is through a formal response to a consultation. As we tried to signal by requiring a participation statement rather than a consultation statement, the national planning framework will be developed in a range of ways, including seminars and workshops, which will influence the development of the draft plan. It would be wrong to focus merely on consultation responses. It is more appropriate to understand how the participation of the public at large has helped to shape the national planning framework—that was the intention of an amendment that we lodged at stage 2. I ask the Parliament to reject amendments 43, 44, 46 and 96.

Amendments 93 to 95, in the name of Bruce Crawford, propose a separate public examination to inform parliamentary scrutiny. We do not believe that that is required for a broad strategic policy document such as the national planning framework. Bruce Crawford wanted us to copy England. However, unlike the technical and detailed regional spatial strategies that are prepared elsewhere in the United Kingdom, the national planning framework will not allocate land for specific developments. While some of the issues that are raised by the framework might be politically contentious, they will be issues of principle rather than of technical complexity. The programme of participation and parliamentary scrutiny to which we are committed will provide ample opportunity for the issues that are raised by the framework to be examined critically. I do not think that it is appropriate to suggest that Parliament does not have the capacity or competence to conduct its own scrutiny of a national planning document or that it cannot decide, in the light of the nature of the document, how best to organise that scrutiny. Contrary to what Christine Grahame said, Parliament will have a significant role to play and its participation will not be on the level of its participation in the process relating to statutory instruments, as Patrick Harvie alleged.

I am just about to go through the whole process. What is forgotten in relation to this issue is that it is not just a matter of having a final discussion in Parliament; there is a long process before that. The framework will have been in the public domain long before it is laid before Parliament. Before the process begins, the Executive will publish a participation statement that will set out when and how the process will take place and the steps that will be taken to involve the public at large. Stakeholders, MSPs and the public will all be given the opportunity to participate in the debate.  The process will involve initial consultation on the scope and content of the national planning framework, the issuing of a draft for public consultation, revision of the draft in the light of the reaction to it and scrutiny of the finalised national planning framework in the Parliament. Over a number of months, there will be regional seminars, thematic seminars, workshops and e-consultations. We are keen to reach the maximum number of people and organisations and to ensure that they can participate in the most effective and appropriate way for them. The national planning framework will, of course, draw on existing policies and programmes such as those on transport, regeneration and environmental infrastructure. It will reflect the spatial consequences of policy in those and other areas. Any projects that are identified as national developments will have been subject to scrutiny as part of the development of other strategies or programmes. That applies to all the examples that Christine Grahame mentioned. Moreover, stakeholders, the public and MSPs will have had the opportunity to scrutinise and make representations on the consultative draft. There will be opportunities for scrutiny, comment and debate throughout the preparation of the NPF and I fully expect the final stage, in the Parliament, to involve rigorous and testing scrutiny. In the light of that extensive programme of consultation and scrutiny, we think that Christine Grahame's amendment 43 and Donald Gorrie's amendments 44 and 46 are misconceived. Ultimately, the national planning framework is a statement of Government policy, which is the responsibility of ministers, but it will have been developed painstakingly, over a prolonged period, with the full participation of the public, interested organisations and, crucially, parliamentarians. Ministers are accountable to the Parliament and it is folly to suggest that the national planning framework will be used as a Trojan horse for slipping in difficult developments unnoticed. It is for ministers to determine the framework's final content, but they will do so having taken account of the views of Parliament and the public at large.

Amendment 1 will address an issue that Jackie Baillie raised at stage 2, by requiring that any statement on a national development in the national planning framework must contain a statement by the Scottish ministers on the need for the development and may also contain a statement on other matters pertaining to the designation. I am grateful to Jackie Baillie for her contribution on the matter. Amendment 1 clarifies our intentions: designation as a national development will establish the policy need for the development in question, but ministers should not be constrained from setting out the broader context for the designation. Amendment 1 will ensure that the NPF addresses the question of need but will not unduly restrict the matters that may be addressed in a statement on a national development. At stage 2, we gave an undertaking to Scott Barrie to lodge an amendment to require the Scottish ministers to give regular consideration to the need for revision of the NPF. Amendments 38 to 40 will place a duty on ministers either to revise the framework or to publish an explanation of why  they decided not to revise it within five years of publishing the framework. I ask members to support amendments 1 and 38 to 40. Amendment 97, in Patrick Harvie's name, would extend the duty to contribute to sustainable development to the function of implementing the NPF. Part 1 of the bill sets out the functions and duties of ministers in preparing and revising the NPF. As there is a clear duty on ministers to prepare the framework, it made sense to impose further duties in relation to how they should do that. However, it would make less sense to impose duties on ministers in relation to the framework's implementation, which is not the sole or even the principal responsibility of ministers. The framework will be implemented by planning authorities in exercising their planning functions, public agencies, such as the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, Scottish Natural Heritage and Scottish Water, and private developers. Planning authorities, of course, will be under a duty to contribute to sustainable development in preparing their development plans. SEPA, SNH and Scottish Water are also bound by a sustainable development duty. I fear that amendment 97 would add a duty to unspecified and unclear ministerial functions. The key issue for the bill is to ensure that the framework, which sets out the principles and priorities for development by which many agencies will be guided, is developed with the objective of contributing to sustainable development. That is extremely important to us. I therefore ask the Parliament to reject amendment 97. I move amendment 1.

There is not much to reply to. For Patrick Harvie's benefit, I clarify that I said that ministers will not have the sole or principal responsibility in implementing the framework. Euan Robson got to the heart of the matter when he said that amendment 97 is misplaced and does not fit well in section 1. Of course ministers intend to do everything on the basis of sustainable development and I agree that planning is a crucial  tool in the move toward that, but amendment 97 would not help.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  Amendments 38 to 40 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

This is the 16 th year of the United Nations campaign of activism to end violence against women, and I am proud that the Parliament is again discussing male violence against women. If this annual debate helps, even in small part, to reinforce the message that there is no excuse for men's violence towards women, however it manifests itself, it is right that we take that opportunity, and if our debate can demonstrate the support of the Parliament for the many women who have worked tirelessly over the years to keep male violence on the public agenda, and to support women and children who are affected, that is right too. The theme of this year's UN campaign celebrates activists who have made the campaign a success and honours women human rights defenders who have suffered intimidation and violence. Earlier this year, I had the great privilege of meeting Thabitha Khumalo, from the Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions. She has spoken at a number of events, including the Scottish Trades Union Congress conference, to appeal for the "Dignity. Period!" campaign, which has the simple aim of ensuring provision of sanitary products for Zimbabwean women. She has carried on her fight for human rights in spite of the consequences. She has been arrested frequently and has suffered torture, kidnap, gang rape and beatings. Sadly, she provides just one example of a woman being treated in such a way because she is not afraid to stand up for women's rights. In Scotland, we have had our own struggles to pursue gender equality, whether fighting for an end to sex discrimination, proper maternity and other employment rights or an end to the gender pay gap. Those struggles have been taken forward within political parties, by trade unions and elsewhere, but it is women who have put them on the agenda and kept them there. It was the work of women activists and volunteers that led to the establishment of the first women's aid groups and rape crisis centres. In 1976, when Scottish Women's Aid was founded, there was a lack of public awareness and understanding of domestic abuse and an undoubted failure by statutory agencies to respond appropriately. Much of the work done by Scottish Women's Aid was around awareness raising and getting  domestic abuse on the political agenda. Over 30 years, the organisation's approach has been informed by the real experiences of the women who have been in contact with it. That has been vital in increasing understanding of what women need, whether that is information, refuge, rehousing, legal provision or other support. Women activists, often unpaid and survivors themselves, have developed hugely our understanding of domestic abuse; its relation to gender inequality, male abuse of power and control; the strength of women who survive such abuse; and our responsibility to protect. Scottish Women's Aid listened to the many abused women who left for the sake of the children and to the families that stayed in its refuges in the early days. With that experience came a deeper understanding of how children, too, are affected by domestic abuse. It is a great tribute to Scottish Women's Aid activists that they now campaign for both women and children, emphasising the resilience and bravery of both and the fact that their protection and well-being are inextricably linked. I am pleased that we now fund Scottish Women's Aid to carry out its much-needed work and I congratulate it on its 30 th anniversary. It was also 30 years ago that the first rape crisis centre in Scotland opened in Glasgow. Today there is a network of centres across Scotland that work to provide much-needed support to those who experience rape and sexual assault and to raise awareness and challenge myths. Again, activists and volunteers have driven much of the agenda around sexual violence. All the local centres are now given a measure of funding stability through the Executive's rape crisis specific fund, and four years ago Rape Crisis Scotland was set up with Executive funding as the national office of the network to support the work of the affiliated centres and to help the rape crisis movement to develop. Later this month I will attend the 30 th anniversary event at Glasgow rape crisis centre. I look forward to the opportunity to share in its celebration of a significant milestone. I have a great deal of sympathy for Carolyn Leckie's amendment on rape, but it fails to mention some of the action that has been taken. For example, the Parliament passed the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Act 2002, which addressed some of the concerns about the impact on victims of rape when there was an unfair and irrelevant focus on their sexual background or character by the accused or the accused's legal representatives when they gave evidence in court. The impact of the act is currently being evaluated; the final report is due early in the new year.  Moreover, the Crown Office's review of the prosecution of rape is a thorough examination of the best prosecution practice in the area. It contains 50 recommendations, which are aimed at delivering an improved quality of investigation and prosecution and at ensuring that victims are treated with courtesy, respect and sensitivity. Finally, we have asked the Scottish Law Commission to examine the law in this area and await its report, which will be the most comprehensive review ever undertaken in Scotland of the law related to rape and other sex offences. There have also been civil law developments in relation to violence against women under legislation passed by this Parliament. For example, the Family Law (Scotland) Act 2006 created the domestic interdict—a remedy for cohabiting couples—and extends the available interdicts so that they can cover not only the home but the applicant's place of work and the school attended by any child in her care. Elsewhere in the 2006 act are provisions that explicitly require the court to consider abuse or the risk of abuse in family cases. For example, the section will apply when a father applies to the court for contact with his child. The first act of the Scottish Parliament to begin life in a committee, the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001, allows the court to attach a power of arrest to any interdict granted to protect someone from abuse. We should remember Maureen Macmillan's key role in that. Not all the progress has been about legal change. We are also keen to support new and innovative ways of working. The domestic abuse court pilot and the assist service came about because of real partnership focused on delivering tangible improvements to the way in which cases of domestic abuse are handled. After two years of the pilot in Glasgow, more perpetrators of domestic abuse are being brought to justice and are being dealt with swiftly and effectively within six weeks. Importantly, the initiative fully supports both victims and witnesses who come into contact with the domestic abuse court. I was pleased to announce continued support and funding for the court and the associated assist service when I spoke at its second-birthday conference in October. The sexual assault referral centre is another project based on a partnership approach that considers improved, joined-up service delivery. Archway Glasgow will provide a co-ordinated multi-agency response to rape and sexual assault, which will provide women, men and adolescents with sensitive and responsive forensic health and support services every day for 24 hours a day in one central location. We have committed £1.6  million over three years to pilot the centre and I look forward to its launch in April. Activists, not only the many paid and unpaid children's support workers in Women's Aid, have raised awareness of the effect of domestic abuse on children and young people. Through the powerful listen louder campaign, young activists raised their own issues with the Scottish Executive and Parliament. We have moved as a nation from ignoring children to recognising that they are affected by domestic abuse and need support in their own right. Young people have shown that they can eloquently state their needs. The £6 million that we have invested ensures that every Women's Aid group has a minimum of three full-time workers supporting children when they are in and once they have left refuge, and that outreach support is offered to many thousands of children and young people in the wider community. We know that supporting those children is everyone's responsibility, which is why Johann Lamont and the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People jointly launched the new national domestic abuse delivery group for children and the getting it right for every child domestic abuse pathfinder pilot, ensuring a multi-agency, cross-Executive approach to secure better outcomes for children. We have exciting plans for children to participate in a delivery plan for their future, and we make a commitment here for young people to have a voice. There are real changes in the law, and practical changes on the ground. I would like to touch on a number of other areas of work. In her amendment, Christine Grahame refers to refuges. Since 2000, we have invested £12 million, through the domestic abuse refuge accommodation programme, to build new refuges or to adapt, extend and upgrade existing ones. That has resulted in more than 600 new, adapted, refurbished or upgraded spaces since 2000. We have also established a sub-group of the national group to address violence against women to implement a domestic abuse accommodation and support provision action plan. The sub-group is chaired by Scottish Women's Aid and has representation from the Executive's violence against women, homelessness and supporting people teams, as well as from Communities Scotland and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. I look forward to its work progressing.

I am giving the figure of 600 for new, adapted, refurbished or upgraded spaces since 2000. I do not know what the figure of 234 refers to. We are pleased to continue our commitment to funding local projects that are working across the three Ps of prevention, protection and provision. The new violence against women fund of £3 million a year is supporting 87 projects over this year and next. We are also continuing to work with the advice of the national group to address violence against women and we are currently consulting local multi-agency partnerships and training consortia on a draft violence against women framework that provides a common language, understanding and context for progressing this agenda at national and local level. I will be interested to know the outcome of the consultation exercise and will use it to build a solid foundation for progressing our work in this area. It is clear to me that to bring about real change we will need to consider how to challenge attitudes and demand so that it becomes unacceptable to abuse women and to view them as sexual commodities. Education will be a key part of that; children and young people are our chance to eradicate violence against women in future. We acknowledge the work of Scottish Women's Aid, the Zero Tolerance Trust, multi-agency partnerships and others, all of which are finding exciting ways of working in schools and youth groups to change attitudes to domestic abuse, sexual bullying and violence against women more generally. We are reviewing a range of positive local and national developments and materials to widen the reach of that vital prevention work and to promote good practice across Scotland. Men must take responsibility for ending violence against women. In March, we supported a successful conference, held by Amnesty International and the Men's Health Forum Scotland, aimed at involving men in tackling violence against women. Those organisations are now working to build support for the white ribbon campaign. Wearing a white ribbon is a symbol of men's opposition to men's violence against women. It signifies a commitment never to commit, condone or remain silent about such violence. I for one will be proud to wear one during the 16 days. I move, That the Parliament is pleased to reaffirm its commitment to the cause of ending violence against women; supports the 16th year of the United Nations' 16 Days of Activism Against Gender Violence campaign and its focus this year on activists; pays tribute to the many paid and unpaid women across Scotland, for example at the Scottish Domestic Abuse Helpline, local women's aid groups, rape crisis centres and other voluntary sector projects, who have given their time, energy and commitment over the years to raising the profile of domestic abuse, rape and sexual  assault and other forms of male violence against women, as well as offering support to those who experience it; congratulates both Scottish Women's Aid and Glasgow Rape Crisis Centre on reaching their 30th anniversaries; welcomes the progress made over the last 30 years including recent developments which recognise the impacts that domestic abuse has on children, and supports the Scottish Executive in its efforts to tackle violence against women in all its forms.

We have no plans to review the policy. Housing stock transfer remains a key option for councils to attract substantial new investment to improve housing in their area while keeping rents affordable.

As I said about the Edinburgh housing stock transfer, I will do everything that I can to support and help Stirling, just as I have Edinburgh. It is simply a fact of life that most people understand—apart from the SNP—that it is impossible to have the same level of investment through traditional routes as it is through community ownership. In the SNP's fantasy-world motion this morning, it suggested that the Treasury could somehow give an extra £2 billion to Scotland to write off debt. How could that possibly happen given the significant increases to our budget that we already receive each year? The SNP has to get real. I will support councils as best I can, but it is absolutely impossible for this Administration, as it would be for the SNP should it ever be in Government, to make the same level of investment in Stirling or anywhere else without community ownership.

Of course I will continue dialogue with Sylvia Jackson and Stirling Council, as I did with the City of Edinburgh Council following the no vote there. We will do as much as we can to support councils where there has been a no vote. However, tenants—and everyone in the chamber—have to face the simple fact that a yes vote will unlock far more investment and provide far more stability than a no vote.

I congratulate Mark Ballard on bringing this important debate to the Parliament and I welcome the representatives of voluntary and community health groups who are in the gallery. The voluntary sector is vital to our communities and delivers responsive, innovative services such as the community health projects that we are discussing. Community projects arise from and are  embedded in the communities that they serve. They can persuade people and engage with them in ways that statutory providers often find much more difficult. Last December, we published "A Vision for the Voluntary Sector: The Next Phase of Our Relationship", which recognised the sector's vital contribution to our joint policy aims and made it clear that we need to do much more to understand, build on and learn from best practice in the sector. Seen from the perspective of "A Vision for the Voluntary Sector", community health projects make a substantial contribution to addressing the health issues that communities in Scotland face. We need the commitment of the independent, community and voluntary organisations that work with the statutory sector to meet the challenging targets that we set for improving the health of the people of Scotland and closing the health inequalities gap. Without those organisations, it might be impossible to achieve our objectives. Like Mark Ballard, I pay tribute to the Edinburgh community food initiative's remarkable achievements in the past 10 years. They are a tribute to the energy, commitment and vision of the staff and volunteers who have contributed so much over the years to make the initiative such a great success. I hold up the Edinburgh community food initiative as an exemplar of how a community health project can work successfully with and within the communities that it serves to identify where positive change can be brought about in community health and well-being. The initiative demonstrates how a community health project can respond and adapt to the changing priorities in health improvement—and to changes in community and partnership demands—and ensure that it remains sustainable. There are, of course, many other examples, and I will mention just one. Just around the corner from the Edinburgh community food initiative, which is based in my constituency, is the FareShare project, which is run by the Cyrenians. It distributes food to more than 40 hostels and day centres for the homeless. A film about the project will be shown in the Parliament two weeks today and speakers will describe the project's work. I hope that members will attend to hear about its important work on health and homelessness. I recognise that achieving sustainability remains a major concern for community health initiatives. A key principle in the Executive's approach to improving community health and well-being is to allow community partners to agree on local priorities and to target their resources accordingly. Therefore, it is important that community health initiatives are able to work with the statutory sector to identify the priorities and decide how they can best be met. The Edinburgh community food  initiative can act as a model for others in that respect. It has secured a wide range of funding partners as well as generating its own income as a social enterprise. Among its deliverables are activities that clearly link to enabling its partners' objectives to be met. An example is the snack attack initiative, which delivers on the Scottish Executive's free fresh fruit for primary 1 and 2s initiative and provides free fruit for children who are eligible for free school meals and subsidised fruit for primary 3 to 7s. That is joined-up delivery and true partnership working, and I believe that much can be learned from it.

I was about to say that decisions about funding for the projects that we are discussing are made by local agencies and partners, and members cannot really suggest that it would be right for the Executive to take steps that would constrain community partnerships in their funding decisions on individual projects. However, I acknowledge the problem that Mark Ballard described in both his intervention and earlier speech. We are determined to expand the role of the voluntary sector and, as part of that, we are working on ways of supporting the continued sustainability of community health initiatives. One important development is the work of the community-led supporting and developing healthy communities task group. The group has been examining ways of enabling statutory and voluntary community organisations to deliver better on community-based health priorities. It has been considering issues such as sharing best practice, ensuring adequate stakeholder engagement, developing support for building capacity to deliver effectively, and gathering evidence of what works and, equally important, does not work in improving health and well-being through community-led initiatives. The task group is due to launch its report before the end of the year and its findings will be of great  interest and importance. The Executive will work with the relevant stakeholders to consider how its recommendations can be translated into actions that will provide support and reassurance for community health initiatives. Returning to resources, I point out that the Executive already provides the voluntary sector directly with a significant level of funding—some £656 million in the current year, based on three-year funding packages that can be renewed. However, it is not possible or appropriate to fund all of Scotland's 50,000 voluntary organisations from the centre. Most of the locally based organisations rightly seek funding from strategic agencies in their areas, since their work is about determining local need and local solutions for local people. However, as a priority the Executive will promote the further use of and support for the voluntary sector. We will encourage local authorities, health boards, enterprise companies and other agencies to work with the voluntary sector in their area to meet the needs of communities in the most appropriate way. Understanding those needs and demands is a central ambition of "A Vision for the Voluntary Sector". The vision means new working methods and new partnership approaches based on working together. That is what communities are about, and we have seen real successes all over Scotland. Putting the power of the community to the challenge of health may be the way to a truly healthy population. The challenge is there, and the community undoubtedly has both the strength and potential.  Meeting closed at 17:59.

The Stirling and Renfrewshire ballot results were very disappointing. The packages that were put before tenants would have delivered significant new housing investment and rent stability. Despite those setbacks, transfer will remain a key means for some councils to improve housing in their areas. Tenants in the Highland Council area are currently voting on a transfer proposal and tenants in Inverclyde will have an opportunity to vote shortly. Tenants in four areas—Glasgow, the Borders, Dumfries and Galloway and the Western Isles—have already transferred to community ownership, and substantial new investment is now being delivered on the ground, as Audit Scotland has made clear. The transfer in Argyll and Bute is due to be completed shortly.

It is shameful that Frances Curran is, once again, calling the process privatisation. There are many housing associations throughout Scotland in which tenants have a central role. The ballot that is taking place in the Highland Council area is a good case in point, as it is not just about transferring stock to a housing association. There will be six local committees, each of which will have a tenant majority. Over and above that, as Frances Curran knows, housing associations are non-profit-making organisations. One of the major obstacles that we have faced in the ballots is the fact that Frances  Curran and other people are going round telling people that the process is privatisation. Let me make it clear to tenants in Highland and in Inverclyde that it is not; it is community ownership, new opportunities for tenant involvement and new opportunities for greater investment and stable rents in the years to come.

Tricia Marwick knows fine well that second-stage transfer is not an issue in the ballot in Highland and that it will not be an issue in the ballot in Inverclyde. Indeed, it was not an issue in any other ballot in Scotland. It is, again, misleading tenants to suggest that the challenges and difficulties of second-stage transfer are in any way relevant to the choices that they face. The investment that is taking place in Glasgow is more than double the investment that was made each year before the stock transfer. That investment is being made in Glasgow notwithstanding the difficulties with second-stage transfer and we are determined that progress will be made. The joint team report will be published within the next month and will map a way forward on the issue.

Councils have a choice. No one is forcing councils to go down the route of community ownership. If they are able to meet their investment levels while keeping rents at a stable level, they can choose to do that. However, the fact is that community ownership is by far the best option for many councils, as it allows the debt to be written off. In the case of Highland Council, for example, the 41p in the pound that is currently being spent on the repayment of debt could be freed up to promote more investment and keep rents stable. Councils have a choice. We are not against councils investing directly in their stock if they choose to do that, but it is important that we  have the option of community ownership for councils that can benefit from it.

Tenants have a choice and a vote and nobody is trying to take those away. If Margo MacDonald had listened carefully to what I said to Tricia Marwick, she would know that I said that it is misleading tenants to suggest that second-stage transfer is in any way relevant to the choice that they face. I was not saying that perceptions about that do not influence some tenants—I know that research has been done on the matter in Edinburgh. That is clear in Edinburgh, but the fact is that the second-stage transfer process is unique to Glasgow. The extra investment has gone in, both in Glasgow and in the other local authority areas where there have been transfers. If tenants in Highland and Inverclyde vote yes, they will have massively increased investment and stable rents in the years to come.

I congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on securing the debate.  The Executive places great importance on empowering communities to take part in the consideration of important proposals, whether they relate to wind farms or to other developments that would have an effect on communities. That is why our planning modernisation proposals include a number of measures to that effect, to which I will refer later. I will also refer to Scottish planning policy 6, which I believe addresses Roseanna Cunningham's concerns about guidelines. Between October 2006 and March 2007, reporters from the inquiry reporters unit have been and will be engaged in public local inquiries on a number of wind farm proposals throughout Scotland. Some of those are planning appeals, which follow a refusal of planning permission by the relevant planning authority. Others relate to applications made under the Electricity Act 1989 for developments that would involve more than 50MW of generating capacity and to which the planning authority has objected. It is not always understood that decisions about such applications are made by enterprise ministers. What I will say applies to all significant public local inquiries, not just those that relate to wind farms. That said, I acknowledge that wind farm proposals are occupying a great deal of some communities' time. Under the current system, public local inquiries are conducted under the inquiry procedure rules that were laid down in 1997. As a general rule, it is the responsibility of the people who appear at public inquiries to provide, in advance, evidence to support their point of view and about which they may be questioned. That said, it is obvious that some communities and members of the public cannot be expected to bring to bear in a public inquiry the same level of technical expertise as certain statutory bodies can. However, the weight that reporters give to evidence relates to the quality of the arguments rather than to how they are presented or who makes them. When planning authorities and ministers consider planning or other applications, SEPA, SNH and Historic Scotland have specific roles to play in providing them with expert advice. The fact that those bodies are consulted on an application whenever relevant means that it is likely that when an inquiry is called they have already expressed views for or against the proposal. Alternatively, they may have indicated that their concerns would be resolved, provided that certain conditions were attached to any permission. Their reasons for reaching a particular view are set out in their reply to consultation on the application, which is available to interested persons and the community when they prepare their case for the inquiry. A community body or a local person who is looking for information to help them to decide  whether to appear at an inquiry, or to support the views that they wish to express, can read the consultation replies that those bodies have already made. If necessary, they can rely on those views, which are contained in documents that form part of the inquiry. In some cases, SEPA, SNH or Historic Scotland will decide to provide written evidence to a public local inquiry but not to appear in person. That decision will be taken on the basis of whether they consider it necessary to make oral submissions to the inquiry to explain their stance in a particular case. When a public local inquiry into a major proposal is being set up, the reporter usually holds a pre-inquiry meeting to discuss the procedural arrangements. That is the stage at which decisions are best made about what evidence should be given, by whom and in what form. In some cases, reporters have requested that SNH, SEPA or Historic Scotland should make an appearance at the inquiry. Reporters make those requests in the light of the circumstances and the representations that have been made to them. Those requests are not, however, made lightly. First, reporters consider whether the contribution will genuinely be needed to assist in the proceedings, since the purpose of an inquiry is, in all cases, to enable the reporter to have all the information that he or she needs to make a decision or recommendation. Whenever a reporter has requested their appearance, SNH, SEPA or Historic Scotland has complied with that request. I remind members that Scottish Natural Heritage will appear at the conjoined inquiry in the Ochils. In making such decisions, reporters act independently. It would not, therefore, be appropriate for ministers to interfere with their judgment. When necessary, the inquiry reporters unit will engage with the parties to an inquiry with a view to ensuring that their evidence is presented most effectively and in the most appropriate manner. Of course, as I said at the outset, we place great importance on empowering communities and ensuring that their views are fully taken into account in the consideration of proposals that affect them. Our proposals for modernisation, which are contained in the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, will place the community at the heart of the planning system. They will ensure that, in the case of major applications such as those relating to wind farms, meaningful pre-application consultation will take place with the community.

We have a whole programme around planning involvement, part of which is the way to support communities to be meaningfully involved in planning. Obviously, there is Planning Aid for Scotland. We are looking to develop the arrangements that we have at present for the new planning world in which we expect communities to be far more involved than they were in the past. I referred to applications for wind farms being considered as major applications and, as such, why they will attract pre-application consultation. That answers Christine Grahame's point. As major applications, they will not be dealt with under the procedures that pertain to the national planning framework. Pre-application consultation will encourage the careful consideration of proposals and the reflection of local views as much as that is possible at the start of the process. Greater scrutiny of such applications will also be required before applications are determined. We aim to ensure that, for major proposals such as the wind farms that we are debating, all the necessary information, including the type of environmental information that is referred to in the motion, is submitted by the developer at the outset and made available to the community. In addition, appeals will become a review of the planning authority's decision. It will no longer be necessary for the community to go searching for the kind of support on environmental matters that the motion implies is the case at present. Moreover, the nature of the process for each appeal will be determined by Scottish ministers so that more informal processes such as hearings, or even a reliance on written submissions, can be used whenever the subject matter warrants it. That will make the process not only more efficient, but less intimidating for those who wish to have their views taken into account. We are in the process of reviewing our national planning policy guidance on renewable energy. We have had a healthy response to the consultation on draft Scottish planning policy 6. The proposal is for the development of areas of search for large-scale wind farms. That should be incorporated into an up-to-date development plan framework that will provide communities and developers alike with greater certainty around where major proposals are likely to be considered acceptable. The key to SPP6 is the plan-led system, which is intended to address the issue of landscape capacity.

I am not sure that I understood the question. May I give way again, to allow the member to clarify his point?

That is an interesting suggestion, which I will consider. If the matter does not come up in the debate on the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill in two weeks' time, I will write to the member to set out my view on his suggestion. We share the concerns that are at the heart of the debate. Although we will not interfere in the conduct of particular public local inquiries, it is important that communities that participate in inquiries can properly support their arguments and know to where they should turn for the information that they need. If that information is held by SEPA, SNH or Historic Scotland, existing processes should ensure that it is made available to the community. Our aim is to ensure that in future the flow of information improves further and that communities and individuals can participate fully and comfortably, not just in the appeal process but in a more inclusive and efficient planning system.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

I convened the affordable housing working group to secure the input of a cross-section of interested parties on practical ways of making the housing supply more effective in areas of greatest need. The group has no plans to publish a formal report, but I intend its discussions to influence practice and help to inform our policy approach to the key subject of affordable housing.

Land supply is central to the group's discussions, but some issues are beyond our direct control, such as the cost of materials. We are concerned to consider all the issues—not just investment needs, although they are significant, but matters such as land supply. In the Highlands, which Rob Gibson represents, many of the problems are manifest, but action is being taken on all those fronts. A big increase has been made in the affordable housing investment programme and, if people in the Highlands vote for community ownership, great new opportunities will be presented, such as 1,000 homes over and above the existing increase, plus all the other rent and investment advantages for council tenants.  We are considering other issues, such as land banking. The innovative land banking scheme in the Highlands is helping to release land. Recent discussions have been held with Scottish Water on issues that I have been concerned about, so progress is being made. Of course, many issues and challenges exist, but we are rising to them, not least in the area that the member represents.

The Executive is working with local government and partners on a wide range of actions to prevent and tackle homelessness. In particular, action is focused on taking forward the recommendations of the homelessness task force and the interim objectives set out in my statement on the abolition of priority need.

Assessed numbers of homeless people are much the same this year as last year. The number of applications went up a bit, but not in Fife, as Marilyn Livingstone has pointed out. If something is happening in Fife this year, it is not yet reflected in the figures. If Marilyn Livingstone has more information, I would be interested to hear it. Generally, Fife is doing pretty well on homelessness, because of the policies adopted by the council. I was pleased to see that in Marilyn Livingstone's constituency there are plans to open a Home4Good centre. I was pleased to open a similar centre in Dunfermline last year. They are excellent centres where homeless people and those who are at risk of homelessness can access services that they need. The budget for new affordable housing in Fife has increased significantly this year to £18 million, as against £12 million last year. Over and above that, in the past 12 months Fife Council has been awarded £5.6 million from the housing estates regeneration fund for new-build projects in regeneration areas. Fife is moving in the right direction when it comes to investment. The council has some excellent initiatives, as I said, but if there are continuing problems I would be pleased to hear about them from Marilyn Livingstone.

We are strongly committed to the 2012 target, as indicated by the profile of housing expenditure over the current spending review period. A further increase will be made in 2007-08 to bring the number of new builds up to 8,000. Anything beyond that will be a matter for the spending review, which will be informed by our policy commitment to 2012 and the detailed work to estimate housing need that we have been doing through Professor Bramley. Tricia Marwick can be assured that housing will be given significant attention in the spending review.

It has been a good debate. I particularly liked Pauline McNeill's description of what we are trying to do. She said that we are trying to liberate the older classes to live the lives that they want to live while ensuring that their health care needs and other needs are met. Meeting need has been the main focus of the debate, but I re-emphasise the centrality of opportunity and contribution. Robin Harper referred to the programme that the Executive funds for retired and senior volunteers. We have committed £330,000 this year alone to develop and promote older volunteering. Many older people are already volunteers, and I pay tribute to the valuable role that they perform in that area as in many others. The main subject of Christine Grahame's speech was fuel poverty. Our central heating programme is the best targeted intervention in the United Kingdom for reaching people who are in  fuel poverty. Many thousands of older people throughout Scotland are benefiting from warm, comfortable homes and lower fuel bills as a result of the central heating programme. The Executive has spent more than £290 million on fuel poverty measures, providing central heating systems to more than 73,000 homes.

In a moment. I must make some progress. Applicants who are aged over 80 can receive upgrades and replacements of partial or inefficient systems. Christine Grahame called for the extension of that provision. From January, everyone who is on pension credit will be entitled to that as well. Christine Grahame expressed concern about Scottish Gas. However, I point out that, as the new managing agent, Scottish Gas represents best value for money. As a result, thousands more people will benefit from the programme. She also asked about my meeting with the fuel companies. Of course, I put pressure on the power companies to do more for the poorest customers and I call on them today to reduce their prices quickly, notwithstanding the time gap between the buying of gas and its use. Finally, Christine Grahame highlighted elder abuse. Existing legislation on adults with incapacity and mental health offers some protection to the frail elderly, and we augment those measures with financial support for the Scottish helpline for older people and for Age Concern Scotland in order to raise awareness of the issue and to provide people with advice and assistance when they need it. We recognise, however, that we need to do more. The Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Bill, which is presently before Parliament, will help to limit all kinds of elder abuse by offering greater support and protection. The bill provides new powers to investigate suspected abuse; to assess the person and their circumstances; to intervene to manage the risk of abuse; and, in exceptional circumstances, to remove the victim to a temporary place of safety and to exclude the perpetrator. It is important that the Parliament passes that bill in due course.

I will take interventions if I have time at the end of my speech. Many points were made in the debate that I have to respond to. Colin Fox majored on the state pension and the restoration of the link between average earnings and pensions. As Elaine Murray reminded us, there will be a higher, fairer state pension that is  again linked to earnings, as announced recently by the Westminster Government. Also, we will ensure that the least well-off continue to share in the growing wealth of society by increasing the guarantee credit in line with earnings in the years ahead. John Swinburne said that poverty was not acceptable to his generation; it is not acceptable to me, either. As Pauline McNeill put it, we are not half-hearted about pensioner poverty. Bristow Muldoon explained in detail what we are doing to address that. I will not repeat the figures that I mentioned in my opening speech, but I advise members that £10.5 billion more will be spent on pensions in 2006-07 than would have been spent if the 1997 policies had continued. That figure is nearly £7 billion more than it would have been if we had simply restored the link with earnings in 1997. I refute Alex Neil's assertion by repeating the figure that I gave of a reduction in relative pensioner poverty from 30 to 16 per cent since 1997. Of course, the absolute reduction is a great deal more than that.

I have only two and a half minutes left, and I have many more points to make. I will take an intervention if I have time when I have addressed all the other issues. David McLetchie raised the issue of food preparation, which was one of the most complex areas that the care development group dealt with. A letter that was issued in May to all local authorities stated that it is up to local authorities to assess people's needs and to decide how to deliver the services that are required. The letter also stated that we expect local authorities to provide simple tasks free of charge when there is an assessed need. We would expect a local authority to consider whether it has an obligation to make any refunds to people whom it might have incorrectly charged for any service.

I have only two minutes left and I still have many points to address. I cannot possibly deal with the points that were raised in the debate and take interventions at the same time. John Scott asked about funding. Local authorities have been given more funds to implement the policy than have been spent. In 2006-07, £85 million has been allocated to provide services that were already free to people before the free personal care policy was introduced. People forget about such services. In addition, the  funds that were provided for the policy were agreed with COSLA in the previous spending review. John Scott raised the issue of council tax benefit. We are working with the pension service and COSLA to address that matter. Bristow Muldoon and Elaine Murray were right to highlight problems of council tax for pensioners who do not receive council tax benefit. As they indicated, we are exploring the best way of dealing with that matter. However, we are not pursuing the local income tax line that John Swinney supports. As Elaine Murray reminded us, such a mechanism would increase tax on hard-working families. Moreover, we would lose £300 million from cuts to benefit spending, and every pensioner in Scotland would be faced with the bureaucracy of filling out Scottish National Party local income tax return forms. John Swinney made an interesting remark about the uncosted programmes of reckless political parties. Although he had the Conservatives in mind, he must unconsciously—or perhaps not so unconsciously—have meant the SNP as well. Of course, it is not such a problem for the Conservatives, because they would simply make cuts to take the strain. Even the master of rebranding, David Cameron, let the truth slip yesterday when he omitted the line that had been trailed in his speech about never jeopardising the NHS by cutting its funding and instead said: "We will always support the NHS with the funding it needs". As Pauline McNeill said, the idea that the NHS is safe in Tory hands will never be true—and the idea that pensioners are safe in their hands will never be true either.

Since its establishment, the Executive has been strongly committed to the interests of Scotland's older people. I shall highlight some of the progress in a moment. We are also planning for the future, so I will say a little about that first. Since the beginning of the year, we have been developing a strategy for a Scotland with an aging population. Scotland faces unprecedented demographic developments over the coming years, with a change in the balance between youth and age. In 25 years' time, for example, 26 per cent of the population will be over 65 and 44 per  cent of the population will be over 50. We see that as an opportunity, not a threat, but it will require us to change our way of thinking about age. We must challenge stereotypes and ageism wherever they are found and recognise the enormous contribution that older people make to Scottish society. That is the starting point of our strategy. We have consulted extensively and have heard clear and powerful messages from those consultations. Those messages reinforce our determination to ensure that Scotland's older citizens are not marginalised or excluded by their age, but have full opportunities and are valued for who they are. For that reason, I was glad to welcome the new age discrimination legislation that came into force at the weekend. It will empower many older people to make choices about their future that may not have been open to them before. I look forward to a continuing culture change, in which arbitrary age limits become a thing of the past and people's ability to do a job, or anything else for that matter, is based on their actual ability rather than on stereotyped assumptions about age. We are currently working on the strategy and we will publish it early in the new year. In preparing it, we are taking seriously the messages that we are hearing from individuals, groups and organisations throughout Scotland about issues such as: the need for understanding and mutual respect between the generations; the need for public services that respond to the needs of people as individuals, whatever their age; straightforward and easy access to those services; the importance of housing that meets people's needs and that is linked with the right transport and amenities; and, most fundamentally, judging people by who they are rather than by their age. I have been impressed by the enthusiasm and interest of people of all ages who have responded to the consultation. It has clearly captured people's imagination and interest. I intend to ensure that that spirit is carried forward in the strategy to help set a future direction for our approach to Scotland's aging population. A key aspect is about supporting people's health and well-being. In the responses to the consultation there was widespread understanding of the importance of keeping mentally and physically well. In that regard, a report last week from the Mental Health Foundation and Age Concern highlighted the negative effect of discrimination on the health and well-being of older people and the positive effect of participation, which reinforces two key themes of our strategy. The direction of travel for the health service has already been set. David Kerr's report and the Executive's response to it, "Delivering for Health", set out a new vision for delivering services based  on focusing on meeting the twin challenges of an aging population and the rising incidence of long-term conditions. That marks a fundamental shift in the way that the national health service works, from being an acute hospital-driven service to one that is community based; emphasises a concentration on preventing ill health and treating people faster and closer to home; and highlights a determination to develop responses that are proactive, modern, safe and embedded in communities.

Obviously, each decision must be made on a case-by-case basis. It is clearly not possible to discuss each case this morning. Other specific pieces of work have been set in train, notably development of a rehabilitation framework and work on the management of long-term conditions, which are both particularly relevant to older people. Another exciting new development is telecare, which enables older people to stay at home for longer with the assistance of modern technology. Some members will be familiar with the pioneering work done by West Lothian Council. I was pleased to go to West Lothian in August to announce an £8 million telecare grant scheme, which will help to roll out telecare more quickly throughout Scotland. It is an important new way of enabling people to stay in their own homes as long as they can and wish. On the two specific issues raised in the motion, we know that there are concerns among older people and others about council tax. We have accepted the need to review the performance of the current council tax system. That is why we have set up the independent review of local government finance, to ensure that the right system is in place to provide funds that local authorities need to carry out their duties. The report of the local government finance review committee is expected by November. I cannot, of course, comment in advance of it.

We are concerned about that issue and we are looking to address it in partnership with the pension service. On the motion, I know that this week the Conservatives are very exercised by rebranding, but they must do better than this. Setting aside the issue of whether what they propose is mutualisation or privatisation—in my view it is the latter—the key point is that their proposal would allow only a one-off payment of money; it is not costed for the long term or even for the length of a four-year Parliament. Therefore, the only conclusion that we can draw is that their proposal would result in cuts in services. That is consistent with what we heard from their United Kingdom leader yesterday. We all noticed that in the speech that he delivered he omitted the part about making no cuts to the NHS that was shown on the website, so we know what to expect from the Conservatives, both at Westminster and in the Scottish Parliament.

Not at the moment. I am glad that the Conservatives in the Scottish Parliament support free personal care, unlike—as Bristow Muldoon reminded us—one of the members of the UK Conservative shadow Cabinet, who does not even support free nursing care for Scotland. I hope that the person winding up for the Conservatives will do better than Annabel Goldie in condemning Boris Johnson and calling on David Cameron to sack him.

I will not take any lectures on free personal care from David McLetchie. I was the person who chaired the care development group, which came up with the detailed proposals for the successful implementation of free personal care in Scotland. We promised free personal and nursing care and we have delivered that. Around 50,000 people currently benefit from free personal care. The Health Committee care inquiry report concluded that the free personal care policy has been a success and has been widely welcomed. It confirmed our belief that the policy has provided greater security and dignity to more older people, and has provided the support that they need to enable them to live in their own homes for longer. The report made a number of recommendations, mainly around waiting lists for services and  funding. Our aim is to evaluate the policy in the light of the inquiry and of our own research, which is due to be published early next year. Meantime, thousands of people continue to benefit from this flagship policy. We also promised free bus travel across Scotland for everyone from the age of 60 and we have delivered that. Older people across Scotland have welcomed nationwide free bus travel enthusiastically and are benefiting from the opportunities that it provides to get out and about, see friends and family, and play their part in the community. The policy has served as an inspiration and model across the UK and elsewhere, and has contributed greatly to the quality of life of older people in Scotland. I wanted to say something about free central heating, but I will leave that until the wind-up speech, because I must respond briefly to Annabel Goldie's astonishing comments about pensioners being robbed of security and dignity, particularly her criticism of the level of pension increases since 1997. I am astonished, because when the Tories left office the poorest pensioners had to live on £69 a week and pensioner poverty was greater than it had been for decades. However, there was an average real-terms increase in pensions of 37 per cent between 1997 and 2005, which resulted in more than 120,000 pensioners in Scotland being lifted from relative poverty, which represents a 46 per cent reduction in the number of pensioners in relative poverty. Further, more than 200,000 pensioners have been lifted from absolute poverty, reducing the percentage of pensioners in that category from 30 per cent to 6 per cent. Annabel Goldie's remarks about pensioner poverty are utterly astonishing and the main policy that she outlined is utterly incredible. I move amendment S2M-4901.4, to leave out from first "believes" to end and insert: "recognises the enormous contribution that our senior citizens make to Scottish society; supports action to challenge ageism, widen opportunities for older people and ensure that they are treated with dignity and respect; acknowledges the improvement to older people's quality of life through groundbreaking policies such as free personal and nursing care, free bus travel and the central heating programme, and welcomes the continuing commitment of the Scottish Executive to recognising, valuing and supporting Scotland's older people through the development of its Strategy for a Scotland with an Ageing Population."

Presiding Officer, as you know, I wrote to George Reid this morning expressing my regret that copies of the report "The Right to Buy in Scotland—Pulling Together the Evidence: A report to Parliament on the effect of the Right to Buy in practice" were issued by the printer to a few housing stakeholders at 3 o'clock yesterday afternoon. That was an error, as my officials had instructed the printer to dispatch the report to those stakeholders at 3 pm today. When we found out about the error, we received undertakings from all the stakeholders that they would not comment on the report before my statement today. As I said, I regret deeply what happened. The background to the report lies in the Parliament's first major piece of housing legislation after devolution: the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, which made significant changes to the social rented housing sector. At that time, it was the will of the Parliament that major changes should be made to the right to buy to respond specifically to Scottish circumstances. The legislation acknowledged that there remained many people who wished to buy their homes and continue to live among their communities, but also acknowledged that a better balance was required between the needs of the community and the benefits that individual tenants received from discounts. As a result, discounts were substantially reduced. In the past, they had been as high as 70 per cent, but the 2001 act reduced them to a maximum of £15,000 or 35 per cent, whichever is lower. Existing tenants had their discounts protected, provided that they retained the tenancies that were in place at the time. The right to buy was also extended to tenants of non-charitable housing associations, but those tenants had their rights suspended until 2012 to allow associations time to prepare for the extension. Although the right to buy was the subject of review and refinement in 2001, Parliament saw the need for a further report on its effects. Therefore, the 2001 act contained a statutory requirement for the Scottish ministers to report to Parliament on the effects of the right to buy by the end of September this year. The legislation set out clearly the information that had to be provided. The report that I publish today meets that specification. In it, members will find evidence on the extent to which tenants have exercised the right to buy together with a comprehensive look at the effect of the right  to buy on the nature and condition of the housing stock in Scotland. Furthermore, the report considers the effects of the right to buy on the needs of those who require housing, as well as on the demand for housing accommodation and its availability. Those specific requirements demand a detailed report that considers a broad range of evidence and which is based on facts—it is not a review of our policy on the right to buy. Although valuable research has been conducted on the topic, much of it preceded the significant legislative changes in 2001. Now, possibly for the first time in a purely Scottish context, we have a comprehensive and detailed picture of the evidence on the right to buy in Scotland on which we can all rely. I am pleased that the report presents all the evidence in a clear and objective fashion, and I hope that that is recognised by those with an active interest in the subject. The report draws on recent evidence provided by the wider housing stakeholder community. I welcome that input, particularly the evidence from the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland and Shelter Scotland, all of which commissioned work on the right to buy. Our key stakeholders, including local government, have also participated in seminars on the report. I am grateful to them for their time and contributions. I turn to the report itself. It contains a range of findings, and I can touch on only some of the key conclusions here. First, there is the trend in sales. Nearly half a million sales have taken place in Scotland since the right to buy was introduced in 1980. Sales peaked in the late 1980s and to a lesser extent four or five years ago. Those high numbers of new homeowners mean that more than 67 per cent of Scottish households are now owner-occupied. That is almost double the proportion prior to the introduction of the right to buy. Around half of the households that have moved into home ownership have done so as a result of the right to buy. For many years, more homes were being sold to sitting tenants than being built, but that trend has changed recently, with right-to-buy sales declining and new build—both in the private sector and of affordable housing—on the increase. To date, much of the research on right to buy has asked questions about the role former right-to-buy properties might play in the wider housing market. Such resales are considered in detail in our new report. It has often been suggested that right-to-buy properties, when sold again on the private market, could help first-time buyers on to the property ladder; that is certainly true in some areas. Right-to-buy properties can be affordable and can help to widen choice at the lower end of  the housing market, but in areas where the housing market is experiencing pressure, even former right-to-buy properties can be out of reach for some. The finding that the ability of social landlords to meet housing need is affected by right-to-buy sales is not new but self-evident. That is why we acted in 2001 to curb overly generous discounts. The report identifies those areas that have seen the highest right-to-buy sales and that experience pressure on affordable housing and vice versa. The interplay between those factors is explored. One of the key arguments aired in the debate on the right to buy focuses on the replacement of stock sold. Commentators will be interested in the report's analysis, which underlines that one-for-one replacement of stock is not required. In recent years, we have supported significant new-build programmes for affordable housing in Scotland, and our investment is delivering new homes for rent and for low-cost home ownership where they are needed most. However, need varies so much throughout Scotland that local areas must assess carefully any response by way of new-build affordable housing. Overall, the report presents a detailed picture of significant local variations in need and availability. Different areas have historically seen different levels of sales, and the need for affordable housing varies from one part of the country to the next. Therefore, it is really only at the level of the local community that the full effects of the right to buy can be considered with any real clarity. As well as capturing a great deal of existing data, the report draws on some new qualitative research. The report on that work is also being published today. Our new research, which considers the views and experiences of tenants and purchasers, finds that the right to buy has had positive effects on individuals and households and has given purchasers a greater sense of control over their housing choices. In some cases, there appears to have been a shift in culture from renting to owner-occupation, with some younger family members now considering that owner-occupation is a realistic option. One limited change since the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 is the application of the pressured area mechanism, which is unique to Scotland. Scottish ministers can designate pressured areas to enable local authorities to suspend the right to buy for certain tenancies for up to five years. The final chapter of the report considers the effectiveness of the mechanism's operation and examines the cumulative effect of the designations that have been granted across Scotland to date. With six local authorities already operating suspensions, it is clear that pressured area status is being seen as a useful tool.  Pressured area designations can help local authorities to preserve stock where it is needed to meet demand from housing waiting lists as part of a wider strategic approach to new affordable housing provision. However, at this point the report cannot tell us much about one important aspect. The report's statutory timetable is such that it is impossible to say how the changes to discounts that were introduced under the 2001 act will alter sales patterns. That is largely because tenants who have taken new tenancies in the social rented sector since September 2002 must serve a minimum five-year qualifying period before they have any entitlement to buy their home. The report reveals that the tenants who are now in the social rented sector are less economically active than their predecessors 20 years ago. It is unclear whether the smaller discounts that are now on offer will enable them to purchase in our buoyant housing market. From September next year, we will be looking with interest to see how sales under the modernised arrangements compare with those under the traditional scheme. Only at that stage will we be able to establish whether the legislative changes have achieved the better balance that was sought. Today, our policy is to aim for mixed-tenure communities. We recognise that building monotenure estates of social rented housing is not desirable for residents or communities in the long term, although that was not always the case. The right to buy has been instrumental in mixing tenure and in helping to forge stability in many communities, as families purchase homes for the first time. However, the report recognises that that has not necessarily been the case across the board, as the effects of the policy have varied depending on location. I have touched briefly on some of the key findings, but there are many more in the body of the report, for example on the relationship between the right to buy and repairs, as well as the relationship with the private rented sector, and on further areas of interest such as the characteristics of today's social rented sector compared with those of other housing tenures. The right to buy is judged controversial by some people, and it continues to provoke strong reactions. There is no doubt that it has been a major influence in shaping many communities and in helping to build communities with mixed tenure. The substantial changes that we made in 2001 were largely welcomed by those who engaged in the debate on the right to buy. Some people want us to go further, by either amending the policy again or removing it altogether. However, the evidence in the report does not support such a position.  The report tells us many things about the right to buy and about the social rented sector in general. It does not tell us that the policy that the Parliament put in place in 2001 is failing to meet its aims. Those aims are to meet tenants' aspirations to own their own homes and, as a consequence, to create diversity of tenure within communities. Nearly 500,000 households have been helped into home ownership by the right to buy. In the report, we recognise that the right to buy can affect the ability of social landlords to provide accommodation in areas of pressure, but that is not a new finding. Indeed, it was precisely the reason for the introduction of the pressured area mechanism in 2001, which operates over and above our rising investment in new affordable homes for rent and in low-cost home ownership where that is needed most. I acknowledge that the debate on the merits of the policy will continue and that it is as yet too early to evaluate fully the effects of the changes that were made in 2001. We will watch with interest what happens from autumn next year, when most tenants under the modernised scheme will begin to be eligible to buy. I urge members to spend time looking at the evidence in the report, which is detailed and demands close attention. Until now, such an objective overview of the evidence has been lacking. I hope that the report goes some way towards filling that gap and will lead to a more informed and more rational debate on the right to buy.

I have already expressed regret about what happened today. I intended to do what I said I would do in my letter to the Communities Committee, but it was against the procedures of the Parliament, as Tricia Marwick knows. In that sense, I was in error to assume that the document could be released at 11.30. Tricia Marwick's main point was that we have not taken into account the views of those who need affordable rented accommodation. Ms Marwick has had the report for an hour or so, so she will know that by far the biggest chapter in it is about the effect of the right to buy on the availability of affordable accommodation. People will read that chapter with perhaps the most interest and attention because it contains detailed evidence that has not been available before. She might want to look in particular at the table on page 33, because it gets the issue into proportion. The number of extra houses that would have become available for rent is quite small. If we compare that with the number of houses that are being built now through our massively expanding affordable housing programme, it pales into insignificance. Over and above that, of course, Tricia Marwick is forgetting the pressured area mechanism. We recognise that, in certain situations, it is desirable to suspend the right to buy if there is a big gap between the number of lets becoming available and the number of people on the waiting list. I believe that we have got the balance right, and that the Scottish National Party is turning its back  on the thousands of people who have fulfilled their aspirations by buying their own home. Tricia Marwick is not examining the evidence in detail and is turning her back on aspiring home owners.

There are no proposals in the report to change the policy. As I said in my statement, the report is a review not of the right-to-buy policy but of the evidence of the effect of the policy. In so far as it comes to a conclusion, it bears out the decisions that the Parliament made on the policies that Wendy Alexander and Jackie Baillie set out in 2001. Of course, we acknowledge the number of people who went into home ownership under the Conservative policy but, in 2001, the Parliament thought that the policy needed to be rebalanced so that there were lesser discounts and provision was made for the pressured area status of certain parts of the country. I think that we got the balance right in 2001. There is no intention to change that balance as a result of this report.

On the second point, that is not part of the pressured area mechanism. Detailed analysis is done of the housing situation in a particular locality. That locality can be quite a small area, which is why I said earlier that the relevant decisions have to be made at the community level. On Mr Robson's first point, of course we will examine the evidence in the report in the context of our general work on the 2012 target. There are many parts to homelessness policy, but central to it is ensuring that there is an adequate supply of  affordable housing. That is why work to increase the number of affordable homes that are built is at the heart of our housing policy. The number will increase next year to 8,000, which is the highest figure for many years. Ensuring that we build enough new, affordable homes is at the heart of our policy, and it is in the light of the overall policy that people should consider the effect of the right to buy, which, as I said in my answer to Tricia Marwick's question, is modest in comparison with the massive housebuilding programme that we have at present.

As I have indicated, we do not think that the evidence in the report points in that direction, but obviously the debate will continue and people will make their suggestions and contributions. Perhaps someone will make contrary suggestions today, although we have not heard many detailed proposals so far. We believe that we struck the right balance with the provisions that are enshrined in the 2001 act. The pressured area mechanism is the best way to deal with shortages in particular parts of the country, but it exists over and above our fundamental policy of ensuring that enough new affordable homes are built in the right places. That is at the heart of our housing policy.

I certainly do not accept that the right to buy is a right-wing tool. I would not allow the parties of the right to claim the territory of aspiration, which is right at the heart of what the Labour Party believes in—if I can speak for the Labour Party rather than the Executive for a moment, although I am sure that the Executive  shares that view. Aspiration and compassion, together, are absolutely central to what we are all about. Aspiration for those who want to own their own home is enshrined in our housing policy, but so is compassion, and we have the most progressive homelessness policy in Europe. I do not think that they are in any way contradictory.

In fact, this week's homelessness figures show that the number of people who have been assessed as homeless is more or less the same as before. Of course, the numbers have gone up in the past few years because we have given homeless people new rights, but the figures that were produced this week show that action to prevent homelessness is successful in two thirds of cases; that more households have been rehoused than ever before; that rehousing in permanent accommodation is increasing, which is obviously central to our homelessness policy; and that fewer pregnant women and families with children are being temporarily accommodated in bed-and-breakfast or hostel accommodation. There is still a long way to go on homelessness policy, but there are many signs of progress in this week's figures.

I cannot give an exhaustive account of the research that has been done, but Communities Scotland published some a few months ago.  Maureen Macmillan is right to fasten on to that particular aspect of the report. In general, much of the information about rural areas is comparable with the information about urban areas, but there seems to be a significant difference in respect of resales. I can write to the member with a more exhaustive list of the research that has been done, but I know that Communities Scotland did publish some recently on the subject.

On the member's final point, a rising number of new affordable homes are being built every year. Of course the majority of them are being built by housing associations, but tenants are very happy to be moving into housing associations; it does not matter to them whether their home is a housing association property or a council house. However, some councils, such as Midlothian Council, are looking to build their own houses in the near future. That takes me back to Christine Grahame's second point. The majority of our investment is in affordable rented housing, but the homestake shared equity scheme has already been a massive success. The three-year targets were met in about six months. There is great demand for the scheme, which is meeting a great deal of the housing need. If people were not able to access it, they would be on waiting lists for social rented accommodation.

We will certainly be following that very closely indeed. Certain projections have been made and the report discusses different scenarios, but nobody can know for certain what the effect will be. We might surmise that a lower number of people will exercise their right to buy, but we cannot be sure. We will certainly consider the evidence very carefully indeed. We will also examine pressured area designations to see if there is too much bureaucracy. I think that there were some difficulties with the first pressured area, but six designations are now in place and the whole process is flowing far more smoothly. It is right that there should be a thorough and comprehensive process. I notice that some people—not Karen Whitefield, of course—want to get rid of the process and just let local authorities do what they like. However, that would result in postcode variations and we must have some national criteria for designating pressured areas. Again, it is a matter of getting the balance right, but if any excess bureaucracy can be eliminated, it will be.

That is certainly the view that I have outlined in my statement today. To repeat, we believe that the 2001 act struck the correct balance. We acknowledge what the Conservatives did in starting the policy, but the balance had to be adjusted in the way that it was under the 2001 act. We need the safety valve of the pressured area mechanism plus significant levels of new build to strike the right balance if we are to deliver both for those who need social rented accommodation and for those who aspire to own their own home.

I certainly agree with all Wendy Alexander's comments and, since she has asked a question, I repeat the tribute that I paid to her for all the work that she did on the issue. On her specific question, she is right that the differences between housing issues in areas of net surplus and areas of net need are a key issue. In headline terms, the issue in areas of net surplus is perhaps more to do with regeneration. Community ownership can be particularly appropriate in those areas where a great deal of money is required for investment. Obviously, the area that Wendy Alexander represents is coming very much into the frame, given Renfrewshire's ballot on community ownership this week. The needs in areas that require regeneration will be different from those in areas that require new supply. We need to strike a balance between those two needs in our housing policy.

Tommy Sheridan understates the figure for 2004-05. Next year, we will build 2,500 more affordable houses per year than in 2004-05. Therefore, we are very much expanding new affordable housing in Scotland. However, the fundamental fallacy is the ratio that Tommy Sheridan quotes about the number of new houses built compared with the number of houses sold. I refer him to the table on page 33 of the evidence document that we published today, which lists figures that are central to the whole debate. The significant issue is not the number of houses sold under the right to buy but how many of those would have come up for let in a given year. That story is told in table 4.4 on page 33. For example, although East Lothian has had significant problems with a lack of new affordable housing, the number of lost lets as a result of the right to buy has been only seven a year. The number of new houses built in the area each year was far greater. In Edinburgh, the number of lets lost through the right to buy has been 42 a year—by the way, that represents the upper limit because, for various reasons, we made that figure as high as possible—whereas this year 596 new affordable homes are being built in Edinburgh. We must keep the lets lost because of the right to buy in proportion. They are not the fundamental problem, although we will deal with them if the area is under pressure. The real issue is building new homes and, notwithstanding what Tommy Sheridan said, that is exactly what we are doing.

West Dunbartonshire Council submitted its application to join the community ownership programme on 11 July. The application is being assessed by Communities Scotland and I expect to be in a position to give the council a formal response later this year.

I was certainly pleased to visit Castlehill a few weeks ago, where I found a lot of enthusiasm for the community ownership programme. Indeed, I have seen the same enthusiasm in other parts of Scotland that I visited over the summer. A substantial investment programme is already in place; this year, for example, £10 million has been invested in affordable housing in West Dunbartonshire. However, the programme will significantly accelerate such investment. As I indicated in my answer, I certainly hope to be able to make a formal response in the near future. Of course, when West Dunbartonshire Council is admitted to the programme—I should say if and when, but I expect it to be when—early action funding will be available.

We are taking measures to tackle prejudice and discrimination on the ground of sexual orientation in a range of areas including health, education and local government more generally. To develop further our approach to addressing the causes of prejudice and discrimination in Scotland, we have established a lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender hearts and minds agenda group. It will examine social attitudes to LGBT people in Scotland and provide the Executive with specific recommendations on how we can challenge prejudice and tackle discrimination towards LGBT people.

I hope that we are showing that same leadership, because we have a strong commitment to the whole equalities agenda. That is manifested in several pieces of work that have been done on prejudice and discrimination against LGBT people. I referred to the new piece of work, but Susan Deacon herself led the way when she was the Minister for Health and Community Care and the Scottish Executive Health Department has been  particularly strong in the area ever since. A recent phase of the work involved the development of good practice on LGBT issues for the national health service. That is continuing. There has also been quite a lot of work in education, including recent research on homophobic incidents in schools. The Scottish Executive Education Department will respond soon to that research, which we commissioned. There will also be a new anti-bullying service, and we recently issued guidance to local authorities on improving policy and practice for LGBT people. We are strongly committed to challenging any prejudice and discrimination against LGBT people and I hope that we treat all equality strands as equal.

No one can dispute that, all too often, racism, harassment and discrimination are a feature of life for many people living in Scotland today, as highlighted by Christine Grahame at the beginning of her speech. That is not acceptable. Neither is it acceptable that a climate of fear is generated around established policies such as the dispersal of asylum seekers to Glasgow—evidence of that is borne out in research that was published earlier this month by the Institute of Public Policy Research—or that heightened international tensions and recent events closer to home are exploited to encourage and foster Islamophobia. The tragic events of 7 July last year in London—and, indeed, 9/11, which Christine Grahame referred to—have cast a long shadow across community relations throughout the UK, and Scotland has not remained unaffected. That is why I have made it a priority to meet representatives from Muslim and non-Muslim communities across Scotland and hear about issues of concern and the impact of the attacks on their communities. One of the interesting findings of the recent research on attitudes to asylum seekers in Scotland, which was published last week, was that attitudes to asylum seekers are more positive in the communities in which they live than in communities in which they do not live. That was one of the most encouraging findings of that research and backs up the point that Dave Petrie made about the fact that integration is the most important way in which to take action against bigots.  The theme of integration has run through today's debate. As I said in my earlier speech, we believe in fostering integration and respecting diversity. By integration, we do not mean assimilation. We do not distinguish integration from multiculturalism, as some people do; we view them as being two sides of the same coin. Scotland is richer because of its diverse cultures but, of course, we want integration to be part of that. Dave Petrie was right to remind us that racism and bigotry are not aimed only at the colour of someone's skin, although the remarks of Linda Fabiani in that regard were highly pertinent. It is right that there has been some talk of anti-English hatred. I was slightly uneasy when Linda Fabiani suggested that that was indirect racism. We do not want to overstate the problem, but, when it arises, we have to challenge it and condemn it. Racism is racism; there cannot be a hierarchy of racism. I did not agree with Dave Petrie when he referred to certain comments stoking the flames. Which football team people support is completely different from the issues that we have been talking about in the debate—the question is completely irrelevant to it. There has been a lot of discussion about the importance for integration of access to English language classes. That was mentioned by several members: Marlyn Glen, who asked for a national language strategy, which is coming soon, Donald Gorrie, Bill Aitken and Dave Petrie. As it happens, I was speaking at a conference yesterday about English as a second language in connection with citizenship. The conference covered the many innovative pilot projects that seek to combine citizenship education with English as a second language. We have recently put £4.5 million extra into English as a second language. Over and above that, the Scottish Executive's adult ESOL—English for speakers of other languages—strategy is now in the final stages of development, and we hope to launch it later this summer. Following the launch, one of the key early tasks will be the development of a national ESOL curriculum framework. A coherent framework is to be developed for ESOL learning, teaching and assessment across the full range of publicly funded sectors, including articulation from schools programmes. We have discussed that important issue in relation to the refugee integration forum. One of the actions in the action plan will involve this area. Christine Grahame was rather disparaging about the fresh talent initiative, but I point out to her that the establishment of the UK's first relocation advisory service has now helped more than 10,000 people, directly and indirectly, and has provided more than 300,000 people with information over the internet about living and  working in Scotland. Scotland's special leave to remain scheme, which started in June 2005, has resulted in more than 1,800 successful applications to date. Linda Fabiani asked questions about the various groups. She and Sandra White asked about data in relation to the strategic group on ethnic minorities and the labour market. We are actively seeking Scotland-specific data, and the CRE is assisting us with that work, which we are aware is absolutely necessary. Linda Fabiani also asked about asylum. In terms of the Scottish refugee integration forum, actions will be outlined in our report. We will also take up issues with the Home Office. Linda Fabiani referred to destitution, about which, as discussed at the meeting on Monday, there is great concern. We will take up that issue as part of the finalisation of our action plan. The issues around the right to work will feature in that context. I will hold a meeting with the new Home Office minister with responsibility for those matters in the fairly near future. Sandra White raised issues concerning the new NAS contract. I pay tribute to the work of Glasgow City Council and to Irene Graham in particular for helping to make progress in that regard. I understand and share the concerns that Sandra White expressed on the subject. Various members spoke about Gypsies/Travellers, including Nora Radcliffe, Mark Ballard, Sandra White and Cathy Peattie, who, of course, has a detailed knowledge from her years as convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee. One of the other strands that was identified by the review was the need for further work with Gypsies/Travellers. I am of course aware of the considerable concern in Gypsies/Travellers communities about the inequalities that they face in all areas of life: access to appropriate accommodation, health care, education and other services. A group was established in October last year to consider the issues and develop an action plan to enable the provision of more accessible, co-ordinated, good-quality services. The Equal Opportunities Committee has been conducting a second inquiry into the situation of Gypsies/Travellers. The committee's interim report has shown that progress on the issues in this area has been too slow. Johann Lamont acknowledged that in her evidence to that committee. The interim report raises many issues about services for Gypsies/Travellers that are feeding into the discussions of the group that I mentioned. Regular meetings have been held; the last meeting took place yesterday and the action plan will follow in due course. Concerns were expressed—by Linda Fabiani, I think—about the timescale for that group  and others, but all the action plans will be completed within six months. That is reasonable, given the level of engagement and the involvement of interested parties that we have been determined to have as part of the process. Nora Radcliffe emphasised the importance of dealing with indirect and institutional discrimination, as did Linda Fabiani. Since the publication of the Macpherson report when the Parliament was established, we have responded quickly by establishing national forums, the Lawrence steering group and the race equality advisory forum. The thinking about institutional discrimination has informed our race equality work ever since. Jamie McGrigor complained that £2.3 million would be spent on race equality work in the public sector, but that sum of money is described in the report that he has received from us as covering new development work with the community and the voluntary sector, as well as work to support good existing projects such as Show Racism the Red Card. Some money is supporting new public sector initiatives, but it may reassure Jamie McGrigor to know that the amount is not £2.3 million. I do not have time to go through all the new initiatives to support race equality in the public sector, which is an important feature of the work on the review. For example, some money will go to the national resource centre for ethnic minority health and new posts will be created to support race equality work in regeneration. We are also funding a couple of posts at the local government Improvement Service. Some money is—rightly—going into the public sector to support this work. The one strategic group that I have not mentioned is that which considers race equality in rural areas, which I promised to mention. We know that people from minority ethnic backgrounds who live or work in rural areas can, because of the small minority ethnic populations in those areas, often feel much more isolated than those in urban areas. That issue has been brought more into the spotlight recently with the arrival of migrant workers, many of whom choose to work and settle in rural communities. I am glad that Dave Petrie and others welcomed that. That group will produce a report in the next few months. It is in all our interests that Scotland should be at ease with its increasing diversity. By taking the action—and more besides—that is outlined in the motion, the Scottish Executive has committed itself to fostering integration but respecting diversity and to laying the infrastructure for a time when all can help to shape Scotland's future and to share in what it has to offer. The Scottish Executive has a duty to show  leadership to the public, private and voluntary sectors in tackling the damaging impact that prejudice and discrimination can have in the workplace, in schools, in our public services and on our streets. Our national strategy and action plan will address organisational, business and employment practices and how public services are delivered. Scotland has produced great thinkers. Its people have demonstrated enterprise and innovation and contributed to the world in many significant ways. Scotland has also benefited from the contribution of the many people who have visited and settled here over the centuries. We continue to do so today. The Scotland of the 21 st century needs that innovation, interchange, energy and dynamism to continue. There is no place for small-minded prejudice or narrowness of vision if we are to be a successful nation. Racism undermines and clouds that vision. If we do not tackle racism, we let ourselves and Scotland down. Everyone can help to create a climate in which racism is unacceptable. That is a big challenge, but for Scotland's sake, we must not fail. Later this summer, we shall set out our plans for how the Scottish Executive will take further action to tackle head-on racial inequality and disadvantage and to deliver tangible improvements to the lives of minority ethnic communities in Scotland. I do not underestimate the hard work that lies ahead of us in the coming months and, as ever, I do not propose that we have all the answers or can achieve the desired results on our own. Our approach will therefore be to work in partnership with a range of interests to secure improvement and change. We will continue to emphasise that the agenda is about not just minority ethnic communities, but all communities. The agenda is evolving and we will build flexibility and reviews into all that we do. I am sure that I can count on members' continued support as the Scottish Executive works towards a Scotland in which there is justice, equality and respect for all.

I am grateful for the opportunity to introduce the debate and to restate the Scottish Executive's continuing commitment to tackle racism and promote race equality. Members will be aware that, during 2004-05, the Scottish Executive undertook a review of race equality work in Scotland. Given that it is just over six months since we published the review recommendations, the time is right to update the Parliament on the progress that has been made since then and, in so doing, to give members the chance to debate the issues and contribute to the development of the Scottish Executive's national strategy and action plan for race equality in Scotland, which is due to be published later this year. The Scottish Executive undertook a review of race equality work in Scotland to consider whether the focus and priorities of our work were appropriate within the context of the present time. The primary purpose of the review was to determine the best approach that is required to deliver tangible improvements in the lives of Scotland's diverse communities in addition to ensuring that resources are maximised and directed to best effect. A great number of individuals and organisations with an interest in the area responded to the review. I am extremely grateful to them for their contributions, which have shaped our policy. Among other things, the review told us that the Scottish Executive should provide more strategic leadership and direction on race equality; that public bodies should accelerate the delivery of race equality and tackle racial disadvantage in key public policy areas; and that development and capacity building are necessary for the minority ethnic voluntary sector. Having considered the issues and views that were expressed during the review process, we have developed a framework for action that will help to ensure lasting and effective change and, alongside the forthcoming national strategy and action plan, the delivery of race equality for all in Scotland. Later this year, we will publish the national strategy and accompanying action plan. The strategy will set out the vision, basis and direction for our future work on race equality and  the action plan will outline what the Scottish Executive will do. Respondents to the review identified four specific policy areas that merit further work: ethnic minorities and the labour market; asylum seekers and refugees; Gypsy Travellers; and race equality in rural areas. Strategic groups comprising key stakeholders have been established to examine the issues and prepare the action plans that will inform the national strategy and action plan. I will say something on the first two policy areas in this opening speech and address the latter two in my closing remarks. Even when class and qualifications are taken into account, we know that many people from minority ethnic backgrounds earn less for doing the same or a similar job as their white cohorts; are less likely to be in employment; and are still underrepresented in many occupations. That is why we set up a short-life project group, with membership from central and local government, the voluntary sector, the Commission for Racial Equality and employers' organisations. The group is chaired by Dr Charan Gill and both Allan Wilson and I attend its meetings. The group's overarching objective is to increase the number of people from ethnic minorities in the labour market and to address barriers to their participation. The group has three specific objectives: first, elimination of the ethnic penalty; secondly, reduction of the employment gap; and thirdly, reduction in occupational segregation. The group aims to produce an agreed action plan by the end of next month. It has been three years since the Scottish refugee integration forum published its action plan, which sought to address the barriers that prevent refugees from playing a full role in Scottish society. I reconvened the SRIF in December 2005 and have chaired it since in order to produce a revised action plan that will address the new and emerging issues that affect refugees. The new action plan will examine, among other matters, specific issues such as health, housing, justice, young people, community development and positive images. It will seek to build on the essential principles of the original action plan and to fill any gaps that may have developed. We will publish the new action plan, following proper consultation, later in the year.

I have been dealing with it. When we talk about the Scottish refugee integration forum, we mean asylum seekers and refugees.  Since the dispersal of asylum seekers began in 2000, Scotland has learned a great deal about how to make new arrivals feel welcome and integrate into our communities. My belief is that effective integration is beneficial not only for refugees, asylum seekers and their immediate communities, but for Scotland as a whole. Refugees and asylum seekers bring useful and sometimes rare skills and knowledge to Scotland. If they integrate successfully they can bring huge benefits to the whole of society. The Scottish refugee integration fund is a grant scheme that is used to support the SRIF action plan that I mentioned. Between 2003 and 2006 the scheme has provided more than £1.5 million to projects that take forward key actions outlined in the strategy. A further £600,000 to fund projects in the current financial year was allocated two weeks ago. As well as providing essential advice and information to refugees and asylum seekers, the projects provide services that include befriending schemes, community volunteering projects, drop-in centres, translation and interpreting resources and awareness-raising activities. The projects are run by a variety of organisations that range from major United Kingdom charities such as the British Red Cross to small community organisations such as St Rollox Church of Scotland. The wide range of projects that is funded through the grant scheme reflects the range of issues that is addressed in the SRIF action plan. In addition to providing support to develop the capacity of the minority ethnic voluntary sector, the review highlighted the pressing need to provide better support to communities. As a result, the Scottish Executive established the race equality, integration and community support fund. It will provide £2 million during 2006-08 to support projects that foster greater integration, understanding and dialogue between communities; provide support to tackle issues of inequality and integration; and encourage greater partnership working and improved engagement between minority ethnic communities and public sector bodies. Just under a fortnight ago, I was pleased to announce awards from the new fund when I visited one of the projects that will receive funding at the sports medicine centre at Hampden park. The project, which is run by Glasgow Ansar, Glasgow Maccabi and Bellshill Athletic Football Club, brings together young people from across Glasgow to combat racism, foster integration, build friendships and promote diversity through a football-based fitness and training programme. I could give many other examples of projects we are funding that promote integration and race equality in a similar or related way.  I am aware that much of what I have discussed so far concerns new work associated with the outcomes of our review of race equality work. In the meantime, our programme of race equality, integration and community support work in other areas continues apace. Our one Scotland, many cultures national anti-racism campaign is now in its fourth phase of activity. In order to spread as far as possible our message that there is no place for racism, we have continued our multimedia broadcasting strategy. We have targeted audiences using prime-time television and radio adverts and the internet. As part of the campaign, we have continued to fund a range of initiatives that raise people's awareness of racism and its effects. The Scottish Trades Union Congress's one workplace, equal rights project is mainstreaming equalities into the work of unions throughout Scotland. The project ensures that the key messages from the Executive's work to tackle racism and mainstream equality are sustained and fully implemented throughout Scottish workplaces. We fund Show Racism the Red Card, which harnesses the profile of professional footballers to work with young people, schools, fans and Scottish football clubs to tackle racism on and off the pitch; the Heartstone project, which uses the media of photography and storytelling to raise awareness of the issues of racism and xenophobia; and Young Scot, the national information service for 16 to 26-year-olds. Most recently we supported the Scottish Refugee Council's refugee week, which acknowledged the positive contribution that refugees make to the country. Throughout the Scottish Executive and its agencies, good progress is being made to mainstream race equality into our daily business and policy making. I have time to give only a couple of examples. The Scottish Executive Health Department has continued to build on the policy in "Fair for All", which was developed to tackle racial inequalities and ensure delivery of a culturally competent health service. The success of the approach has led to the document "Fair for All: the Wider Challenge", which encompasses initiatives on age, disability, gender, sexual orientation and spiritual care and includes specific actions that are to be undertaken by the Health Department and the national health service in Scotland to promote equality in the workplace. It goes without saying that schools have a key role in the drive for race equality and in preparing young people to live in a multicultural and inclusive society. The Education Department has funded a number of resources that schools can use to tackle racism and discrimination and to promote equality and integration. The department is also  making progress with several equality initiatives in co-operation with schools and education authorities and with research on the educational experiences of children of asylum seekers in Scottish schools. Tackling racism is not a matter only for Government or public bodies—we all have a responsibility to speak out against racism. In 2004-05 a total of 4,927 racist incidents were reported to police forces in Scotland, which was an increase of 29.6 per cent on the previous year. However, the Commission for Racial Equality estimates that as few as one in five racist incidents is reported. The level of racism and the increased number of racist incidents in Scotland are of great concern to the Scottish Executive. We are examining the development of a monitoring framework to maximise intervention and to tackle the underreporting of racist incidents. In that context, it is only right that Parliament should devote some time to the recent reports of people and property being attacked for showing support for a football team. I am sure that members will join me in expressing outrage and disgust at those attacks, as will all right-minded people in this country. As the Minister for Communities, I will make perfectly clear the Scottish Executive's position on the events: we whole-heartedly condemn those acts of mindless violence, which the police are investigating as racist assaults. There is simply no place for racism in Scotland. Racism harms us all, wherever and however it manifests itself. Scotland cannot become the confident and successful nation that we all want it to be unless we rid the country of the scourge of racism, including anti-English hatred. We are determined to establish a modern, dynamic Scotland that fosters integration but respects diversity. We want everybody to be able to help shape Scotland's future and to share in what the country has to offer. We want a country in which no one is held back because of their colour, race or background and where there is no place for racism, in whatever form it appears. I move, That the Parliament supports the development of a national strategy and action plan on race equality and welcomes the opportunity to contribute to the strategy; welcomes the significant funding provided to local projects through the Race Equality, Integration and Community Support Fund and Scottish Refugee Integration Fund and national projects like Show Racism the Red Card and Heartstone; supports Scottish Executive priorities to increase ethnic minorities' participation in the labour market, build more inclusive rural communities, provide better services to Scotland's Gypsies/Travellers, support refugee integration and continue to raise awareness of the issues through the One Scotland Many Cultures campaign, and supports the Executive's other work to help tackle racism and promote race equality in Scotland.

Edinburgh is sharing in the substantial overall increase in the funding that we are making available for affordable housing investment across Scotland. In the current year we plan to invest £36 million to support affordable housing  developments in the city. That represents a doubling of the budget compared with 2004-05. Working in partnership with the City of Edinburgh Council, we are committed to making substantial and lasting inroads into dealing with affordable housing issues in the city.

There is no doubt that there are substantial supply shortages in social rented housing in Edinburgh. We will certainly take that into account when we come to make our conclusions on the strategic housing investment framework. The issue is also being covered by Professor Bramley's work. Professor Bramley carried out an analysis of supply shortages for the previous spending review and is updating it for this spending review. His analysis for the previous spending review indicated that Edinburgh was by far the largest contributor in respect of supply shortages in Scotland. Based on his preliminary findings this time, I have no reason to believe that the situation will have changed. Edinburgh clearly has a great need in relation to the supply of houses and we will take account of that when we make future investment decisions.

The impact of, and future support for, existing funding initiatives in the most deprived communities will be considered as part of the  spending review process. The community regeneration fund is the principal funding programme for the most deprived communities. Funding from the community regeneration fund is provided to community planning partnerships for a three-year period to support their approved regeneration outcome agreements, but in many cases that involves the funding of good projects that were previously supported by other funding programmes.

Some of the amounts are even more than Kate Maclean suggested. The figure for the community regeneration fund, which I referred to in my initial answer, is £17.3 million. In a sense, the situation is unavoidable because spending reviews are for three-year periods but, as I indicated in my initial answer, the community regeneration fund picks up many excellent projects that were funded in previous spending review periods. We have no reason to believe that there will not be a similar carryover this time round. It is clear that the best projects must be identified. The Scottish Executive cannot keep funding for ever the same local projects; otherwise, it will not be possible to bring new projects on stream. In many cases it is up to local agencies, particularly the community planning partnerships, to ensure that they prioritise and continue to support good local projects.

That is properly a question for the Minister for Health and Community Care,  so I better not tread too far into the territory—although the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform and I have a great interest in the subject because of our previous involvement with the portfolio. In general, in the Health Department and across the Executive, there is a strong commitment to funding work in deprived areas. The new programme to which Shona Robison referred came out of the David Kerr report and is an excellent initiative. I hope that she welcomes the emphasis on anticipatory care, which is ground-breaking work for the United Kingdom and probably further afield.

In my previous answers, I certainly supported keeping good existing things—as Donald Gorrie calls them—going. However, there is something unavoidable about spending review periods, and it is quite right that we should evaluate projects rather than keep them going automatically. The system of three-year funding is significant progress on the system that used to pertain. Indeed, the commitment to three-year funding was part of the strategic funding review that was done in partnership with the voluntary sector. We have made progress. Obviously, there is an issue about keeping good projects going. As I said, I certainly support doing so, but I do not think that there is any simple answer. At the end of the day, we have finite, albeit increasing, sums of money and we have to make decisions about continuing to fund the best strategic projects.

The Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 places on local authorities a statutory requirement to assess housing needs in their areas and to produce local housing strategies to address those needs. Those strategies inform the allocation of funding through Communities Scotland for the development of new affordable housing. If a housing needs assessment says that affordable housing is needed, the local authority should translate that need into planning policy, to gain affordable housing contributions from private housing developments.

Affordable housing is needed in Aberdeen, so I am concerned that the council there has not translated that into planning policy to gain affordable housing contributions, as described in my previous answer. That is a very important tool that councils have; we introduced planning advice note 74 last year to facilitate its use. The council should take action on those lines. As the question was about Aberdeen, I point out that an announcement will be made next week of record investment in the Grampian area for new affordable housing. I remind members that I made an important announcement a few weeks ago about Communities Scotland helping the acquisition of the site of a disused paper-mill in Aberdeen, which will provide 360 affordable homes. As John Swinney is in his place, I take the opportunity to correct something that he wrote this week. Communities Scotland is part of my department and I am directly responsible for its policy and strategic actions.

I am extremely concerned about land supply for affordable housing, which is why I will chair an affordable housing group, which will meet in the near future. We shall certainly consider the issues to which Murray Tosh referred, as well as all the other issues that are relevant to the acquisition of land for affordable housing.

Scottish Water has just produced its delivery plan, which is an important step forward. I have expressed several times my dissatisfaction hitherto, but we know of the new significant investment that the Executive will make from this year for the next eight years. I am sure that that will address substantially the issues about which Alasdair Morgan is understandably concerned.

The main focus of the debate has been on the problems and challenges that we face, and I entirely agree with the case study that was presented and with the many poignant examples that were given. Dealing with the issues of poverty and deprivation that still confront us is what drives me and many others in politics. However, it is also right, although it is not a dimension that I emphasised in my opening speech, to acknowledge briefly the progress that has been made and the successful action that is  being taken. In that respect, Karen Whitefield's speech restored a bit of balance when she described one example of an initiative in her constituency that was funded from the £33 million of community regeneration funding that was given to North Lanarkshire. More generally, we should remember the achievement of a 34 per cent reduction in child poverty in Scotland over the past five years—way beyond the 25 per cent target that had been set. We should also remember that there are 120,000 fewer pensioners in relative low-income households—a reduction of more than half since 1997. In relation to Jim Mather's point, we should also remember the record high employment rate—not high enough, of course—of 75 per cent, which is 3.7 per cent higher than it was in 1999. There has been progress in relation to individual poverty and in relation to area regeneration. I see that progress every week of my ministerial life as I go around Scotland. However, last year's "Social Focus on Deprived Areas" report was a stark reminder of the problems facing Scotland's most deprived communities, and we are determined to make greater inroads into deprivation across all of Scotland. We want to ensure that our investment really helps those in most need, lifting them out of poverty permanently. That is what underpins our approach to closing the opportunity gap and to regeneration. Christine Grahame complained about the targets for closing the opportunity gap, but they are all about improving the position of deprived individuals, whether in relation to employment, health or education and training. We are making significant progress and the improvements in health statistics are well known. We will launch our employability framework very soon, with some new funding, to try to reach people who are still furthest from work, notwithstanding the high levels of employment.

Because of the "Social Focus on Deprived Areas" report, we can measure very accurately how many more people will be in work in specific areas and what the health outcomes will be. The health target is about accelerating the rate of improvement in the most deprived communities, so the targets that have been set are significant. Our recent policy statement on regeneration makes it clear that the main purpose of  regeneration is to stimulate economic growth and generate prosperity—not growth for its own sake but growth that will help people out of poverty and help to regenerate the most deprived communities. I look forward to going with Frank McAveety to the launch of the gateway project in about 10 days' time. The gateway project, along with the Clyde waterfront project, emphasises the fact that the Clyde corridor is our national priority for regeneration. Sandra White and Des McNulty talked about Glasgow, and there is nothing more important to us in regeneration terms than the regeneration of Glasgow. We recognise the great advances that are being made in Glasgow. The Glasgow community planning partnership is beginning to bring together the partners; we recognise its strong focus on worklessness and addiction in particular. Obviously, its work comes within the framework, which was much criticised in the debate, of regeneration outcome agreements and so on. A lot of local flexibility and autonomy are built into the process, and the Glasgow CPP is showing how the community planning process can be operated to best effect. Des McNulty, Derek Brownlee and many other members emphasised that moving people into employment is central to the agenda. The Executive agrees totally with that important point, which is also emphasised in many of our policies, including the forthcoming employability framework. Des McNulty also stressed the importance of giving greater autonomy to the people on the ground, and Mark Ballard spoke about the need to develop capacity in communities. Again, we strongly support those objectives. Des McNulty also addressed the need to achieve effective and measurable change for individuals and communities. As I just indicated, regular updating of the analysis that is published in the "Social Focus on Deprived Areas" will give us accurate information on what is happening in our communities. Des McNulty said that we should not overconcentrate on physical regeneration, which sometimes happened in the past. We should, of course, have a much broader regeneration agenda than one that focuses only on physical regeneration. I want to make it absolutely clear that we have taken that on board in our priorities for regeneration. That said, we should never ignore the importance of physical regeneration. For example, I ask the chamber to note the £386 million investment that we made in housing this year via Communities Scotland. Communities Scotland was much criticised in the debate. Members should recognise that Communities Scotland is part of the Executive and that it is directly accountable to ministers. We can  always have the argument about whether the Executive or an agency should do something; nonetheless, Communities Scotland has a role to play. On the ground, it is up to the community planning partnerships to decide which projects should receive funding. Those decisions have nothing whatever to do with Communities Scotland. That said, there is a role for performance management. Of course we want less bureaucracy. We will take full account of the proportionality issues that the committee raised in its report and of the need to focus on a narrower set of key outcome indicators. In terms of monitoring funding and ensuring that national priorities are followed, there is a role for a degree of performance management around regeneration outcomes. Frank McAveety and Elaine Murray in particular emphasised that all budgets should contribute to regeneration objectives. That point is absolutely fundamental to the report's conclusions. One cannot underestimate the importance of mainstream budgets in dealing with deprivation. Mainstream budgets make significant contributions, particularly the health and local government budgets. Frank McAveety asked whether the review of deprivation weightings will cover the six areas that the committee highlighted in its report. I confirm that the review will cover the areas that the committee identified. Mike Rumbles said that the formula could be simplified. We agree. We have made that suggestion to COSLA; the issue will be looked at. Dave Petrie and Mark Ballard emphasised the importance of the voluntary sector. Certainly, in our vision for the sector, which we published a few months ago, we recognise the vital and increasing role that voluntary organisations play in the delivery of services. As I indicated in my introductory speech, we are committed to continuing to address the funding issues that affect the sector. We have put our money where our mouth is. For example, we have put £18 million into the voluntary sector as part of the futurebuilders initiative. The focus of that investment was very much on closing the opportunity gap. Elaine Murray helpfully reminded us of the rural service priority areas. Obviously, the committee raised concerns about rural areas, but funding the rural service priority areas is a key objective around closing the opportunity gap. Finally, I return to the overarching theme of area-based versus individual approaches that ran through the debate. The committee hinted at the need for more flexibility in those approaches. I am sympathetic to that view. We heard both sides of the argument today. On the one hand, members  were clear that deprivation affects individuals and households as much as it affects neighbourhoods, and that it affects rural as well as urban areas. We accept that. One the other hand, we have heard about and seen the evidence of the particularly acute problems of Scotland's most deprived neighbourhoods and we know how the life chances of families are blighted by the combined effects of those problems, which were brought into sharp relief by the report, "Social Focus on Deprived Areas 2005". A balance must be struck between individual and area-based approaches. We will consider that balance carefully, but it is clear to us that we must address the problems of Scotland's most deprived neighbourhoods if we are to have a significant and lasting impact on deprivation. Place compounds problems of poverty, and the reinforcing tendency of concentrated poverty makes it harder to find solutions, which is why we face difficult problems, as members highlighted. We will redouble our efforts to find better solutions and we will reflect closely on the Finance Committee's important report as we do so.

I am pleased to make preliminary comments on the recommendations of the Finance Committee report, but I emphasise that ministers are keen to hear Parliament's views on these important issues before providing a full response. Today's debate provides the opportunity for members to express their views and I am sure that it will make a constructive contribution to our response. We welcome broadly the overall thrust of the committee's report, which focuses on outcomes,  the importance of mainstream budgets, simplifying funding streams and getting policies and budgets to work together more effectively. We share that agenda. We also wish to ensure that expenditure delivers real change on the ground. We do not want simply to stop areas or people's lives getting worse, but to transform them for the better with effective, measurable changes, to use Des McNulty's words. I turn to the first of the committee's specific recommendations. We acknowledge fully that deprivation exists in different forms in different places in Scotland and that it has an individual and an area dimension, both of which must be tackled. The Scottish index of multiple deprivation, which the report mentions a great deal, has the specific purpose of identifying relative concentrations of multiple deprivation throughout Scotland, but it is by no means the only measure of deprivation that the Executive uses. We use the index for policies and programmes, such as the community regeneration fund, whose aim is to tackle or take account of multiple deprivation. We make no apology for focusing on the geography of poverty in that way.

I think that I said a few seconds ago that deprivation has individual and area dimensions, both of which must be tackled. That is our position. The voluntary sector is the subject of the committee's third recommendation. We fully acknowledge that the voluntary and social economy sectors play a vital and increasing role in tackling deprivation, and we want to support and enhance their role by addressing some of the funding issues that the committee identified. That is what the strategic funding review of the voluntary sector and the funders forum aim to do. The strategic funding review aims to improve the availability, effectiveness and sustainability of voluntary sector funding. A commitment by the Executive and COSLA to move towards three-year funding packages, action to encourage stronger relationships between the voluntary sector and local public bodies so that successful approaches that have been piloted in the voluntary sector can be mainstreamed and a determination to ensure that the voluntary sector is engaged in the early stages of policy development both nationally and locally have stemmed from the review. Those actions and the work of the funders forum, which brings together funding organisations such as the Big Lottery Fund and local and central  Government, will help to address the issues that the committee raised. We accept the need to simplify funding streams, which was another key concern of the committee—indeed, doing so is a central part of our efficient government plan and the overall reform of public services. As a result, we will actively consider proposals for merging or simplifying funding streams as part of the spending review process. However, we must bear it in mind that some funding streams, such as the working for families fund, relate to pilot programmes in which we are working with local partners to explore new approaches to particular issues and to assess their effectiveness. Once we and they have a clearer idea of what works, we can consider simplifying or mainstreaming such funding.

I will try to take an intervention by the member in a moment, but I must first make progress, otherwise I will not be able to say everything that I want to say in the nine minutes that are available to me. We have made some progress on simplifying funding with the community regeneration fund, which is a single fund that replaced the social inclusion partnership fund, the better neighbourhoods fund and the tackling drug misuse fund and their separate reporting processes from April last year. On the back of the regeneration statement, we will consider how regeneration resources across the Executive can be better aligned and consolidated. We will consider how local government funding takes deprivation into account. We agree that where deprivation is a driver of expenditure, it is important that we take proper account of it. We are therefore committed to working with COSLA to review the deprivation weightings in the core local government finance settlement, as the committee recommended. We will do so in time for the next settlement.

I will give way to John Swinney in a moment, but I need to make progress before I do so because I have only four and a half minutes left. We welcome the committee's emphasis on the importance of mainstream resources in tackling deprivation—indeed, we are clear that the mainstream budgets of local government and the health service, among others, matter most of all. Specific funds such as the community regeneration fund and the working for families  fund can and do make a real contribution to people's lives, but the mainstream budgets can make the most difference. Regeneration outcome agreements are not just about the community regeneration fund—they are about getting community planning partners to work together to identify how the fund and their own services and resources can deliver better outcomes for the most deprived communities. We fully accept that regeneration outcome agreements have not yet bent the spend as much as we would have liked, but, given the fact that they have been operational for less than a year, it is premature for the committee to conclude that they are incapable of doing so. We will, of course, consider what else can be done to help regeneration outcome agreements to bend the spend more effectively, and we will review the issue as part of the evaluation of the ROA process. We welcome the committee's focus on outcomes and performance management—indeed, such thinking lay behind the introduction of regeneration outcome agreements. As I have said, regeneration outcome agreements are not just about the community regeneration fund. They are also about partners' wider resources, analysing need and developing a well-thought-out strategy to address need, engaging communities and shifting away from the old focus on individual projects to a much greater emphasis on outcomes—on what actually changes in the fields of employment, crime and health—rather than on only physical regeneration, as Des McNulty emphasised. Regeneration outcome agreements are about providing a robust framework for monitoring progress towards outcomes and, in turn, the effectiveness of interventions and expenditure.

We have had the regeneration outcomes in place for the best part of two years. They were announced on the back of the last spending review in 2004. More work will be done on outcomes, which will be announced when the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform talks about the public service reform package in the near future. We are also in discussion with COSLA about how we might achieve greater focus on outcomes. The First Minister and the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform have encouraged local authorities and their partners to come forward with proposals for new and better ways of working together for shared and integrated service delivery. As I said, the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform will shortly announce his proposals for a dialogue on public service reform.  Those proposals will include discussions with public sector partners, over the summer, about strengthening our outcome approach for better service delivery. The committee's recommendation of a single deprivation fund covering individual and area deprivation is an interesting one. It could achieve a better balance between national and local priorities; it could simplify funding and reporting; and it could lead to better joining up of individual and area approaches. I am sympathetic to the principle, but we must be careful not to dilute the impact of deprivation funding. Crucially, we must ensure that the needs of the most deprived communities are not sidelined for the sake of administrative simplicity. We know that people who live in the 15 per cent most deprived neighbourhoods face particularly acute and reinforcing problems. Our social focus report showed that 16 to 19-year-olds in those areas are more than twice as likely as those in the rest of Scotland not to be in education, employment or training; that working-age people in those areas are four times as likely to be on income support; and that the rate of premature death in those areas is nearly twice that for the rest of Scotland. We and others must tackle that geography of deprivation if we are to have a significant impact on deprivation in Scotland as a whole.

Our whole approach, as I am describing it, is to focus on areas in which there is most deprivation. Some improvements have been made in those areas but we are, of course, seeking to take more effective action. That is why we have moved the focus of deprivation spend to regeneration outcome agreements, and there will be lots of other developments. The flow of our policy developments is consistent with many of the committee's suggestions, which is why I am already indicating that there will be further action in terms of outcomes. I am sure that Shona Robison knows about the new actions that are being taken in health, which is her portfolio. There is a concerted programme of policy action to address those difficult issues of the most deprived areas. Concentrations of poverty are particularly difficult to shift, which is why we are placing an emphasis on the geography of poverty and why we will not give way to those who say  that we should concentrate only on individual poverty. We must address the poverty of place as well as the poverty of individuals and families, wherever they live. The Finance Committee has rightly focused on the issue of expenditure. That is undoubtedly crucial to tackling deprivation, but it is not the whole story. Tackling deprivation is also about changing the way in which we and others work. It is about ensuring that a joined-up approach is taken at the centre and on the ground; it is about focusing on what matters; and it is about linking opportunity and need, which was the crucial theme of our recent regeneration statement. That is highly relevant to Shona Robison's question. We have more work to do on the issues, but our approach to closing the opportunity gap, to regeneration and to community planning provides a strong foundation. I thank the Finance Committee for its work on this important issue and I look forward to a productive debate.

We will monitor the effectiveness of the advice through regular contact with key stakeholders, including planning authorities and the renewables industry.

There is no cap to our ambitions on micro-renewables, or indeed on renewable energy more generally. I would be deeply concerned if the advice that Mr Harvie quotes is being given frequently, because we are very keen indeed to promote micro-renewables. That was the whole purpose of the planning advice note, which gives advice on the various micro-renewable technologies and provides good practice guidance in relation to developing them. A whole range of policies in planning, and in energy policy more generally, are geared towards promoting as vigorously as we can all renewables, and, in the context of Mr Harvie's question, micro-renewables as part of that drive. There have been significant funding announcements in relation to renewable energy in the past week or two, including the £3 million for the Scottish communities and householder  renewables initiative and, more generally, the £7.5 million announced last week to support the biomass action plan and the £8 million to support marine renewable development. We are absolutely determined to increase the amount of energy in Scotland that is generated from renewables, and although 40 per cent by 2010 is our target, there is no cap to our ambitions and I am sure that we will reach well beyond that.

Part of the Executive's approach to supporting Raploch URC is to put in place arrangements to monitor and evaluate the way that the initiative is taken forward and to learn lessons and consider whether the approach could be taken in other areas. Stirling Council has received an allocation of £1.242 million from the community regeneration fund, a significant proportion of which will be used to support the renewal of Cornton and Cultenhove. In addition, a funding allocation of £15 million from the community ownership early action programme should further support the holistic approach to the renewal of those communities.

I will address the two aspects identified in Sylvia Jackson's initial question. First, urban regeneration companies must produce regeneration outcomes as part of their business plan. Those are strategically linked to the community planning partnerships' regeneration outcome agreements. That is all monitored by Communities Scotland. Secondly, there is significant new build in Cultenhove and Cornton. Castle Rock Edinvar is building 91 new properties in Cornton and 75 in Cultenhove. The various partners in those areas of Stirling are keen to ensure that regeneration is about far more than bricks and mortar. Housing Stirling is working with Castle Rock Edinvar, the local communities and other potential partners to explore and identify mechanisms for creating jobs, improving training and education, improving health and enhancing local amenities. Communities  Scotland will not only be involved in monitoring progress, but has had initial discussions with Castle Rock Edinvar about potential community activities that may be funded through the wider role fund for housing associations. A great deal of money is going into the various initiatives in Stirling. Those initiatives will be carried forward in partnership and will be monitored.

I congratulate Trish Godman on securing a debate on the important issue of trafficking for forced prostitution. Human trafficking is a despicable form of modern slavery and no one should be in any doubt about the fact that the Executive views that form of exploitation as wholly unacceptable—as it does all other forms of sexual exploitation of women, which Elaine Smith, in particular, emphasised. We are determined to challenge the whole spectrum of violence against women, which is the wider context of the debate, although I will focus on trafficking. Victims of trafficking, who are among the most marginalised groups in society, experience the most horrendous emotional, physical, mental and sexual abuse. I am glad to have an opportunity to reaffirm our view that trafficking is intolerable and that those who perpetrate it should be dealt with severely. We have already taken action on trafficking. With the support of the Parliament, we introduced a tough new offence that is aimed at sex traffickers. Section 22 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003 provides that it is an offence for a person to be involved in the trafficking into or out of the UK of a person or people for the purpose of sexual exploitation. The maximum sentence is 14 years, which reflects the seriousness of such offences.

We regard prostitution as unacceptable and part of the spectrum of violence against women. I do not have time to go into detail about our policy proposals and action on prostitution.

I must make progress. The Crown Office rightly regards trafficking cases as a priority and has provided guidance to prosecutors on making full use of the new anti-trafficking legislation. I am pleased that, as a result of operation pentameter, which is a police-led, UK-wide multi-agency campaign to combat trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation, the first trafficking charges in Scotland have been brought under the 2003 act. The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 provides another weapon in the armoury, by enabling enforcement agencies to seize the ill-gotten gains of people who profit from trafficking. It is important not only to deal effectively with the perpetrators of such despicable crimes but to protect and support the people on whom they prey. As a result of operation pentameter, police have rescued four trafficked women. It is essential that they and others like them receive appropriate care. Elaine Smith asked whether an initiative such as the POPPY project could be set up in Scotland. There is a similar project: as part of our violence against women fund, the Executive is continuing to provide support to a pilot project in Glasgow that aims to determine the need for support for trafficked women. The pilot was set up in 2004 and provides advice and support to women who have been trafficked into Glasgow. It also raises awareness about the nature of trafficking and its impact on women. The project has developed links with other partners in Glasgow, such as the police, social work services and NHS Greater Glasgow, to provide safety, accommodation, health care, legal advice and psychological support. The project has negotiated with Strathclyde police a method of third-party reporting, which enables front-line workers to pass on anonymous information to the police, to assist them in criminal investigations.

I had better take guidance from the Presiding Officer on how long I have left to speak.

I will take an intervention from Christine Grahame.

I certainly cannot answer that question; the member is right to say that the justice ministers take the policy lead on the matter, although I have a strong interest in it as the Minister for Communities.

I will deal with the convention in a moment. I will respond at the appropriate point in my speech. I did not give way in a very good place—I was talking about the successful Strathclyde police pilot project. The information that that project has provided shows the number of women who have been trafficked for commercial sexual exploitation—in Glasgow alone—from Lithuania, Albania, China, Thailand, Sudan, Kenya and Hungary. That this should happen in Scotland today is truly shocking and horrendous. It is vital to continue to monitor the findings from the project and to ensure that we develop our understanding of the reality of trafficking for women and of their support needs. We should not forget that that vile trade could not exist if there was no demand. It is important to send a clear message to men who pay for sex that they are fuelling a horrendous trade and are, as Trish Godman made clear, guilty of rape. We are determined to challenge the demand for all forms of commercial sexual exploitation—and for all forms of sexual exploitation more generally—and to work in partnership to combat them.

The Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 covers some of that, but I will draw the matter to the justice ministers' attention, if more needs to be done. By its nature, trafficking is an international crime that operates across borders and often involves organised crime networks, so partnership working and the sharing of information and intelligence with national and international law enforcement agencies are essential to identifying what is happening and to dealing effectively with those who are involved. That is why we undertook a joint consultation, which closed recently, with the Home Office on proposals for a UK action plan to tackle human trafficking. The plan contains proposals on preventing trafficking at source, on improving law enforcement and on supporting and assisting victims. The convention was raised in the consultation. It is a reserved matter, but I share Trish Godman's views and concerns about it. The Glasgow interagency trafficking working group broadly welcomed the action plan, but said in its response to the consultation paper: "An automatic reflection period and the possibility of a short term residence period affording women rights to assistance without the absolute necessity of assisting the police might mean that frontline workers could offer women reassurance about approaching the authorities for help leading to more prosecutions but more importantly providing women with a route out and the protection that they need." I will discuss the issue with the justice ministers, who take the policy lead. We will consider carefully the views that have been expressed today and by respondents to the consultation exercise and we will feed our thoughts back to Home Office ministers. I emphasise that the Executive is committed to tackling all forms of violence against women. The debate rightly highlights one particularly abhorrent aspect of such violence and we will continue to work to bring the perpetrators of that violence to book as well as to support those who suffer at their hands. I will finish by quoting the Glasgow interagency trafficking working group's submission: "As a destination country, primarily for trafficked women, we have created the demand for this heinous form of exploitation and violence against women. We believe that we have a duty to afford any woman who is fortunate enough to come to the attention of the authorities all of the protection and assistance the state can muster. Focussing on demand reduction, victim protection and prosecutions will be vital to combat this form of 21 st century slavery."  Meeting closed at 17:44.

I am delighted that tenants are now beginning to feel the benefit of the step change in investment that was promised at transfer, with £291 million having been spent to date. Tenants are clearly at the heart of the decision-making process through the local management arrangements that have been put in place, but we are determined to see quick progress on second-stage transfer, which remains an absolute commitment and a key part of the solution for Glasgow's housing. We will continue to work closely with all the key partners to ensure that it is delivered.

I assure Bill Butler that the issue is right at the top of Johann Lamont and my agendas. As Johann Lamont described in her answer to the previous question, we have regular meetings with Communities Scotland and many of the partners in Glasgow. Clearly, we take a very close interest in the matter. We are determined to drive forward second-stage transfer and to do so as quickly as possible. We are as disappointed as Bill Butler is that second-stage transfer has not taken place as quickly as it was originally envisaged. We are determined to make up for that. At the same time, we should acknowledge the considerable investment that has been made in Glasgow. In my initial answer I indicated the figure involved—I am sure that Bill Butler and others know the many details. I mentioned the £291 million that has been spent over the past three years, which compares well with the £65 million and £75 million respectively that were spent in the two years before transfer. A further £150 million will be invested this year.

It is outrageous that £291 million of investment should be called an "absolute shambles". Sandra White would be better served by maintaining a sense of balance. Much has been achieved, but there is a lot more to do. Nobody is more determined to press ahead with that than Johann Lamont and me. Of course, it is partly a matter of investment. Johann Lamont mentioned the £1.6 billion, which includes resources to deliver 6,000 new homes for tenants who will lose their houses through the GHA demolitions. Second-stage transfer is the immediate priority this year. An enormous amount of work is going on: a financial team was established and a short-term working group is trying to resolve some issues. I expect and we are determined to see early progress on that most important issue.

rose—

Will the member give way?

How can Chris Ballance argue against a system in which the Scottish Parliament would make decisions about nuclear power, which is exactly what we have under executive devolution? How in the name of democracy can Chris Ballance object to that?

I thank the Communities Committee for its thorough consideration of the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill. I welcome the committee's endorsement of the bill's principles and its extremely detailed and comprehensive report. I am sure that we will be able to respond positively to many of the committee's recommendations, although I will be able to refer to only a few this afternoon. Our approach to drawing up the reforms has been open and transparent and has involved a wide range of interested parties. We will continue to engage, and will even intensify, stakeholders' participation throughout the process of preparing secondary legislation and guidance. In the interests of greater transparency, we shall also produce, before stage 2, a consolidated version of the parts of the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 that the bill substantially amends. As I have said before, the bill heralds the most fundamental and comprehensive reform of the planning system in Scotland since its creation in the immediate post-war period. The case for change was overwhelming and calls for reform came from the widest possible range of interests. All those that are involved in planning—local communities, planning professionals, voluntary organisations, business and the wider public—saw the system as complex and inaccessible. Many complained of an overly bureaucratic system, with built-in delays, uncertainty and unpredictability hampering investment. Too often, people could not understand why and how decisions were being made, nor how they could act to influence those decisions. Our modernisation will establish a new planning system that is quicker and more efficient and which has community involvement at its heart. I regard those two themes—efficiency and community involvement—as the two pillars on which our reforms are to be built. They are of equal and fundamental importance. An efficient planning system will be a major contributor to sustainable economic growth and to delivering high-quality outcomes. Equally, creating more opportunities for community participation will help local people to shape the decisions that affect their  communities and to forge new partnerships and ways of working. A key aim of our modernisation proposals is to reinforce the central role of development plans in the planning system, guiding and shaping the future development of our localities, and to ensure that local people and other stakeholders have a wide range of opportunities to influence change in their communities. That will involve early engagement and participation by communities, making the most of their local knowledge and their views about how their area should develop. It will be backed up by new measures to assess the effectiveness of that participation before plans take effect. Having up-to-date development plans is about far more than meeting targets. Development plans can ensure transparency and predictability in the system, which will benefit applicants and communities alike. They can also ensure that local authorities and the communities that they serve can set out their shared vision of an area's development in the round, rather than responding piecemeal to individual planning applications. Crucially, there will be a statutory duty on planning authorities to exercise their development planning functions with the objective of contributing to sustainable development. The reformed planning system will be based on a sustainable development approach; that is why we are also considering how best to apply a similar duty to the production of the national planning framework, as recommended by the committee. The second national planning framework will be a key element in the planning modernisation package. For the first time, there will be the opportunity for a national debate about Scotland's long-term spatial development and the key projects that will be required to support it. Through our national planning framework, we will set out what those priorities are and the Scottish Parliament will rightly have the opportunity to consider and debate them; in that way, elected representatives will be doing what they do best—considering how to meet the needs of Scotland.

A draft Scottish planning policy on renewable energy will be coming out  very soon. Indeed, I had another meeting about that yesterday.

In the next few weeks. Perhaps we have not been clear enough about the process for preparing the national planning framework and about the opportunities that there will be for participating in that process. The content of the draft framework that is submitted to Parliament for consideration will not come as a surprise, because the issues that are raised by the framework will be in the public domain well before it is laid before Parliament. Any projects that are identified as national developments will already have been the subject of consultation and debate as part of the development of other strategies or programmes, such as those for regeneration, transport or waste management.

I shall give way in a moment. Stakeholders, the public and members of Parliament will have the opportunity to participate in the debate on the framework at several stages, including initial consultation on the scope and content of the framework, the publication of a draft for public consultation, and scrutiny of a final draft in Parliament. That is why it was our view that a period of 40 days will provide sufficient time for Parliament to consider a broad spatial strategy, which will already have been subject to widespread consultation and debate—we will report on that consultation process when we present the final draft to Parliament. However, I acknowledge the concern that for such an important and broad-ranging document there must be sufficient time for parliamentary consideration. We will reflect on the issue and return with a view prior to the committee's stage 2 consideration of the bill. The other three levels in the planning hierarchy will also contribute to a more efficient and transparent system. Our proposals for processing agreements for the most complex planning applications will respond both to developers, who seek certainty and predictability in major investments, and to communities, which will be consulted before the application has even been submitted. Those are sensible proposals that will ensure that the planning system is a contributor to sustainable economic growth and is responsive to the views of communities. Our proposals for delegating as many applications as possible to the local level will  rebalance the planning system and ensure that many more planning decisions and, in certain circumstances, appeals are made locally. That is entirely in keeping with our view of planning as primarily a local service, which is best run and maintained by people who are accountable at the local level. I acknowledge the concerns of the Communities Committee and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities about certain provisions in the bill that might seem to undermine the autonomy of local authorities. We recognise and strongly support the crucial and democratic role of local authorities in delivering an effective system and are reflecting on stage 2 amendments that will help to reinforce that role. We are considering the scope for removing certain types of development from the planning system altogether, through a review of the general permitted development order. That will help the planning system to raise its sights and ensure that it does not spend a disproportionate amount of its time embroiled in neighbour disputes or minor matters that have limited wider significance. The initial results from our research into permitted development were made available to the committee this week. To deliver a modern and efficient planning system, we need not only to reform comprehensively our planning procedures and priorities, but to address the human resource issues in relation to the education, training, supply, recruitment and retention of planners. In the financial memorandum, we have provided our assessment of the financial implications of the reform proposals that are contained in the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill. We have supplemented our earlier estimates with additional information in response to concerns that were expressed by the Finance Committee. We shall review and revise those cost estimates with COSLA, local authorities and other interested parties as the bill progresses through Parliament in order to agree the scale of the problem and to identify possible solutions. I wanted to make a brief comment about affordable housing, but I will cut that back since I want to take Christine Grahame's intervention.

Okay. In that case, I will read out that part of my speech. The committee's report rightly drew attention to the lack of affordable housing that is creating severe social problems in some parts of Scotland. The measures in the bill to revitalise development plans have the potential to address the situation in the long term, given that plans are the only  mechanism by which local authorities can release sufficient land for all types of housing. In the short term, we can examine other mechanisms related to the planning system. I have announced the creation of an affordable housing working party, which I will chair. That will bring together local government and key stakeholders to discuss how to make better use of existing mechanisms to help deliver affordable housing where it is most needed. We have also announced research that will examine, first, whether a specific use class for affordable housing might be of assistance and, secondly, what other mechanisms not currently in use might assist in the delivery of more affordable housing.

I had better make progress, given that I read out that extra section of my speech because Christine Grahame did not make her intervention.

In that case, I will give way.

It will hold its first meeting in June. The second pillar of our reforms is to ensure greater rights for communities to participate in the planning system. Much has been said and written about the breakdown in trust between planning and local people and about the system's lack of credibility. Radical solutions are required. I believe that it is imperative that we seek to rebuild that trust on the basis of early participation, transparency and dialogue. As I have noted, putting in place a system with requirements for up-to-date and responsive development plans will go a long way to restoring a framework for meaningful public participation in planning. The bill contains a range of requirements for enhanced publicity and notification to neighbours of key development proposals. We will also require the submission of a consultation statement in which the local authority will set out all the steps that it has taken to reach out to local people and seek their views. Where that consultation has been inadequate, ministers will be empowered to ask the local authority to go back and make greater efforts before the plan can be finalised. On individual planning applications, the bill sets out new requirements for information, participation and, in certain circumstances, hearings and pre-legislative consultation. The bill should ensure that all those who are potentially affected by a planning  application will hear about it and will have the chance to make their views known, either by written submission, or, more frequently, through hearings and wider participation. Once decisions have been made, we will require local authorities to give reasons for their decisions, both positive and negative.

I want to make some more progress before I give way. There are key non-legislative aspects to participation, including lessons to be learned and disseminated about the quality of stakeholder engagement. I am ambitious for us to put in place the most creative and innovative procedures. We will therefore produce a planning advice note on community engagement to provide advice on the new requirements for inclusion; give practical guidance on approaches to community participation; and highlight examples of best practice. The PAN will emphasise the importance of early engagement, of having an open and transparent process and of providing explanations of how decisions were reached so that people can see that their views have been considered. The PAN will encourage participation using a variety of approaches that are appropriate to the needs of the different communities of interest. For example, as highlighted by the committee, the guidance will include advice on how to involve equalities groups to ensure that they have opportunities to participate in the planning process. The PAN will be placed on the web so that it can be regularly updated with, for example, information about support for those who are involved on all sides of engagement. Importantly, the web-based version of the PAN will contain examples of effective participation in development planning and management, as they emerge from developers and communities. Over the next few months, we will engage in locations throughout Scotland with a range of stakeholders and communities, including minority ethnic groups, young people, Gypsies and Travellers, to obtain views. We would encourage community groups, planning authorities and developers to get involved in that process. We shall, of course, also ask for the committee's views. We want the final PAN to be as helpful and innovative as possible to enable everyone to participate in the planning process.

Obviously there has been a full debate in the committee, which I am sure will feature during this debate. The committee took a great deal of evidence and—correctly, in my view—it has come down against the approach of bolting on a third-party right of appeal. Everything that I am saying is to do with participation from the earliest possible stage. I wanted to say a lot about good neighbour agreements, but I will have to skip some of it. However, I acknowledge the Communities Committee's contribution on that and many other issues. We will certainly consider carefully the committee's recommendations and I undertake to develop comprehensive guidance on the issue, on which we will consult. I think that that is the substance of what the committee asked for. Good neighbour agreements will give communities a greater say, but overall responsibility for monitoring how a development operates and, where necessary, for enforcement will rightly remain with the planning authorities. Everyone should have confidence that when a development takes place it does so in compliance with the terms of its planning permission. The bill's provisions will strengthen the planning authorities' ability to take effective enforcement action more swiftly through temporary stop notices and to raise awareness of enforcement procedures through our proposals on enforcement charters. I am pleased to note the committee's support for those measures. I also note the committee's call for fixed-penalty notices to provide an additional means of enforcing planning decisions. The Executive intends to produce proposals on that at stage 2. I recognise that some people have particular concerns about cases in which the local authority proposes, or is an interested party in, a new development. It is our intention to lodge an amendment at stage 2 to ensure greater transparency by withdrawing the notice of intention to develop procedure in favour of straightforward planning applications. We will also introduce measures to ensure that such cases will be subject to additional scrutiny where a local authority development departs from the development plan or encounters a significant body of objection. For change to be successful and lasting, it must encompass all participants in the planning system: policy makers; those who are responsible for development plans and development management; local authority decision makers; developers; consultees; the planning schools; and other stakeholders, including communities. To start laying the foundations of the programme of  culture change, there will be an important research project into the culture and future of planning. The outcomes of that research will form the bedrock of proposals to assist culture change. The planning system needs a radical overhaul, in the interests of greater efficiency and greater public participation. There is a strikingly broad consensus behind the principles that the bill promotes. The bill promotes a development plan-led system and an approach that will bring greater certainty and rigour to planning processes; it sets out a framework that promotes the early engagement and participation of local people in decisions that affect them; it promotes more rigorous enforcement and more active performance management; and it acknowledges the need for the approach to be underpinned by a fundamental change in the culture of planning, which will involve all those concerned. Of course, there are issues to discuss and debate as we go forward, because planning is a broad-ranging and complex subject. However, we have the opportunity to effect a real, lasting and beneficial modernisation of Scotland's planning system. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Planning etc. (Scotland) Bill.

The current view is that the Edinburgh Gazette provides a single, well understood system of notification of relevant planning applications that is freely available. We will consider carefully the recommendations that the Communities Committee made on that and other matters in its report on the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill.

We strongly support the development of e-planning. We are determined to have a modern communications system that is consistent with our objective in the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill to meaningfully involve far more people in planning than have been involved in the past. How we communicate with the public is vital. Local authorities will be required to disseminate information more widely than they have had to do. In that context, we will have to consider whether the Edinburgh Gazette has a continuing role to play. However, it is true that other communication methods will come to the fore.

In the financial year 2005-06, 87 homes for social rent were either built or under construction in the Scottish Borders. Although no social rented homes were built or under construction in Penicuik in 2005-06, 95 such homes were built or under construction in adjacent settlements across Midlothian. I recently announced an expanded affordable housing investment programme for 2006-07, which will result in a 35 per cent funding increase  for those local authority areas compared with the allocations that I announced this time last year.

We are keen to encourage the development of land banking. The pilot scheme in Highland has been very successful in respect of the cost of houses. We are also developing homestake initiatives throughout Scotland, which the First Minister mentioned during First Minister's question time. There is a homestake development in the Borders. Land is a big challenge in many parts of Scotland, but new planning advice note 74 will help the Borders and other areas that face shortages, as 25 per cent of private developments will require to consist of affordable housing. Therefore, a raft of policies will complement the significant extra resources to which I referred in my initial answer, on which I will elaborate. The allocated investment in affordable housing in the Borders in 2005-06 was £4.8 million, which was 61 per cent more than in the previous financial year. In the current year, the allocated investment in affordable housing will be £6.577 million, which equates to a nearly 37 per cent increase in investment. Therefore, the Borders is doing well in respect of the money that it receives. Apart from the money for Midlothian to which I referred, Midlothian is preparing a council house new-build programme that is planned to provide 1,000 houses in the period to 2010.

I am not aware of particular difficulties with the information technology system in the Borders, but I will write to the member if I am wrong to think that there is none. The member would not seriously expect me to carry in my head the precise number of private landlords in the Borders.  We value the role of the private rented sector in providing housing opportunities and believe, for the reasons that Johann Lamont gave, that its role will be enhanced by the registration system.

I am aware of the supply issues that relate to homelessness, although I am sure that Cathie Craigie agrees that other issues must also be addressed, including preventing homelessness. We are on an upward supply trajectory. Some 6,400 units were provided last year, which met our target. On the current spending review, my announcement on Monday took the figure for this financial year up to 7,100 units, which will increase to 8,000 units next year. We are doing detailed work, taking into account our homelessness obligations, on assessing housing needs as part of our preparations for discussions on the next spending period. Cathie Craigie can be assured that I shall continue to be a champion for housing.

Ministers had several meetings with COSLA in October and November 2004 to discuss supporting people budgets prior to the revised allocations that were announced on 23 December 2004. COSLA is represented on the officials group that assesses the impact of the budget changes on services, providers, service users and jobs, which met in April, July and December 2005. Scottish Executive officials regularly attend COSLA's meetings of supporting people lead officers.

In addition to the meetings with COSLA to which I referred, I met Fife Council some time ago about that. However, I would be more than pleased to meet Helen Eadie and her colleagues to discuss it further. I followed with close interest developments in the supporting people programme and we submitted a report to the Communities Committee about that a week or two ago. I am advised that there have not yet been any service reductions in Fife; indeed, next year's budget will be the same as this year's. Helen Eadie will want to raise those issues in more detail with me. I look forward to that.

This has been an excellent debate, in which most people have welcomed our determination to develop a strategy for a Scotland with an aging population. However, I am slightly mystified by the SNP's wish to delete the part of our motion that "welcomes the consultation and ongoing work currently being carried out to develop a Strategy for a Scotland with an Ageing Population." We are determined to have a comprehensive consultation process. I assure members that all Executive departments are involved, which is something that Helen Eadie called for in her speech. I am in the process of holding meetings with ministers, and all of them will be considering the implications of an aging population for their portfolios. Traditionally, this subject has been viewed in terms of the demands on traditional services. That is certainly something that we do not overlook, but we want to deal with the issues in new and more integrated ways. There are further issues around the services that support the involvement and contribution of older people and all the work that we need to do to remove the barriers to that involvement and contribution. John Farquhar Munro was concerned about older people in some places being defined as those over 50. As the consultation document says, we take a flexible approach there, and it is good to break down stereotypes. The fact is that that probably is the decade in which people begin to experience ageism, with regard to employment for example. Karen Whitefield highlighted the benefits of employing older, more experienced people, and other members also covered employment. Donald Gorrie did so in the context of flexible working, as did Nora Radcliffe. Patrick Harvie made a comparison with last week's debate on fresh talent. I hope that there are not contradictions there. We are clear that if we are to grow Scotland's economy, we need to capitalise on the assets of the aging population. Older people have a lifetime of skills and  experience, and they can contribute immeasurably in that regard. We need to help those people who want to stay in work until they are ready to retire, and we need to ensure that they have the skills that they need. We must increasingly think of retirement as a process, not an event. That is why the whole idea of flexible retirement is so important. I am pleased to have Linda Boyes of the Scottish Council Foundation on my advisory group. She has recently done a piece of written work on flexible working arrangements. Some changes to the pension regimes at Westminster are also helpful, including the change from next month that will allow people to receive an occupational pension while working for the same employer. Sandra White raised several matters. She queried whether 12 weeks was adequate time for the consultation; we believe that it is. We are receiving responses and many inquiries for more questionnaires. The consultation document is easy to respond to, so we are confident that 12 weeks are enough. Like Christine Grahame, Sandra White talked about food preparation under free personal care, to which the amendment refers. Discussions are taking place between the Scottish Executive and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to resolve those issues. As I chaired the care development group, I assure Sandra White that the issue was complex and that we spent much time on discussing it. As for the closure of care homes, the fact is that some homes will not meet new standards by 2007. However, new modern facilities are being built and major companies are investing heavily in the sector, which shows confidence. Christine Grahame, Sandra White and others mentioned pensioner poverty. We should recognise the significant reductions that the figures that were released 10 days ago or so showed. Half the pensioners who were in relative poverty in 1997 are now out of it and more than three quarters of pensioners who were in absolute poverty in 1997 have been moved out of it. Of course there is more to do, but we should acknowledge progress. I know that the SNP and others are hostile to the pension credit. As Helen Eadie said, we must deal with uptake, but we should remember that pensioners are on average £19 a week better off with the pension credit than they would be if the earnings link had been applied to the basic state pension since 1997. Many issues in relation to the frail elderly were raised. Nanette Milne talked about people who have communication difficulties because of stroke  or dementia. We are exploring with disability organisations how to reach those people and to hear their views. A piece of research that I announced a while ago and which Nanette Milne supported is based on listening to the views of people who have communication impairment and learning from them in the development of services. Irene Oldfather was concerned about various issues that relate to dementia. I will not become involved in the drug therapy issue, other than to note that the final appraisal document from NICE will be published soon, after which NHS Quality Improvement Scotland will give a view on it. Important developments in dementia care have taken place and I am pleased that, in the Easter recess, I will go to the dementia services development centre at the University of Stirling to launch its work on housing, care and support for people with dementia. Mary Scanlon talked about delayed discharge. The latest census showed that 778 patients had been ready for discharge for more than six weeks, which was down 19 per cent on the figure in January 2005. The total of 1,488 patients, which Mary Scanlon quoted, represents a reduction of 10.8 per cent on last year's figure. Recently, Lewis Macdonald announced new targets to eliminate by April 2008 all inappropriate delays over six weeks. David Davidson talked about health issues. He will know of the strong emphasis on anticipatory care in the management of long-term conditions following David Kerr's report. Roseanna Cunningham talked about co-housing. We are certainly aware of innovation elsewhere, including co-housing. We welcome input that suggests new and innovative ways to meet housing need. More generally, in the survey that was conducted before the consultation's launch, housing was identified as marginally the top issue for the Executive to get right for the aging population. The houses that we build today will need to be suitable for an older population. We need to think beyond the traditional models of housing for older people and the Executive is reviewing older people's housing. Karen Whitefield and Helen Eadie referred to the central heating programme and fuel poverty. I am pleased that they welcomed the extension that was announced last week. The programme will continue beyond 2006 and, from 1 January next year, it will be widened so that pensioners who receive the guarantee element of pension credit will be able to receive upgrades to partial or inefficient central heating systems. Under our commitment to eradicate fuel poverty by 2016, we have already spent more than £200 million on measures to tackle fuel poverty. We have provided central heating to more than 63,000  homes and we have insulated more than 223,000 homes under the warm deal. Our central heating programme is the best targeted fuel poverty programme in the United Kingdom. Patrick Harvie referred to antisocial behaviour. I have already met the Minister for Justice—she has just entered the room at a timely moment—to discuss with her what impact an aging population will have on issues that come within her portfolio. Notwithstanding what Patrick Harvie said, many older people's lives are crippled by a fear of crime that stops them going out at night or getting involved in social or community activities. Many local police forces do excellent work in building bridges between generations and helping older people with basic security measures to help them to feel safer. Among other matters, the strategy will consider community safety as well as—to return to the central theme of both the debate and the strategy—the contribution that older people make to creating stronger and safer communities. I see that I am in my last minute. As I am expected to keep to 10 minutes, I will stop at around 10 to 5 rather than repeat my previous performance and talk for 19 minutes. As I said, the central theme of the strategy is the contribution of older people. Linda Fabiani and Donald Gorrie mentioned the role that older people have as carers, whereas Helen Eadie, Karen Whitefield and others highlighted their role as volunteers. Certainly, the central thrust of the strategy for a Scotland with an aging population is that it is time to break down the stereotypes about older people. We want to do everything that we can to remove the barriers that prevent older people from contributing to society in ways that they choose. That is not only an important but an innovative and radical approach, which I am glad has been broadly welcomed today. We will not, of course, forget the traditional services that older people need. The strategy will also consider how those should be modernised and reformed for the benefit of older people. I look forward to the consultation over the next three months and I hope that members will encourage their constituents to participate. I look forward to presenting to the Parliament the completed strategy later in the year.

I welcome this opportunity to open a debate on one of the most fundamental changes ever seen in Scotland. We are facing unprecedented demographic developments. Because of greater life expectancy and decades of lower birth rates, the age profile of Scotland's population is changing markedly. In the coming decades, there will be ever greater numbers of older people and a lower proportion of younger people. A large increase in the numbers and proportion of people aged over 65 is certain; indeed, current projections predict that, by 2031, one in four of the population will be aged 65 or over. That cannot be ignored, and any responsible Government must respond with a hard strategic look at the implications and the possible responses. Our approach is based fundamentally on acknowledging the opportunities and benefits that an older population will bring. Too often, we see negative stereotypes of older people, from the grumpy Victor Meldrews of this world to the helpless little old lady in a shawl. Such images do nothing to help us to understand older people's diversity and range of contribution. Even more insidious and reprehensible are the assumptions that older people are nothing but a burden on society and a drain on essential resources. Over the years, there has been a lot of negative talk in the press about the burden and problems of an ageing population; however, we must challenge and break down the stereotype of older people being past it and of no value to society. Our starting point is the enormous contribution that older people make to Scottish society and a determination to ensure that that contribution is valued, supported, recognised and encouraged. So much could be said on this subject. For example, the Parliament has previously debated volunteering and the contribution made by older volunteers. Indeed, earlier this week, I was privileged to launch the retired and senior volunteer programme's strategy for older volunteers. Again, I must stress the incredible contribution that older volunteers make to Scottish society. From being active on boards and community councils to helping at the local primary school, hospital or charity shop, they form a fundamental  element of the Scottish voluntary sector and all areas of society benefit from their selfless contribution. However, that contribution is about much more than volunteering. For example, our systems of care provision would not be able to cope without the unstinting dedication and commitment of older people caring for their loved ones. Grandparents play a major role in caring for children, helping parents to go out to work and providing a loving and rewarding environment for children. We want to encourage and support such unpaid, selfless contributions. However, older people are also consumers. Notwithstanding recent significant reductions in the figures, problems of pensioner poverty continue. That said, many pensioners have significant disposable income and are making clear consumer choices about how they spend their money. One of the benefits of an aging population is the growing importance of what is sometimes called the silver economy. Our strategy consultation document is deliberately entitled "Age and Experience" in recognition of the fact that one benefit of an aging population is the breadth and length of older people's life experiences. That experience can benefit our nation—helping older entrepreneurs to achieve success; benefiting employers who seek to recruit and retain older workers; and benefiting all generations as skills are passed down to younger people. However, we must ensure that we remove the barriers to benefiting from that experience; we must combat discrimination and promote equality of opportunity and outcomes. In the strategy, we will consider carefully the barriers that people face when they try to make a contribution. Some of those barriers are structural. For example, people may not be able to work because they are caring for older relatives or perhaps because they do not have the skills that employers require. Other barriers are social. As we know, there is still an attitude that consigns older people to the scrap heap. We have all seen the advertisements that ask for "young, energetic individuals". I am thankful that the forthcoming age discrimination legislation means that those ads will soon be a thing of the past—but attitudes are another matter. We have a responsibility to promote equality of opportunity, and that applies to age as well. Unfortunately, agist attitudes do not exist only in the workplace. We could all name industries that focus entirely on youth markets, and I have already mentioned negative stereotypes of older people. Our strategy will set out how some of the barriers can be removed by challenging agism and age discrimination and by addressing structural  and social barriers. We will consider how we can support older people to make a continuing contribution to society. We might do that by supporting intergenerational activity or volunteering, or simply by acknowledging the unofficial contribution that people make through their involvement in their own families and communities. Through our consultation, we are seeking the views of individuals and communities on what practical support people need and on what we can do to help. Work is part of that, of course—but only for those who want it. As the motion says, we must support older people to contribute "in ways which they choose". If one side of our radical approach is breaking down stereotypes and valuing and supporting the contribution of older people, the other is ensuring that they receive the services that they need when they need them. That is why the second key theme of our strategy is integrated services. This Government has put a great deal of effort into integrating services—paving the way for pooled or aligned budgets and encouraging, for example, the establishment of joint health and social care services. There are many excellent examples, such as the West Lothian health and care partnership, which was so successful that it led to West Lothian Council winning LGC Local Government Chronicle's United Kingdom council of the year award last week. I congratulate the council on that award, and I am very fortunate in having David Kelly, the man who heads the partnership, on my advisory group for the development of this strategy. More generally, our work on joint future has led to a situation in which joint working is the norm for local partnerships in health and community care. That is a major step forwards for the provision of locally responsive services for older people. However, some difficulties are more entrenched. When older people need services, the journey they have to go on is long, hard and strewn with obstacles. First, they need to find out about services—but where do they turn? Where do they go? How can they get the trusted information that they need? By funding the Scottish helpline for older people, the Scottish Executive has made a significant commitment to providing a source of impartial professional information for older people. Funding has been awarded for the next three years, enabling the helpline service and the consortium behind it to develop and grow—in particular, to develop local networks of advice and information services. However, information is not enough. Trying to arrange the services needed and to sort out the complexities of who pays for what, and who  provides what, can be daunting for the best among us, let alone for someone who is at a vulnerable point in their lives. We need to rise to the challenge of simplifying the route to the services that people need, while also allowing choice in the services that people want. As the next generation of older people age—a generation weaned on consumerism and choice—people will become more demanding of the services that they need. We must ensure that services are appropriate and accessible and that they are available where and when they are needed. That is the challenge for the strategy—to ensure that, now and in future, services are able to respond appropriately to the needs and demands of older people. The "21 st Century Social Work Review" has taken major steps forwards in addressing some of the challenges facing social work, and "Delivering for Health" has done the same for health services. Our strategy will be based firmly on the excellent work already done; it will aim to bring together budgets to create seamless and personalised services that meet individual needs.

As Mary Scanlon knows, tremendous progress has been made on that matter, although more needs to be done and will be done. Integration will increasingly be the theme of inspection arrangements. This week, I was pleased to give approval to the first ever joint inspection of older people's services, which will be led by the Social Work Inspection Agency. Another key theme of the strategy is promoting and maintaining health and well-being. Perhaps one of the most feared and publicised consequences of an aging population is the possible increased burden on health services. However, longer life expectancy will not automatically result in a proportionate increase in demand on health services. The greatest demands for health services tend to come in the final years of a person's life, regardless of what age they happen to be. Health improvement does not stop at 50. Increasingly, people can have more years of healthy life. Many excellent initiatives exist. Simply going out for a walk improves physical and mental health and gives people the opportunity to get social engagement, fresh air and exercise. We therefore support the paths to health initiative, which uses older volunteers to support walking among older people. I was pleased to meet people who are involved in that project a few weeks ago.  Mental health and well-being are important factors. Mental well-being can improve quality of life and is an integral part of healthy aging. We have established the national programme for mental health and well-being, which has later life as one of its themes. The programme supports local practical projects that support the mental health and well-being of older people. We want to know about the key initiatives that make a real difference to people's health and well-being. That is why the strategy consultation asks about the most important aspects for good health and well-being in later life and what can be done to support them. In our ever more dispersed society, transport is critical to allow people to stay involved. As our dependence on cars grows, those who are dependent on public transport can find themselves excluded. Free local bus travel for older people has made a huge difference to people's quality of life, as it enables them to get out and about and engage more fully with society. The extension of the scheme to national travel, which will happen in the near future, will bring wider benefits, as it will enable older people to travel, thus further improving their quality of life and connecting communities throughout the country. The strategy will consider how transport systems need to adapt to an aging population and how the design of housing and communities can meet the needs of older people, which is another key theme.

The Minister for Transport and Telecommunications is addressing that issue. There is clearly more work to do, but we should all welcome and acknowledge the big advance in opportunities for older people that the national travel scheme will bring. We want to support people to stay at home in accommodation and an environment that meet their needs as they get older. Meeting that objective is partly about designing wider services and partly about housing design and new technology that enables people to stay in their homes. The aging population poses fundamental questions about Scotland's future. The issue impacts on all aspects of life, from health and social care services to employment practice. It is an issue for older and younger people. Because of that, we are undertaking a major public consultation exercise to ask public and  professional audiences what they think. The questions are complex ones with no easy answers and we want to hear from as many people as possible. I look forward to hearing from members today and I hope that their constituents will contribute too, either through the consultation paper or through the website—www.infoscotland.com/experience—that we have set up, which gives people the opportunity to make an online submission. We are holding a series of focus groups to find out the views of different age cohorts, to get rural and urban perspectives and to get perspectives from different equality groups. The aging of the population is to be welcomed, not feared. It is testament to improvements in public health, longer life expectancy and our nation's growing prosperity. The issue presents us with challenges, which we ignore at our peril, but also great opportunities. We can reap the benefits of foresight and build a better Scotland for today's generation of older people and for everyone as we grow older. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the changing age structure of Scotland's population and the benefits and opportunities it brings; values the enormous contribution of older people as volunteers, carers, workers and in many other ways; recognises the need to challenge stereotypes of older people and support them to contribute in ways which they choose; supports the further development of effective integrated services for older people, and welcomes the consultation and ongoing work currently being carried out to develop a Strategy for a Scotland with an Ageing Population.

As Helen Eadie said, addressing poverty at home and abroad must be central to the raison d'être of every politician. Today's debate has touched on international and domestic issues. To start with the former, I am delighted to have the opportunity to pay tribute to the make poverty history campaign, particularly the Scottish organisations that play a leading role in the global fight against world poverty. The Scottish Executive strongly supports the aims of the make poverty history coalition. The Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport, who has responsibility for the matter, recently met representatives of the coalition and committed to continue to do so regularly. Every fair-minded person would agree that the UK Government demonstrated leadership during the G8 summit and worked hard to deliver significant steps towards debt cancellation and more and better aid. However, as Dennis Canavan emphasised in his excellent and passionate speech, there is clearly a great deal more to do. Continued pressure is needed to ensure that the promises that were made during the summit are delivered and that much more is done, particularly on trade, an issue that Des McNulty emphasised. The Executive believes that, to make poverty history, everyone must play a part in achieving the millennium development goals. As has been mentioned, through our international development policy, we are committed to supporting international development. The first round of awards from our international development fund was announced last November. Almost £5 million over three years will benefit 34 projects that are based in Ghana, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Tanzania, Sudan, Malawi and Sri Lanka. The application period for the second round of funding closed last  month. Again, the response was overwhelming. Within our broad sub-Saharan Africa priority, there is, as members know, a particular focus on Malawi. In that context, the focus is on education, which Linda Fabiani emphasised, health, which Nanette Milne emphasised, civic government and sustainable economic development. Christine Grahame and Mary Scanlon emphasised the crucial role of women. As Patrick Harvie reminded us, the status of women in society is connected strongly to the level of poverty and is important in development matters. That is why our international development fund gives additional weight to projects that promote women's equality and empowerment.

As I said, the fund has a focus on sustainable economic development. However, we all accept that the international trade talks are crucial. We certainly need to press for a great deal more progress in opening up markets to the poorest countries. On domestic issues, John Swinburne highlighted the definitions of poverty. The international definitions that we use rightly focus on relative poverty, so that the threshold becomes higher as wages rise. It is right that I remind members of the figures that came out last week on child and pensioner poverty. Compared to 1998, in 2004, 100,000 fewer children lived in relative low-income households—100,000 children have been lifted out of poverty and prevented from being held back through lack of opportunity. The 2004 figure is a reduction of 34 per cent from the starting point and it exceeds significantly our first-quarter target towards our goal of eradicating child poverty by 2020. The final point that I have time to mention is pensioner poverty, which has featured strongly in the debate. Clearly, more work needs to be done, but we should recognise that, according to last week's figures, compared to 1997, 120,000 fewer pensioners are in relative low-income households and, since then, more than three-quarters of those who were in absolute poverty have been lifted out of it. Through the pension credit and initiatives such as free central heating, free personal care and free bus travel throughout Scotland, we are maximising Scottish pensioners' disposable income. It is regrettable that Christine Grahame did not recognise that and that she launched an attack on the strategy for older people, which will astonish older people's organisations. That  strategy clearly focuses on much broader issues and is crucial to Scotland's future. My time is up. I congratulate Dennis Canavan and the independents on securing such a good and important debate.

This has been an excellent and important debate. I begin by welcoming all the visitors in the public gallery. Many of them were here earlier, and some of them will be attending the events this evening. This is a very important day, and it is absolutely right, as so many members have said, that we should regard it as a day of celebration. We should celebrate the struggles of women in this country and throughout the world. Indeed, the debate has had an international dimension, with Sylvia Jackson, Rosie Kane, Christine Grahame and others referring to what is happening in other countries. Although it is right that we should celebrate, we have not yet achieved gender equality. The main emphasis in today's debate has been on what remains to be done, rather than on what has been achieved. Having said that, several members, such as Sandra White, started their speeches by acknowledging the way in which things have moved on; Cathy Peattie also referred to various ways in which the situation of women has improved. Nora Radcliffe quoted the remarks of Jenny Watson, the chair of the Equal Opportunities Commission, that "In the last 30 years women's lives have changed beyond recognition". We recognise that and celebrate the progress that has been made. However, as I said, the overwhelming emphasis in the debate has been on what remains to be done. That is why the Executive is happy to support the SNP amendment. No one is more impatient than we are for the pace of progress to speed up. I will give more detail in a moment, but there are some important developments in what we are doing in Scotland through the new gender equality duty, as well as developments that apply to the UK as a whole, including the work of the women and work commission. Those developments give us grounds for hope and belief that the pace of  progress will speed up from now on. We are impatient with what has happened—we want more to be done, and all the members who spoke in the debate echoed that. The biggest theme that came through in the debate was that of the unacceptable pay gap and the many issues that surround it, such as occupational segregation and gender stereotyping. In the longest part of my speech, I hope to respond to those issues. Before that, I will touch on two issues that have always been very important for the women's equality agenda. The first is child care. In her opening speech, Johann Lamont explained the significant resources that have been put into child care by the Executive, and Elaine Smith rightly said that more needs to be done. The matter is being examined on an on-going basis. Only recently, local authorities were asked to review their out-of-school provision, and they have submitted action plans to the Executive to address gaps in provision. Work is going on—including in my department, as we have responsibility for the working for families fund—to explore how we can build on the progress that has been made in child care. Child care is a good example of an area where we should, while recognising the problems that remain, celebrate how much has been achieved over a short period. I certainly welcome the remarks made by Nanette Milne and Mary Scanlon in which they expressed their support for expanding child care and increasing choice in it. I do not want to spoil the tone of the debate too much by being partisan and party political but I remember that, when I was an MP in the 1990s, the Government of the time was a million miles away from that attitude. We should welcome the progress that has been made on that issue. The second key issue is violence against women. Joanne Lamont quoted in her opening speech the staggering fact that it is estimated that, internationally, violence against women causes more deaths and disability among women aged 15 to 44 than cancer, malaria, traffic accidents and war. It is a serious and long-standing international problem. As Mary Mulligan said, progress has been made in the provision of services and support. The announcement that Johann Lamont made about the increased funding for the new violence against women fund has been widely welcomed throughout the chamber. We can note a small element of change in people's attitudes in the Zero Tolerance briefing, which referred to research by NHS Health Scotland and the University of Glasgow. There are grounds for hope, but it is clear that there are massive problems. Mary Scanlon said that the level of repeat victimisation  was up 19 per cent since 1999, which we have to take very seriously. The increase might be, in part, a result of increased awareness of the problem, but we certainly cannot take any comfort from that. Stewart Stevenson talked about violence against women and referred to rape in particular. He was right to point out that we have not found an effective way of prosecuting men for rape. The Executive takes that issue very seriously, which is why the law on rape and the Crown Office's prosecution procedures are being reviewed. I am sure that those two reviews will lead to significant changes. There are other important developments. We recently announced support for the sexual assault referral centre in Glasgow. I am glad that negotiations on that have now been finalised. We are funding rape crisis centres over and above the specific funding that we announced today. There is also the domestic abuse court. A lot of action is being taken in the areas of protection, prevention and provision, but we all know that much more needs to be done. The SNP's amendment, which is in the name of Sandra White, highlights trafficking. One of the key reasons why we will support the amendment is that we take that issue very seriously indeed. As part of our consultation on the UK action plan on human trafficking, we are seeking views on how to strengthen investigation, enforcement and prosecution in relation to trafficking offences. We currently support a pilot project in Glasgow, under the violence against women fund, which aims to determine the need for support for trafficked women, as there is no specialist support service in Scotland apart from that project. The project will continue to be funded under the new money announced today. [ Interruption. ]

As I said, two big areas of work that on the agenda give us grounds for renewed hope: the new gender equality duty; and the recent report of the women and work commission. The gender equality duty, on which members will recall that we had a Sewel motion a few months ago, will bring about huge changes in how we take forward our work to achieve gender equality in Scotland. The new duty will strengthen existing initiatives, enabling us to promote new ways of tackling gender inequality. The key point about the duty is that public authorities will be required to demonstrate outcomes—it will no longer be sufficient for them to embed their equality commitments in paperwork and processes. The gender duty has recently been the subject of consultation and the plethora of responses from throughout Scotland and the rest of the UK is under consideration.  The specific duties have not yet been finalised, but three key areas will form the core of the gender equality duty and will help us significantly to push forward our work on equality between women and men: gender equality schemes; gender impact assessments; and action on equal pay. I will deal with equal pay first, because that issue has attracted most comment from members today. The specific duty on equal pay, as outlined in the consultation document, will not only call on public authorities to develop and publish a policy on equal pay between women and men, but include a commitment to act on the results of any review. That part of the gender equality duty will obviously build on work that we are already doing. Johann Lamont referred to the close the gap partnership, in which we have participated for the past five years and for which we recently announced renewed funding. Our work with it has focused on raising awareness and supporting equal pay audits.

Are you saying that you can hear what members are saying or what I am saying? I thought that you were—

I thought that you meant that I was talking too loudly. We intend to target large private sector employers in our future work with the close the gap partnership, and we are particularly keen to engage with organisations in which there are particularly large gender pay gaps, as the Equal Opportunities Commission has recommended. We aim to work to change organisations' attitudes from the top and to encourage pay audits and follow-up action. Sylvia Jackson and other members referred to the work of the UK women and work commission, which last week produced an interesting and significant report. The Executive has clearly not had enough time to respond to the 40 recommendations in that report, but I have certainly been impressed by them. The report highlights the continuing waste of women's skills and potential, which is a tragedy for women in the first instance, and the negative impact on Scotland's economy, which Jamie Stone highlighted. We are determined to take action to address all the causes of the pay gap that the report highlights. Nora Radcliffe said that many jobs that women do are not sufficiently valued,  which is clearly an important part of the pay gap issue. Occupational segregation also featured in many speeches. Recent Equal Opportunities Commission research on modern apprenticeships in Scotland has identified a complex set of factors that influence young people's career choices—Marlyn Glen and other members referred to that issue. Some progress has been made on modern apprenticeships, but much more is needed. It is clear that the gender imbalance reflects what happens in the wider labour market. We have welcomed the Equal Opportunities Commission's report on occupational segregation and have said that we will work with it and other relevant stakeholders to develop appropriate actions to address any systemic barriers that prevent people from adopting their career choice. We have also established an interdepartmental working group to consider occupational segregation and how it can be effectively tackled. We recognise that there must be concerted, joined-up action in several policy areas if the issue is to be addressed. I have been told that the commission is pleased with the approach that we have adopted in that regard. Gender impact assessments and gender equality schemes will also help us to improve how we run our organisations. In drawing up a scheme, public authorities will have to set targets and outline how they intend to meet them. We are already doing a great deal of work on equality proofing our policy and budgets, which will be extremely helpful to us in preparing for the new duty's impact assessment requirements. The work of the equality proofing budget and policy advisory group has been invaluable in making progress on that area. The Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive have taken a great deal of interest in the matter. I know that the Equal Opportunities Committee has done work on equality proofing the budget, and the Executive has also taken the matter seriously. It has set up two pilot schemes to develop tools for gender analysis, which have achieved some recognition. I am pleased to be part of an Oxfam CD, on which I am interviewed because of what the Executive has done in that regard, although our work may not be widely known in the chamber or across Scotland. On the smoking cessation pilot scheme, we know that young girls and boys smoke at different rates and respond to different strategies to help them to stop smoking. We need to know the extent to which policy and spend meet the different needs of boys and girls, and we must act on our findings. That is the purpose of that pilot scheme, and there is another pilot scheme in relation to sport. Rosie Kane raised the issue of the criminal justice system. A lot of work has been carried out  with reference to women and the criminal justice system, on which the Scottish Women's Convention had a particular proposal. We recognise the problems that have been identified, and Cathy Jamieson has agreed to set up a short-life working group to consider further progress on the issue. A member of the Scottish Women's Convention has been invited to take part in that group. That builds on the work of two previous high-level groups—one at ministerial level considered the issue of female offenders and alternatives to custody—and the proposals in the reports of those groups have been followed through. Another example of how the Executive has addressed the specific needs of women offenders is the 218 time-out centre in Glasgow, which opened three years ago. Every year, up to 500 women who are caught up in the criminal justice system are being helped to overcome their substance misuse, tackle the causes of their offending, move on and reintegrate fully into society. I think that I have had double the length of my time, but I will try to fill in the three minutes before decision time, although that will make it a 19-minute speech. There have been many powerful and interesting speeches, and the theme of challenging gender stereotyping has come through strongly, starting with Sandra White's speech. That is a major theme of the women and work commission, and the challenges are not just for employers, but for schools and the education system more generally. The recommendations in that area will be addressed as we consider our response to the women and work commission. Cathy Peattie and Marlyn Glen talked about pregnancy discrimination, on which the Equal Opportunities Commission issued a report a few months ago. I spoke at the Scottish launch of the report and committed the Executive to involvement in actions to deal with the issue, on which I hope to be able to report further before too long. Many other points were raised in the debate. Shiona Baird welcomed progress on the sculpture in memory of the suffragettes. In exactly an hour's time, I will announce who will make that sculpture. Shiona Baird also suggested that there should be a permanent monument on the Royal Mile to the thousands of women who tended wounded men during the world wars, and referred especially to Elsie Inglis. The First Minister has had a meeting about that suggestion and has considered it. We would consider an application in support of a statue, but that would have to have the support of the City of Edinburgh Council, given the proposed location of the monument.  As I said at the beginning of my speech, this is a day for celebration, and that has been the main theme. However, as Mary Mulligan said, we should deal with gender equality on not just one day of the year but every day, and it should be mainstreamed in all our work. We do not have gender equality, but I am sure that today's debate has renewed our determination to ensure that we have it before too long.

indicated disagreement.

I begin by setting the Executive's "People and Place: Regeneration Policy Statement" in its broader context. To improve the fabric of our country, since devolution, we have invested massively in enterprise, jobs, housing and transport and in combating poverty and deprivation. For example, Scotland's employment rate is now among the best in Europe; we have spent more than £4 billion on good-quality housing for Scotland's people; and we have reduced dramatically the number of Scottish children and pensioners who live in poverty. We have also set out clear policies, for example on our support for economic development, in the refreshed version of "A Smart, Successful Scotland"; on our future investment in infrastructure, in the infrastructure investment plan; and on action to turn round the most deprived communities, in our community regeneration statement of 2002, which paved the way for our integrated community regeneration fund, with its strategic approach that focuses on outcomes. That is a strong foundation for future wider regeneration policy. Despite all that work, we felt that the time had come to take stock of how our funding, policies and action across a range of portfolios work together to support regeneration. We asked whether we needed to do more and do better. "People and Place" is the result of that. Before I turn to the content of the statement, I will say a few words about the fundamental principles that underlie our approach. First, as the title suggests, regeneration is about people and place: it is about realising the opportunities that places offer for the benefit of people who live and work there and about capitalising on our assets and making them work for the good of the economy and local communities. It is about linking opportunity and need. Our aim is to grow the economy—our number 1 task—but also to tackle the poverty and disadvantage that still hold back too many of our communities. Regeneration has a clear economic  rationale, but it also has a compelling moral purpose. Secondly, regeneration is not about having a prescribed list of actions; it is about outcomes, such as increased economic activity and employment, higher incomes, a higher skills base, increased community confidence and improved quality of life. Thirdly, regeneration needs partnership between the public and private sectors, local authorities and central Government and agencies and communities, but it also needs clarity of purpose and leadership. At local level, where regeneration really takes place, local authorities have a key role. At national level, we are determined to play a wider and more ambitious leadership role. We want to raise our game, which we will do by bringing together private and public sector players to maximise the impact of their activities and resources; by acting as a catalyst for private sector activity and investment; by ensuring a genuinely joined-up approach across the Executive to remove barriers to action; by tackling the land and property issues that can hold back regeneration; and by using a range of policy measures to create mixed and vibrant communities throughout Scotland. By doing so, we will show that Scotland is open for business.

Mary Scanlon is right to assume that. Part of the leadership role to which we aspire is to be clear about our priorities, because, while we want to be ambitious, we need to be realistic. We cannot aspire to engage everywhere to the same level at the same time. We have to prioritise on the basis of economic opportunity, community need, and the state of activity on the ground, which is why our statement identifies three key geographic priorities for the immediate future. Our national priority is the Clyde corridor, including the areas that are covered by the Clyde gateway and Clyde waterfront regeneration initiatives. Glasgow has seen strong economic growth in the past decade and parts of the city are undergoing a remarkable physical transformation that is led by major investment in housing. However, the long-term decline of traditional industries has left a legacy of underused assets and there is a concentration of Scotland's most deprived communities, in which social exclusion,  economic inactivity and physical dereliction and decay have been long-standing problems. Our regional priorities are Inverclyde and Ayrshire. Both areas have suffered from long-standing problems of industrial decline, deprivation and depopulation, but they have great assets, such as good transport connections, high-quality natural environments, a strong cultural heritage and increasing property markets. Both areas have the potential to become better and more integrated into the Glasgow city region and the wider economy of the central belt. In each of those priority areas, the Executive and all our agencies will work together to intensify our activity in support of regeneration.

I was just about to talk about our support in North Ayrshire; as Irene Oldfather has intervened, I shall begin with that. We will support a pathfinder urban regeneration company to regenerate the area around Irvine bay, which I was pleased to visit yesterday. The start-up costs have been announced and when the business plan is produced, further funding will be forthcoming. In Inverclyde, which I was pleased also to visit yesterday, we will support a pathfinder urban regeneration company. The same details will apply there as those that I have just described for North Ayrshire. In the Clyde corridor, we will step up our engagement with Glasgow City Council and its partners to deliver the regeneration of the Clyde gateway and waterfront, including working to establish an urban regeneration company to drive forward the gateway initiative. The Executive and its agencies will provide additional support—financial and other—for all three of those initiatives. We will seek to prioritise investment throughout all Executive portfolios in support of the regeneration of those geographic areas. This is partly about money but, more important, it is about changing the way in which we work; it is about ensuring a joined-up approach throughout Executive departments and agencies, at the centre and on the ground, in support of local action; it is about opening doors for others; it is about being proactive and outward looking; and it is about engaging more effectively with public and private sector players. It is about working better  and smarter to support regeneration wherever it takes place. We will focus particularly intensively on our priority areas, and we will follow that new approach in our activity throughout Scotland. There is no question of a lessening of our existing commitment to supporting local government and its partners in other parts of the country. Through the community regeneration fund, we will continue to support targeted action to help the most deprived neighbourhoods throughout the country. We will continue to support business development throughout Scotland; critically, through all our departments and agencies, through the regeneration outcome agreement process, through our support for skills and employability training and through a range of other action, we will work to ensure that effective action is taken to link economic development to community need. Communities Scotland and the enterprise networks have particularly vital and complementary roles to play in all that work. They will work hand in hand to promote and encourage regeneration initiatives at local and regional level. I shall touch on two critical areas: land and property, and creating mixed and vibrant communities. We know from past experience that investment in bricks and mortar alone is not enough for lasting regeneration, but developing land and property can bring new industrial, commercial and residential development and new opportunities for employment and economic growth. The private sector is and must be at the forefront of such development, but the public sector has a key role in oiling the wheels and making it easier for others to realise the potential of particular locations. Our planning reforms will make planning more responsive to regeneration opportunities and provide greater clarity and certainty for the private sector. That will complement our investment in tackling the problems of contaminated land throughout Scotland and the worst concentrations of vacant and derelict land. Over the three years to 2008, we are providing £20 million to local authorities to help them address the problems of contaminated land. That is in addition to the £24 million that was provided over the previous five years. Moreover, we have already provided £20 million to Glasgow City Council, Dundee City Council and North Lanarkshire Council—the authorities with the most significant problems—to deal with concentrations of vacant and derelict land that can hinder redevelopment and regeneration. Yesterday, I announced a further £24 million for those three council areas and for South Lanarkshire.

I am sure that Nicol Stephen will address the issue of Scottish Enterprise in his winding-up speech. However, one of the key features of the regeneration statement is that Scottish Enterprise and the local enterprise companies will be signed up to the regeneration priorities that we have outlined today. I do not have time to say all that I wanted to say about creating mixed and vibrant communities. However, I can say that a key role of regeneration is to do precisely that. We want communities that have a mix of housing and a mix of income; that are great places in which to live and invest; that are strong and safe and have a sense of place and identity; that provide opportunities for sport, leisure and cultural activities for all ages; and in which there are different housing choices and public and private sector services that serve people's needs. Obviously, our £1.2 billion investment in new housing over the three years is relevant to that, as are issues such as good architecture and design, which will be the subject of tomorrow's debate. A detailed action plan will be drawn up soon and I believe that we need to draw on the experience and expertise of those on the front line. That is why I will establish and chair an informal sounding board of high-level players from the private and public sectors to advise us as we develop and refine our approach. The statement that we are publishing today is just the start of the process. However, we are absolutely committed to the approach that we have outlined. We hope and believe that it will result in lasting change for Scotland. We have raised the stakes and we are determined to deliver. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the Scottish Executive's statement "People and Place: Regeneration Policy in Scotland"; notes the current support for the regeneration of communities across Scotland; supports the commitment from the Executive and its agencies to work with local authorities and other partners to ensure that communities benefit from economic activity and to attract further investment from the private sector, and welcomes the Executive's determination to tackle those land, property and other issues that can act as a barrier to regeneration and to create successful, mixed and vibrant communities.

National planning guidance encourages local authorities to undertake open  space audits, as they form an essential first step in preparing their open space strategies. The Executive is currently undertaking a review of national planning policy on open space. A consultation draft will be published in the spring.

Once eligibility has been assessed, it inevitably takes time to carry out and complete the installation of a new central heating system, including the necessary post-installation checks. Moreover, demand for the programme continues to be very high, which puts strain on the managing agents' and installers' capacity. We are committed to doing everything we can to ensure that eligible applicants have their systems installed as soon as is practicable and that waiting times are kept to a minimum.

I have certainly had concerns about some of the comments that Eaga has made and my officials have already contacted it about them. I am astonished by Margaret Jamieson's example, although I obviously do not know the specifics of it. I will look into the case, if she will pass me the information. We are required to tender for a new contract this year—there is no way of avoiding that, so it will happen—but we are trying to ensure that the service is as seamless as possible during that period. By the end of March, we will have installed 14,000 central heating systems in the private sector in this financial year, which is an all-time record and is 1,000 more systems than have ever been installed in a single year. The new contract will kick in exactly halfway through the next financial year, so we have told Eaga that it should spend half of the money for next year in the six months during which it will certainly have the  contract. Of course, Eaga will bid for the new contract, too. I understand Margaret Jamieson's concerns. I have taken some action on them and I will examine them further.

The fuel price increases raise a range of issues. I have written to the energy companies to urge them to do everything they can—more than some of them are doing—to help their low-income customers. We are extensively using other policy levers that we hold, such as improved insulation. Nine out of 10 people who were fuel poverty and who have had central heating installed under the central heating programme were moved out of fuel poverty as a result. The price rises obviously raise issues for the Westminster Government, on which we have on-going discussions. The important point in the present situation is that all the players should do everything in their power to ensure that the unwanted price increases do not have the effect that we fear on low-income customers.

Five local authorities have applied for right-to-buy pressured area designations. The Scottish ministers have approved designations in three local authority areas so far and two applications are being assessed.

The work on the report on the right to buy is on-going and the report will be produced in the autumn. I have considered how long some applications take and I am satisfied that  the right procedures are being used. A thorough assessment must be carried out when it is proposed to remove from an area the right to buy. Some local authorities have provided the necessary information quickly. East Renfrewshire's application, for example, was processed quickly. It took a bit longer for South Ayrshire because we did not get the information that we required quickly, but that has now been dealt with. I have looked into the matter and I think that the procedures are correct and that exemption from the right to buy in pressured areas is an important part of the 2001 legislation. That is a good approach for us to take to the right to buy.

I had a formal meeting with the executive member for community safety and housing on 22 December and a number of informal discussions thereafter. Officials from the Scottish Executive and Communities Scotland have also been in on-going dialogue with their counterparts in the council and have had two formal meetings: one in January and one earlier this week.

Certainly, I am extremely disappointed, as I have made clear on many  occasions. Clearly, it is up to the City of Edinburgh Council in the first instance to look at the options that are before it. David McLetchie raises one possible scenario. Since 2004, local authorities on the community ownership programme wanting to undertake partial transfer have been able to get the equivalent debt write-off for the section of their housing stock that they transfer, so that is certainly one of the scenarios that Edinburgh may well be considering. As I have made clear on many occasions, I shall certainly do all I can in this new situation to support Edinburgh, but it is impossible to provide the level of investment that would have been brought into Edinburgh through community ownership. I know that councillors are thinking long and hard about the situation and not ruling out the option of partial transfer for the future.

Over the past year, I have met many volunteers. Most recently, on Monday I met young people in Aberdeen and Peterhead. I start by paying tribute to everything that volunteers—the young and the not so young—do day in, day out throughout Scotland. Volunteering is strong in Scotland, and the position that we enjoy on the domestic, European and world stages is positive. In the United Kingdom, Scotland has had three firsts: it was the first country to produce a strategy for volunteering, the first country to fund a national network of volunteer centres and the first to establish a national programme of full-time and part-time volunteering for our young people through ProjectScotland and the millennium volunteers programme. Scotland is leading the way and has much to be proud of in relation to implementation of the Russell commission recommendation to develop a national framework for youth action and engagement, but we are far from complacent. We will continue to build on that strong position by developing and sharing best practice, by supporting young volunteers through schools and further and higher education institutions, by encouraging and supporting volunteering in the public sector, by making volunteering an important element of our strategy for an aging population, and through our continuing support for the millennium volunteer youth development workers, ProjectScotland, Volunteer Development Scotland and the network of volunteer centres. Just before Christmas, we published our vision for the next phase of development of our relationship with the voluntary sector. Our aim is to unlock the potential of voluntary and community action so that the sector is regarded as an equal partner with the public and private sectors and its broad contribution to communities and to Scotland is fully recognised. The sector's strength lies in its independence, its values, its diversity, its connection to communities and—crucially—in its volunteer base. Volunteers have a particular contribution to make to building strong communities and in acting as agents of change in society. As well as being instrumental in transforming how things are done for the better, they have a role to play in building confidence in people's abilities and outlook, and  they can change how society thinks about and responds to issues. Our volunteering strategy is one way in which we will work to achieve that vision. The strategy acknowledges the need to offer high-quality volunteering opportunities and to make the volunteer welcomed and valued. Volunteers should be gainers as well as givers—they should receive guidance, training and support. A focus of the strategy is our determination to create more opportunities for people who come from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, such as unemployed people, the long-term sick, the poor and those in society who lack formal qualifications. Members might have seen, or heard on the radio, the recent "You won't believe what you can do!" volunteering adverts, which are part of our campaign to raise awareness of volunteering and of how to get involved, which builds on the activities that were undertaken during the year of the volunteer in 2005 and directly supports implementation of our volunteering strategy. The campaign has directly resulted in a 100 per cent increase in the number of visits that have been made to the world-class Volunteer Scotland website, which holds information on volunteering opportunities throughout Scotland. A significant element of the campaign has been work with Jobcentre Plus to ensure that everyone who wants to volunteer has the opportunity to do so. Research has shown clearly that individuals who come from lower socioeconomic groups are less likely to volunteer, even though they are not less willing to do so. That situation must change and I am pleased that volunteer centres are entering formal partnership agreements with Jobcentre Plus and are considering doing the same with Careers Scotland. The key to realising the vision and achieving the aims of the volunteering strategy is to ensure that volunteering becomes an integral part of Scotland's culture. Central to that are recent initiatives such as ProjectScotland. I met people who work on ProjectScotland a month or so ago and am pleased about the progress that has been made in harnessing the energy, talents and enthusiasm of our 16 to 25-year-olds and in giving them the opportunity to develop their full potential. More and more young people are benefiting from a sustained period of volunteering, but we know that many young people still find it hard to volunteer. ProjectScotland targets that group in an effort to give them the chance to learn new skills and to enjoy new experiences. Through volunteering, young Scots can make the most of their lives while giving something back to their communities and their country. ProjectScotland is already working. To date, young people from all walks of life have made  more than 6,500 enquiries to ProjectScotland, which have led to more than 1,100 applications being made and more than 320 volunteers being given placements. ProjectScotland is making a difference for our young people by letting them experience success and by building their confidence. It is also working for our communities, which benefit from the enormous contribution that the new generation of volunteers is making. Let us look at examples: there is the volunteer who is placed with the National Trust for Scotland, who lives in a bothy and provides educational activities for young people; the person who is involved in organising activities for the Edinburgh festival fringe; and the man who developed confidence and a sense of purpose by volunteering straight from prison, which helped him to decide on a career in youth work. ProjectScotland is helping more and more young people to feel connected to their communities, to use their skills, interests and talents to help others and to gain self-confidence, self-reliance and new skills. Those people will be better equipped to move on in life, whether that means going into employment or training, starting their own businesses, or going on to more volunteering. We are right to be proud of ProjectScotland and of how it is taking volunteering into the 21 st century.

I am in my last minute, so I cannot take any interventions. I want to pay tribute to the tremendous contribution that older people make. We have only to consider the 15 per cent of people aged over 75 who actively volunteer. Older people are a fundamental element of the Scottish voluntary sector, from being active on boards and community councils, to helping out at the local primary school or hospital. I applaud Liz Burns and the people on the retired and senior volunteers programme for their work on the strategy for older volunteering in Scotland—the hidden resource. Their work has involved consultation with older people, and the strategy sets out the benefits and impacts of older volunteering. Older people tell of the satisfaction of being able to give something back. I have no time to go through the examples on my list, but I will mention one of my recent engagements. A week or so ago, I met people from the paths to health project. The project has trained more than 1,400 volunteer walk leaders across Scotland, the vast majority of whom are in the 50-plus age bracket. Through helping others, they themselves benefit as well. The contribution of older people to society—whether that contribution is voluntary or paid, personal or professional—is immense. We are  developing the strategy for an aging population and at its heart will be valuing, supporting, recognising and encouraging the contribution that older people make. Of course, we will also ensure that they receive the services that they need, when they need them. With initiatives such as ProjectScotland, I firmly believe that Scotland is at the forefront of volunteering. The potential is almost limitless. Over the next 15 years, thousands of volunteers will help people throughout across the country. Thousands of lives will be touched and thousands of lives will change. This is only the beginning—the real prize is to move from a culture of disengagement to a culture of participation. Volunteering can, and will, help us to achieve that prize.

The Planning etc (Scotland) Bill contains a range of measures that will enhance community participation in the planning system. Current planning law does not include community rights of appeal, and that will not change.

Mark Ruskell is quite right. Last year, there were three appeals under the Zetland County Council Act 1974 in relation to marine fish farming, which does not come under planning legislation at the moment, although it will be brought under it. In that sense, therefore, the same rights would not have applied in the three cases in question. However, given the scale of all the other reforms that we are introducing to enhance community participation, that system, with all due respect to Orkney and Shetland, pales into insignificance.

I will not get involved in any particular planning application given that we might ultimately have to consider it. However, I am the first to accept that the current planning system has problems, which is precisely why we have introduced the most radical package of reforms to it since 1947. We accept that community engagement in the planning system is not adequate, which is why we have introduced a raft of proposals to enhance communities' rights. I recognise that people have genuine concerns, but I believe that our proposals will go a long way towards addressing them.

The Executive's regeneration policy statement will be published shortly.

I acknowledge Duncan McNeil's consistent lobbying on the issues, particularly that of an urban regeneration company. I can make only limited comments in advance of the statement, but I underline the Executive's commitment to give priority to areas of clear need and economic opportunity. The areas will be announced in the regeneration policy statement. As I said, I cannot pre-empt that, but we are well aware of the situation in Inverclyde and we are reflecting on it in the context of the statement. We are in discussion with partners in Inverclyde about the challenge of regenerating that area.

Our proposed reforms are based on the consultation paper "Modernising Public Local Inquiries". Although many of the proposals should reduce the adversarial nature of inquiries, we do not propose to prevent anybody who is involved in an inquiry from having paid representation.

We do not expect people to have paid advocates but if they were to do so, that would still be within the framework of hearings and not the adversarial system that Donald Gorrie has concerns about. There will be two kinds of hearing. There will be far more hearings before council planning committees but there will also be far more use of an informal hearing process involving reporters. One of the key changes that we will make is that people will not have an automatic right to a full inquiry. There will be more informal proceedings before inquiries take place. In general terms, even in a full inquiry there will be more use of the informal hearing procedure for bits of that inquiry. People tend to think of highly-paid advocates but, as any community group can ask someone to speak on their behalf, we think that it would be difficult in principle to exclude people from having advocates within the inquiry framework.

In any such situation, the reporter would have to follow planning guidance. I cannot talk about any particular planning application, but the general issue to which Fergus Ewing refers may be to do with out-of-town shopping centres. The new planning policy guidance on town centres and retailing would be the fundamental benchmark when decisions are taken in relation to that issue.

The promised public sector targets for local authorities and housing associations were met in 2004. The target that was agreed with Glasgow Housing Association is that the programme will be completed during 2007. The private sector targets have been met or exceeded each year since the start of the programme. By the end of March 2006, we expect to have installed about 46,000 systems. The target number of installations for the over-80s was 4,000—that target was set in May 2004—but the estimated outturn by March 2006 is 6,000 systems, which represents an increase of 50 per cent.

We continue to advertise the programme and we will make an  announcement soon about its next phase, which will begin later this year. All the evidence that we have suggests that the programme has been of particular benefit to people in low-income households. For example, nine out of 10 of those who lived in fuel poverty but have had central heating installed have been lifted out of fuel poverty by the programme. Without being in any way complacent, we think that the programme has been successful. In the next phase, we will focus particularly on poorer pensioners. An announcement about that will be made fairly soon.

I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate and by recognising the achievement of the Parliament's short-life working group on communication impairment and the communication impairment action group in bringing these issues to our attention. Like Mrs Milne, I pay tribute to their work and welcome their members to the chamber this evening. I acknowledge people's depth of feeling about the need to raise awareness of the full range of communication impairment issues and to increase support.  Nanette Milne has advanced the view that comprehensive research is required to achieve those objectives. The Executive takes seriously the needs and experiences of all people in Scotland, including those with communication impairment, and we will undertake research in this area to help us to understand and to improve people's life experience. However, we should acknowledge that, although many people are comfortable with the term "communication impairment", some prefer to use the wider phrase "communication support needs", which recognises that, although people are sometimes able to communicate well, they might have difficulty because the right support is not available for them. The Executive is already delivering a range of measures to support people with communication support needs and to ensure that they are able to access services and have their voices heard. I will highlight some of those measures in response to points that have been raised this evening. Shona Robison referred to children who have communication difficulties. As members know, the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 establishes a statutory framework for meeting the needs of all pupils who require additional support for learning, regardless of the factors that have given rise to them. That legislation, which covers all forms of communication impairment, places duties on local authorities and national health service boards to meet those needs; however, I am aware of the situation to which Shona Robison referred and acknowledge that there is still much to do in that area. The Executive also core funds the communication aids and language learning centre at Edinburgh University, which provides specialist expertise in technology for children who have speech and communication difficulties. More generally, two projects funded through the children, young people and families unified voluntary sector fund are relevant to the points that have been raised in the debate. In fact, Ken Macintosh mentioned the first of those projects, which was launched yesterday. The Executive awarded £145,000 to the British Stammering Association to issue CD-ROMs that will provide teachers in Scottish schools with a significant best practice and guidance resource for managing stammering in the classroom. Furthermore, in response to Nanette Milne's points on dyslexia, I should point out that an award has been made to the transition dyslexia project. Eleanor Scott and Robin Harper both highlighted the issue of mental health and hearing impairment. Last year, the relevant guidance was reviewed to draw together key advice, guidance and considerations into a clear, unambiguous benchmark document for agencies to use in  designing services for people with a sensory loss who also have a mental health problem. A short-life group worked on the matter, and new guidance has recently been issued. Before I deal with the issue of research, I will touch briefly on other Executive measures. We fund the operations of the Scottish sensory centre, which is a national organisation aimed at supporting those involved in the education of deaf and visually impaired children and young people. As for stroke, which was mentioned by Nanette Milne and Rosemary Byrne, we are improving the organisation of stroke services through the development of managed clinical networks. If a communication impairment is identified, specialist assessment and treatment is available from speech and language therapists. Moreover, the Scottish advisory committee on stroke recently agreed to gather figures for aphasia. I know that campaigners on this issue have been concerned about the lack of information in that respect. As far as learning disability is concerned, we are continuing to implement "The same as you?", which recommends a person-centred approach to meeting each individual's needs. Communication is fundamental in allowing that to happen. Notwithstanding all that, we acknowledge that the current position lacks the strategic and comprehensive approach that the motion calls for and that we must understand the nature of communication support needs across all sectors. As Eleanor Scott and other members reminded us, that is an issue not just for the NHS. As the motion points out, communication impairment can impact on every waking moment of a person's life and affect their experience of the education system, the justice system, transport and employment. Research will help us to understand the full impact of the issues and develop a more comprehensive approach. A key feature of the research that we will commission will be the inclusion of direct consultation with people who have communication support needs. That was one of the factors that attracted me to this proposal; it is something that I know about from other policy areas. From my experience in the health portfolio, I know that we are trying to get more and more involved in listening to the people who use the service and in learning from them to develop appropriate services. Rather than going through service providers or umbrella groups, we will want to ensure that we reach and involve people who have communication support needs—although some of those people might not be accessing services at present. Only by doing that will we be able to understand their experiences and needs. More generally, our strategic disability working group has already been considering how we can  improve our consultation with those who are hard to reach. We are delighted that the communication impairment action group has been participating in that working group and has been working with us to help us to develop a more inclusive approach to communication impairment. Any new research will not stand in isolation because the Executive has already undertaken some research to examine some of the issues and experiences of people with communication support needs; there is an existing evidence base that goes well beyond that. Notwithstanding that, we want to broaden our understanding of the issues and ensure that we are able to identify and meet the needs of those with communication support needs across all areas of their lives. I have therefore asked my officials to develop a specification for research that will build on what we have already done and help us to develop a programme to tackle the very real needs that have been brought to our attention by the communication impairment action group. Once again, I thank that group and the all-party group for the work that they have already done to raise awareness of this issue. I hope that the research will build on that and improve both awareness and the support that will, as a result, develop in due course. We will need to go out to tender for the research and we plan to do that in the near future.  Meeting closed at 17:52.

Where development constraints are preventing the provision of an adequate housing supply, we are determined that they should be overcome. In relation to water and sewerage infrastructure, a huge increase of resources has been secured to overcome strategic constraints on all housing development.

I am pleased that there has been progress in the past couple of weeks in Orkney and I have no doubt that a satisfactory conclusion will be reached in that case. The Executive is conscious of the wider problems surrounding the issue, and that is why Scottish Water has been given the specific objective of providing sufficient strategic water and sewerage capacity to enable all anticipated new housing developments between 2006 and 2014 to be connected to the public networks. The funding mechanisms are being put in place to deliver that significant commitment, and the legal framework will take effect from April next year. On 3 October, Scottish Water was given directions on investing by the Executive.

We have already seen some progress with the publication of the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill on Wednesday, but I am mindful of the need to examine other suggestions, and Johann Lamont and I are actively considering what further options may be available to encourage the release of land for housing in general and for social rented housing in particular. We shall certainly consider all the options, and I hope that we will be able to make further proposals in the not-too-distant future.

We shall continue to support the work of the specialist minority ethnic voluntary sector in its twofold role of providing direct services to minority ethnic communities and working to challenge racism and encourage embedding of race equality into mainstream services. As part of that, we have created a £2 million race equality, integration and community support fund, which is open to minority ethnic and mainstream organisations from the voluntary and public sectors, and which will run from April 2006 for two years. We have already invited bids and we will announce which projects are to receive funding in early 2006.

That is an important suggestion, which I heard when I attended the Equal Opportunities Committee recently. Particular initiatives are going on in relation to black and ethnic minority workers in social work and housing, but work is also needed in relation to community development. We will try to make progress on Cathy Peattie's suggestion.

In the Linlithgow constituency, investment in the five years to March 2005 has been £7.6 million, which has provided more than 200 affordable homes. Communities Scotland is working with West Lothian Council and agreement has been reached that a joint procurement strategy will result in the provision of 348 new-build units in West Lothian in the next 18 months. Fourteen strategic sites that are in the ownership of the local authority have been identified in the constituency; they will potentially be available for affordable housing.

I acknowledge that the housing situation in West Lothian is changing—that was indicated in a report that was produced on Monday—and we are keeping up to date with it. In general terms, that outturn spend in West Lothian has already increased from £2.3 million in 2001 to £7.7 million in 2004-05, which is an increase of 230 per cent, which is a good base on which to build. I agree with Mary Mulligan that more needs to be done, including through the homestake initiative that was launched some time ago. However, I was pleased to visit a person in Edinburgh this morning who has benefited from the open market pilot for homestake in Edinburgh  and West Lothian. West Lothian will benefit not just from the open market pilot but from the new build homestake that is taking place across Scotland and which is a significant and distinctive feature of our shared equity scheme.

We are one year into a two-year pilot and the evidence so far is very encouraging. We have commissioned a two-year evaluation that will report in early 2007.

I certainly hope that the rest of Scotland can benefit from the positive lessons that we are learning from the pilot in Glasgow. I was pleased to be at its launch and at the first-anniversary conference recently. It is clear that the specialist knowledge in the domestic abuse court brings great benefits to the women who suffer from domestic abuse. Matters are being dealt with faster, there is a high conviction rate and, crucially, the ASSIST support project provides the necessary support to women who go through the court.  In the recent debate on violence against women, I quoted one woman's heart-rending comment: "I have suffered over 40 years of abuse and rang the police for the first time after reading about ASSIST and the DA court in the paper." In passing through the court, men—the perpetrators—are getting the message that such abuse is a crime that the court takes seriously and which we will not tolerate. That message will be restated in the media campaign that will be launched on boxing day with new television adverts.

I am pleased to announce that today the Executive is publishing the statement on the abolition of the priority need test that is required by section 3 of the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003. It sets out the action that has been, is being and will be taken to achieve the abolition of priority need by 31 December 2012 and sets interim objectives. The statement has been prepared following intensive consultation and information gathering throughout the year and builds on the comprehensive agenda for preventing and tackling homelessness in Scotland that was set by the homelessness task force and endorsed by this Parliament in 2002. Details of responses to the consultation and a technical appendix setting out the information received from local authorities are also being published today. The consultation indicated that there is still a consensus about the programme of work that the task force proposed. There are concerns about implementation and delivery, but there is agreement that the direction of travel is right and that unfair distinctions between homeless households should be removed. The statement that we are publishing today sets out key actions in relation to the supply of appropriate and affordable housing; the prevention of homelessness; housing support and wider forms of support; legislative change and guidance; and monitoring and support arrangements. It also sets out the key interim objective, which is for local authorities to reduce the proportion of homeless households that they assess as non-priority by 50 per cent by 2009. That is an administrative target rather than a legislative target. Its purpose is twofold—it aims to ensure that we maintain a steady pace towards the 2012 target, but it will also help to identify particular problems in local areas so that they can be addressed. We remain committed to moving forward at an appropriate pace. The target will allow more definite monitoring of progress and it will allow the issues to be more clearly identified, understood and addressed.  The statement makes it clear that the supply of appropriate and affordable housing is the key. We are already making a significant investment in affordable housing, and provision will increase from well over 6,000 units this year to more than 7,000 units next year and an estimated 8,000 units in 2007-08. That represents a major expansion in our investment in affordable homes and it will assist those who are most in need. We will maintain our commitment to the provision of affordable housing, not least by ensuring that the implications of the 2012 target are reflected in future planning and resourcing of housing supply. Developing an accurate picture of housing need, both nationally and locally, is crucial to our plans. We fully appreciate that the picture of supply and demand in Scotland is both complex and ever-changing. That is why we have commissioned work to provide an update of Professor Bramley's housing need and affordability model. When that is complete in the spring, it will provide up-to-date estimates and a five-year forward projection of the need for affordable housing at both local authority and housing market area levels. The impact of the 2012 target will be a key component of that modelling work. At the same time, we are working with local authorities to ensure that local assessments of housing need are carried out on a more consistent basis and take account of the local impact of the 2012 target. That will improve our ability to plan to meet needs throughout the country. In future, the strategic housing investment framework will guide the allocation of the affordable housing investment programme. As the framework is finalised and priorities for the coming years are considered, we will take careful account of the affordable housing that will be required for us to meet the 2012 target. Careful planning of our investment in housing supply is only part of the picture. We have also embarked on a comprehensive programme of action to address Scotland's wider housing needs. For example, our plans to modernise the planning system, which were introduced to Parliament yesterday, are part of our longer-term ambitions to speed up the planning process and to improve the supply of land for housing. We also want to ensure that homeless households are able to access accommodation from registered social landlords and the private sector. Our statement sets out our expectations and the actions that we will take in that regard. During the consultation, concern was expressed about the allocations policy for social housing. Our view is that there must be room to meet the needs of people who are classed as homeless as well as of other people who are on waiting lists for social housing. We will continue discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to ensure  that the legislative framework and the associated guidance allow sufficient flexibility for an appropriate balance to be struck. At the moment, the national averages for lets to homeless people are 28 per cent in the local authority sector and 14 per cent in the RSL sector. Therefore, it is important to keep the issue in proportion. However, the heart of the matter is not the way in which we categorise or classify people but the need to treat them as individuals with their own individual needs and problems. That is the mark of a compassionate society. We need to act early to prevent housing crises, which are traumatic for the households concerned and which place more difficult demands on accommodation and support providers. A great deal of activity is taking place throughout Scotland to prevent homelessness, but more needs to be done. It is notable that Glasgow City Council is the only local authority that currently predicts that prevention activity will have a major impact on homelessness applications in the next few years. Other authorities need to consider whether they can do more. The statement focuses on the need for local authorities to adopt and implement a housing options approach and to work with other services to put in place specific arrangements for groups that are known to be at a high risk of homelessness. We will create an innovation fund to support new approaches to preventing homelessness and work with the homelessness monitoring group to develop and disseminate practice guidance to ensure that successful approaches are shared. As I have emphasised, our approach recognises the importance of providing support alongside accommodation, where necessary. The statement sets out our on-going work to inform and develop the implementation of the supporting people programme; to implement and monitor the health and homelessness standards; to review the role of social work; to develop the employability framework; and to strengthen and promote social networks. Much progress has been made since the task force reported in 2002, but we need to keep the momentum going. Concern has been expressed about the particular support needs of some homeless households, especially those very few who have been involved in antisocial behaviour. We are keen to emphasise that individuals must be aware of their responsibilities towards others as well as their rights. When implemented, the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003 will allow arrangements to be made for non-tenancy accommodation, which is known as bottom-line accommodation and which can be used for people who have been evicted for antisocial behaviour or who are subject to an antisocial behaviour order.  When those provisions are brought into force, we will address in guidance how and when local authorities can be said to have discharged their duty to an intentionally homeless household. Of course, we will consult fully on that. Given that we need to explore the solutions in more detail, we will not commence the sections of the 2003 act that relate to intentionally homeless households until 2007 at the earliest. Next year, we will make progress on changes to the local connection rules and, as I mentioned, we will proceed with the abolition of priority need via the setting of an administrative target. Alongside the production of guidance on prevention and allocations, we will review the operation of referrals to RSLs under section 5 of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001. We will provide further guidance on preventing and addressing homelessness among households from black and minority ethnic communities; on meeting the best interests of children; and on what constitutes a reasonable offer of accommodation. We will work closely with the homelessness monitoring group and its sub-groups to produce that guidance and in monitoring progress more generally. The statement sets out the key indicators against which we will monitor. The homelessness monitoring group will report on progress annually. We will fund two new posts to offer support to local authorities in addressing issues that relate to the 2012 target. We recognise the key role that local authorities have in delivering the target and how challenging that will be in some areas. Therefore, we will offer all possible support. It is crucial that we ensure that we make best use of the available evidence. We must proceed on the basis of robust evidence. We have noted in preparing the statement that many commonly held perceptions about the size and scale of the issues are not borne out by the evidence. I emphasise that the statement that we are publishing today marks the beginning, not the end, of a process. In 2003, the Parliament enacted what has been described as the most enlightened legislation in Europe to address the needs of homeless people. We were entirely right to take that step. The measures will not be easy to deliver, but we need to have in place a system that treats people as human beings, rather than labels them as being in a certain category, deserving or otherwise. In that way, we will be able to build on the real progress that we have made since devolution and build a truly compassionate Scotland in which everyone has the opportunity to reach their full potential.

On that final point, Tricia Marwick has wilfully misrepresented what I said. We were required to make a statement, which represents the beginning of a process. We must modify the statement in the course of the next seven years. That was clearly the context in which I made my remarks. Tricia Marwick knows full well about our massive agenda around homelessness since 2001 and the great progress that has been made in many respects. Much of what we are doing involves looking forward. I turn to Tricia Marwick's other questions and point her towards the first page of the statement's foreword, which states: "we recognise that appropriate resource provision will be required in order to ensure progress towards the target". Page 10 of the statement explicitly states: "The next Spending Review will therefore take account of the available evidence on housing need, including the  impact of the 2012 target on demand for and supply of accommodation." It is clear that the overall resources for the next spending review period must be dealt with then. However, as I said, there are already rising trends in the amount of money that is going into new social rented housing and, therefore, the number of new builds each year. Tricia Marwick mentioned Edinburgh. I deeply regret the ballot result in Edinburgh last week. As I have said on several occasions since then, we will provide support for Edinburgh in every way that we can, but we can in no way produce as good a package as there would have been if the vote had been in favour of community ownership. It is all very well for Tricia Marwick and other political parties to posture on the issue, but the debt will be written off only under community ownership. Tricia Marwick also asked about the supporting people fund. Since 2001, the budget in question has multiplied by eight. Of course, I have managed difficulties in the past year, but there is a great deal more money in the supporting people fund than there was when the homelessness legislation was passed, for example. In addition, the new formula that was introduced last year gives significant weighting to homelessness in distributing the budget.

The very name innovation fund indicates that we are keen to examine new methods of providing housing support. I am happy to consider the case of the group to which Mary Scanlon referred. I have certainly emphasised the importance of support. Although the homelessness agenda is, crucially, about supply, it is about a great deal more. The issues of support and prevention have already come through strongly this afternoon. Within the current spending review period, we are building up to 8,000 new units a year. That figure will be the baseline for any future work. As I indicated and as Mary Scanlon knows, Professor Bramley is updating his local housing need and affordability model for the Executive. I cannot emphasise too much how important that work is, because it will provide up-to-date estimates and five-year forward projections of affordable housing need at both local authority and housing market area level. His research brief contains a specific requirement to consider the impact of the 2012 target. That will be a key piece of research, feeding into the spending review process.

Annex A to the statement indicates that currently 31 per cent of lets in East Lothian go to homeless people. In my statement, I made it absolutely clear that we will continue to insist as part of the policy that a significant proportion of lets go to people who are not homeless. That is fundamental to the policy. I know that there are concerns, which I understand. There are variations across Scotland but, as I said in my statement, the current position is that 28 per cent of local authority lets and 14 per cent of RSL lets go to homeless people. There is no intention of delivering our policy just by having an overwhelming number of allocations to homeless people. There are problems relating to the implementation of the guidance, which is why an important part of the statement concerns working  with COSLA to revisit and, in many cases, to clarify the guidance, because it is being interpreted differently in different parts of Scotland. I assure John Home Robertson that such revisiting of the guidance will get rid of any general unfairness in the implementation of the policy throughout Scotland. In the light of my comments on the interpretation of guidance and on the wider issues of housing supply, I hope that John Home Robertson is reassured both that we are serious about making progress towards meeting the target and that we are absolutely committed to ensuring that there is a balance between the rights of homeless people and the rights of people who want to move and are currently in council or RSL housing.

Donald Gorrie's first point has much wider reference than to the topic of today's statement. We have taken action to insist that three-year funding is the norm in the voluntary sector through the strategic review of funding. It is difficult to get beyond that entirely because all our spending is determined by three-year periods. However, within that context, we are trying to provide more security in the funding that we offer. On Donald Gorrie's second point, quality of service is an intrinsic part of best value and has been from the beginning.

I was pleased to see the Shelter Scotland report today. Notwithstanding people's concerns about the implementation of the policy, we in Scotland—and in the Parliament in particular—should be proud that we have taken the lead on homelessness. When I have spoken about our policy in other countries, for example at a recent European conference in Brussels, I have found that it is recognised and admired in many other countries. I am pleased that, according to the Shelter research, the public are behind the policy. That should reinforce the determination that I have expressed today that we will implement the policy.

We are committed to that and it is included in today's statement. The first page of the statement says that we will "issue revised guidance around the allocation of social lets to ensure there is sufficient local flexibility to retain balanced and sustainable communities". Flexibility is crucial, as is balance. In that context, we mean the balance between people who are homeless and people who are on the waiting list for other reasons. I am very mindful of what Karen Whitefield says. The purpose of the revised guidance will be to clarify where there is doubt and, if necessary, to revisit the substance of the guidance. I am sure that Communities Scotland follows the guidance as it is currently written; if ambiguities exist, we need to and will clarify them.

Such funding questions will be resolved in the spending review. Obviously, I cannot pre-empt consideration of that by making particular funding announcements today. We acknowledge the scale of the challenge that we face, but we must keep things in perspective. Indeed, some of the figures that I have already highlighted do just that. I point out that, in the current spending review period, we have already shown our commitment on this issue by increasing the number of new social rented homes that we have been building each year. I did not have time in my statement to enumerate all our other housing policies that promote housing supply. The cover of the document shows a jigsaw, which refers not only to the jigsaw of prevention, support and supply in addressing homelessness but to the jigsaw of general housing policy, which is made up of a series of policies that serve to increase supply and improve housing quality. We have a good foundation for our work, but we will take account of Professor Bramley's new research in our thinking on the next spending review.

This summer, I visited and admired the work of the ACCESS project. However, I cannot give a detailed answer to Linda Fabiani's question because I am still looking into written correspondence that I have received on the  matter. I can certainly write to Linda Fabiani when I have finished doing that. I am not entirely sure that I entirely got the gist of the member's first question. We must tackle the problem of difficult-to-let properties either by modernising them and improving their quality or by deciding, in some cases, that demolition is the best solution. Different local authorities are considering the question—obviously, we know what the answer is in Glasgow. One of the tragedies of last week's ballot in Edinburgh is that moves to demolish and rebuild many houses, many of which are in my constituency, are now under threat because we cannot access the scale of funding that would have been allowed under community ownership.

We expect local authorities to use prudential borrowing if they are able to do so. In fact, as someone who cited the example of Midlothian Council in a recent debate made clear, many are doing so. However, the option is difficult for other authorities such as the City of Edinburgh Council that have high rents and levels of debt. An important development in housing is the ability to access higher levels of private finance, particularly through the RSL sector. We expect that approach to continue; indeed, it is made easier by community ownership. Accessing private funding through a housing association in that way is not the privatisation that the critics of community ownership have represented it—falsely—as being. On Cathie Craigie's final point, I agree that Professor Bramley will have to consider the demand as well as the supply side.  I have covered all the points that Cathie Craigie highlighted.

Obviously, quite a lot of detailed analysis underlies the points that Murray Tosh makes, whether at housing market area, local authority or settlement level. We will take account of all those levels on receipt of Professor Bramley's report. Of course, the spending review deliberations will also take account of them. There is no intention to paint a false picture of demand. We must know what the demand for housing is, after which we can respond in the most imaginative way possible and with access to all possible funds. Given that this is my last word on the subject today, I ask people to recognise the enormously ambitious housing agenda that we have in Scotland. People should be proud that the commitment that we have made on homelessness is beyond not only that in the rest of the United Kingdom but that in the rest of Europe. It must be seen as being coupled to the Scottish housing quality standard target, which we have undertaken to realise only three years on from 2012, in 2015. We have set an exciting and challenging agenda. Clearly, we must access and make best use of all the funds that we can—the latter point leads into the efficient government agenda and all those other aspects. Given that the first question was on community ownership in Edinburgh, I will repeat what I said. If we do not make use of community ownership, we cannot unlock all the available resources. Community ownership unlocks far more resources than the Scottish Parliament can access from its revenues alone. What happened in Edinburgh last week was an absolute tragedy. If we are to achieve the abolition of priority need in 2012, and the Scottish housing quality standard in 2015, we  must pursue community ownership along with all our other policies

Structure plans do not allocate sites for development. The allocation of specific sites for development is a matter for local plans. The Scottish Executive does not actively monitor the amount of green-belt land that is allocated for housing in local plans.

In general, the amount of green-belt land has increased in most relevant places over the past 20 years, with the big exception of Aberdeen. We take the green belt seriously, which is why we issued a draft Scottish planning policy on it in the summer. We have received 170 responses, which we will look at carefully before we issue the final SPP. The SPP aims to strengthen and enhance the role of the green belt and to encourage greater stability to increase its effectiveness. That will improve the quality of life for local people and manage land carefully to guide growth of our settlements. There should continue to be a strong presumption against development in the green belt. Where it is considered necessary, the proposed release of green-belt land should be developed as part of a long-term strategy in the development plan. In that way, local people can engage closely with the process at an early stage in view of our proposals for involvement in development planning.

That matter is being looked at in the context of specific planning applications. As I said in my previous answer, we take the green belt seriously. The new SPP will ensure that a long-term view is taken of the green belt and that local people are involved in decisions at an early stage.

Although significant advances have been made in the past few years to tackle race discrimination, those cases provide a stark  reminder to all employers, not just those in the public sector, of the need to ensure that they are not unlawfully discriminating. The statutory duty on the public sector to eliminate race discrimination and to promote race equality came into force shortly after those cases were brought and is designed to prevent discrimination from happening before it occurs.

I agree absolutely with Pauline McNeill. In our recent review of race equality work, we produced a series of recommendations to drive up public sector performance on race equality. The new public sector duty will help in that regard and is actively monitored by the Commission for Racial Equality. As Pauline McNeill reminds us, the private sector also has responsibilities. We recently set up a group to examine the issue of race equality and employment. The first meeting of the group will take place soon and both Allan Wilson and I will attend it. We are determined to drive forward action in the private sector, as well as in the public sector.

There is already a statutory body that monitors the public sector duty—the Commission for Racial Equality. I am sure that Sandra White agrees that it will be actively involved in ensuring that the duty is enforced. There are no grounds for complacency. The cases that we are discussing arose a few years ago, before the public sector duty was introduced, but we know that there is still a great deal to do.

We have no plans to review the statutory definition of overcrowding.

I do not think that changing the statutory definition of overcrowding would help in that situation. I believe that there is sufficient flexibility in the current system to prevent the problem that Euan Robson highlights from arising. I know that Communities Scotland would be critical of any landlord that knowingly placed a family in overcrowded accommodation if accommodation that better met the family's needs was available. Communities Scotland, which I mention because it is the regulator, would also be critical of a landlord that did not offer partial or interim relief from overcrowding by rigidly adhering to a policy of knowingly overcrowding when no accommodation that met the family's needs would be available in the near future. In other words, it should be possible for families to be moved in the situation that Euan Robson describes. Indeed, Communities Scotland would welcome that.

As Cathy Peattie reminded us, extreme gender violence is much more common than many people think. In recognition of that, the Executive has made delivering on the domestic abuse strategy a high priority and is now making the wider work on violence against women a similarly high priority. During the debate, the term "culture" has been widely used, but the fundamental cultural point is that we must understand the underlying causes of violence against women, which are rooted in gender inequality and, as Maureen Macmillan reminded us, inequalities of power. The SNP amendment refers to a particular aspect of violence against women. We accept that commercial sexual exploitation is a form of violence that is predominantly directly towards women. The amendment identifies the normalisation of women as sexual objects rather than individuals. Of course we condemn that and accept the amendment. Margaret Mitchell's amendment rightly emphasises the key part that the voluntary sector plays, not only in delivering much-needed services, but in working in partnership with the Executive to develop policy. Scottish Women's Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and many local bodies such as the women's support project, Women's Aid groups and rape and sexual assault centres make an immeasurable contribution, to which I pay tribute. On the second part of Margaret Mitchell's amendment, the key is to acknowledge that giving women choice over where they are accommodated and ensuring their safety and that of their children are the two fundamental drivers. In many cases, giving them such choice will mean that they remain in, or return to, the family home. That is not always the case but, having given that proviso, I am happy to accept Margaret Mitchell's amendment.  I will deal with the three Ps of protection, provision and prevention, in that order. Cathy Peattie and Bill Aitken referred to the domestic abuse court in Glasgow, on the recent first anniversary of which I was pleased to speak at a conference. The successes of that court are already evident. It has resulted in increased multi-agency working, especially among the police, procurators fiscal, the ASSIST project and other voluntary organisations. Another success has been the fast-tracking system, whereby all cases are heard within six weeks. In addition, there has been an increase in guilty pleas, both at the outset and at the intermediate trial stage. Overall, the court has had a highly positive impact on people who experience domestic abuse. I heard a heart-rending comment from a woman that is testimony to the success of the court: "I have suffered over 40 years of abuse and rang the police for the first time after reading about ASSIST and the DA court in the paper." Bill Aitken said that people had not heard about the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001, but the act is widely used and the evidence suggests that there is a high level of awareness of it among lawyers. In the written evidence that the Law Society of Scotland recently submitted to the Justice 1 Committee, it said that the 2001 act was the principal and most widely used piece of legislation containing powers of arrest. Maureen Macmillan mentioned the many problems to do with rape convictions. It was because of those problems that Cathy Jamieson asked the Scottish Law Commission to undertake a review of the current legislation and to make recommendations based on its findings. The discussion paper that will form the basis of the consultation on that issue is almost complete—we hope that it will be released in January 2006 and that the recommendations will follow in 2007. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service is undertaking its own review of the prosecution of rape and other sexual offences and of the evidence that is required in such cases. We will soon be considering legislation on prostitution, which Margo MacDonald spoke about. We believe that with prostitution, as with any other form of commercial sexual exploitation, we must ensure the protection of the women who are involved in it and must understand why their involvement has come about. However, as well as supporting those women, we must challenge men who believe that it is acceptable to purchase sex from vulnerable women and make them understand that their behaviour falls firmly within the spectrum of violence against women. I move on to service provision. In the first half of her speech, Marilyn Livingstone majored on children. Over the next two years, the allocation of  £6 million will increase the number of workers in Women's Aid groups and will allow outreach work to develop for the many children and young people who live with domestic abuse but do not come into contact with refuge. That will help with the achievement of the objectives of Margaret Mitchell's amendment. Marilyn Livingstone also referred to the sexual abuse reference group. Obviously, work on sexual abuse also relates to the violence against women agenda and an announcement was made fairly recently on a £2 million survivors fund. Frances Curran raised funding, too. The domestic abuse service development fund and subsequent violence against women service development fund were introduced in recognition of the much-needed support for local service provision and to ensure greater consistency and higher-quality provision across Scotland. Of course, funding will be considered in examining how support is developed. We intend to undertake a strategic review of violence against women funding to inform our decisions about how best to proceed in the next spending review period. Mary Scanlon emphasised the importance of homelessness services, given the number of people who are homeless in areas such as the Highlands. Recently, I visited an excellent new project in Glasgow that provides a service during the night for women who have to flee domestic abuse. It is an extension of the homelessness services that are available in the city. I turn to the issue of prevention, which featured strongly in the debate. I am pleased to tell Sandra White that we will be running a further campaign this Christmas with new television and radio advertising. We will also use other media platforms to support our messages, which will include work that will be targeted specifically at young people in both primary and secondary education. As Elaine Smith reminded us, media work is not sufficient on its own. In common with Shiona Baird, Nora Radcliffe and Maureen Macmillan, she emphasised the importance of work in schools. The Executive has provided support to a variety of organisations to help them to produce education packs for use in schools. Elaine Smith mentioned the respect pack, which is produced by the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust as part of its respect campaign. The Executive has contributed significant funding to the campaign pack, which is exactly the kind of material that is needed in schools. It is only through educating children and young people about what is acceptable that we can expect some of the more worrying trends and perceptions around the acceptability of violence to change.

I am a great supporter of Zero Tolerance's work in general and of its respect pack in particular and in this context. However, we must recognise that other material is being produced on the subject and we cannot be too prescriptive in that sense. Certainly, I would encourage all schools to use the respect material or its equivalent. Shiona Baird and other members highlighted the recent Amnesty International UK poll, which showed all too starkly people's attitudes to rape. The matter featured prominently in the debate. The poll made it abundantly clear that not only did respondents underestimate the scale of the problem but, rather than blame the perpetrator in each and every case, they felt it right to apportion blame to the woman. The Executive absolutely abhors that view, which is why the last sentence of our motion highlights the issue. I join Elaine Smith in condemning what the particular football manager said in relation to the 15-year-old girl being blamed. On specific action, apart from saying what I have just said, there is nothing else that we can do about that. Our domestic abuse campaigns have had a significant impact over the past few years. Evaluations show a continuously higher level of awareness and understanding of the messages. However, we must build on that work and extend the scope of our awareness raising to tackling other forms of violence against women. Of course, we must challenge the attitudes towards rape that were highlighted in the debate. The national group to address violence against women has established a sub-group to consider the way forward so that we can develop a more comprehensive media strategy over the coming months. Last week, I spoke at an event in the House of Commons that was hosted by the Women's National Commission, Amnesty International and the Trades Union Congress. I am sure that members will be pleased to hear that it was the work that is being done in Scotland that was held up for praise; the work that is being done in other parts of the United Kingdom came in for some criticism. I say that not in the spirit of complacency; we should recognise the progress that we have made but, given what we have heard this afternoon, we must all redouble our efforts, because there is a great deal more to do.

Our partnership agreement gave a commitment to progress the recommendations of the housing improvement task force; the Housing (Scotland) Bill is the outcome. I thank the members of the task force and its subgroups who volunteered their time, effort and expertise over two years. I also thank the many people who responded to the consultation, the members of the Finance Committee, the Subordinate Legislation Committee and, most of all, the members of the Communities Committee, who gave the issues such careful consideration. Once again, the committee system has been seen at its best: the committees have exerted influence in a way that does not happen at Westminster and have worked constructively with Johann Lamont in particular. Last, but not least, I record my appreciation of the Scottish Executive's bill team. The bill might not have raised a lot of passions, but it is an important bill that is driven by a concern that people in Scotland should live in houses that are fit for the 21 st century. Early in its existence, the Scottish Parliament tackled the social rented sector with marked success through the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001. We always said that it would take longer to address the private sector because of the need for better information and more complex solutions. The bill has been driven by the view that the responsibilities that are attached to owning a house should be taken seriously. Failure to do so affects the quality of Scotland's housing stock and, more specifically, it can affect the next owners, the neighbours in a tenement or the tenant. The bill is a response to sound but worrying evidence that, in 2001, privately owned houses in Scotland needed something of the order of £5 billion-worth of urgent or pending repairs. The task force delved into the reasons for that startling statistic, and it came up with more than 150 recommendations to help the nation to address that state of affairs. I say "help the nation" deliberately, because this is one of those areas where people who say that the Government should do something have got it wrong. It is owners, along with the Government of course, who should do something. The bill does not  therefore remove owners' responsibilities but emphasises and supports them. I will not pretend that the bill has been entirely plain sailing for the Executive. There has been plenty of discussion and differing views, and as I have already suggested, the Communities Committee's scrutiny challenged aspects of the bill. For example, we have moved significantly in our approach to assistance for disabled people to adapt their houses, on landlords' consent for central heating, on fire detection in the repairing standard and on tenancy deposits. Those examples show how we have listened to the issues and arguments and have been prepared to develop policy during the bill's progress. Of course we have resisted legislating on some matters, but only after consideration of the arguments. Where necessary, we have put on record how we intend to achieve an objective through administrative action. For example, in answer to concerns that were expressed by the Disability Rights Commission, I confirm that a landlord dealing with a tenant's request under section 52 to make a particular adaptation should consider the individual's particular disability and not whether that category of disability requires adaptation. A key part of the bill has been to give new rights to the 350,000 tenants in the private sector. If a landlord fails to carry out necessary repairs, the only recourse at the moment is to the courts. The bill will not only improve the standard that a house must meet; it will also give tenants the right to appeal to a new private rented housing panel, which will be able to order that work be done and to penalise landlords when that does not happen. As one would expect, some issues have been more controversial than others. For example, we had interesting debates earlier today about energy efficiency and about the single survey. The single survey is based on two years of research, deliberation and consultation by the task force. It is utterly bizarre that when one buys a can of beans one knows more about it than many people do about the house that they want to buy when they make an offer. The single survey is a sensible approach that will provide detailed information on a property's condition to house buyers and sellers at the start of the transaction. That will help to avoid delays and the risk of transactions falling through and it will help to avoid unexpected costs after the buyer moves in. We have been criticised for proceeding to legislate despite the outcome of the single survey pilot. The pilot demonstrated that the system will not work on a voluntary basis because, in general, there is a lack of incentive for house sellers to participate. However, the policy drivers remain: improving the information that is available to  purchasers on property condition; addressing multiple valuations and surveys; and addressing the setting of artificially low upset prices. Nobody has identified a better way of achieving those objectives. I acknowledge that the single survey is controversial, but I welcome the commitment that has been shown by organisations in the house buying and selling industry to help us to deliver a system that will work for Scotland. I make no apologies for having introduced a substantial amendment at stage 3 to address the current issue in respect of Glasgow Housing Association. That we are able to react positively and firmly to deal with an urgent situation such as that shows the flexibility of the parliamentary process. Not to have done so would have been to let down the tenants in Glasgow who voted for transfer. The amendment will allow us to ensure that tenants in Glasgow can continue to enjoy local management of their homes. Tenants voted for the transfer to the Glasgow Housing Association to secure the much-needed investment in their houses and to secure the responsibility, in the first instance, for managing their houses. The ultimate goal of the transfer remains second-stage transfer, and our focus is now to see that that is delivered. I know that the GHA is also committed to that. In the meantime, it has important decisions to make on its reaction to amendment 64, which we debated earlier. I have dwelt at some length on various aspects of the bill, but I would like to make one important point in closing. Housing issues are a complex area of policy; they affect the great majority of households in the country and a house is the most important investment that most people make. The main measures in the bill are about changing people's attitudes to the responsibilities of being a home owner and are also, as a result, about bringing about long-term improvements in the condition of housing in Scotland. The bill is the cornerstone to a culture change, and we are determined to make continuing efforts in implementation and communication to make it a lasting change. I warmly commend the bill to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Housing (Scotland) Bill be passed.

We expect that decision to be rescinded tomorrow. We are working actively with the GHA all the time to ensure that that will be possible. The direction will be binding, and will make it absolutely clear what is required for future arrangements. We will work with all parties to define the way forward. Tricia Marwick asked about retaining the powers in the new arrangements. The substance of what is in the interim management agreements will be retained because of amendment 64. Linda Fabiani raised several points. I repeat what I have said consistently over the past few weeks: we are absolutely committed to second-stage transfer, but it should be a bottom-up process that goes at the pace of the tenants. She complained about resources, but I do not think that they are complaining in Glasgow, with £716 million from the Executive coming on top of £1 billion of debt write-off. She also asked about second-stage transfers elsewhere, but we follow a tenant-led process in that regard. As an Edinburgh MSP, I am not aware of demands from tenants in Edinburgh for second-stage transfers. If there were such demands, no doubt we would consider them seriously. There were demands in Glasgow  where, of course, the number of council houses is four times that in Edinburgh.

As I have explained, strong devolved arrangements are part of what is proposed in Edinburgh, which is what tenants there wish. Des McNulty asked about efficiency. That is very much at the heart of our policies, as is tenant control of the management of Glasgow housing. I do not believe that those two fundamental principles are in conflict. There is already a good tradition of housing associations working together and sharing services. Obviously, the precise number of second-stage transfer vehicles will be discussed in the coming period. We will do all that we can to ensure that second-stage transfer takes place as soon as possible. Clearly, the procurement issue is a serious distraction from that, and it has caused great concern to tenants in Glasgow, but I do not detect the kind of reaction from the tenants of Glasgow that we saw a moment ago from Christine Grahame. They have welcomed amendment 64. Indeed, when we announced it last Friday, the GHA welcomed it as well.

When the bill is enacted, we will be able to give a direction that will place that position beyond doubt. Christine Grahame said that the bill's wording is top-heavy. If she has a better way of solving the particular difficulty that has arisen, I would be delighted to hear it. I do not hear the tenants of Glasgow complaining to us that what we are doing is top-heavy. They have welcomed it hitherto, and if we vote to pass the bill this afternoon, they will welcome it even more later today.  Amendment 64 agreed to.

I am sure that many members agree that a number of registered social landlords are well placed to play a valuable role beyond their housing role in communities. That wider role can benefit communities in a number of ways: it can help to create jobs and provide training; it can improve people's health or the environment in which they live; or it can provide first-class community facilities in some of our most disadvantaged areas. I am keen that we facilitate and encourage RSLs to make the most of their assets—financial and human—so that they can maximise their positive impact in communities. I do not want to limit unduly the kinds of activities in which RSLs may get involved, but that broad encouragement is balanced by the keen interest that Communities Scotland, as regulator, maintains in the relationship between an organisation's wider role and landlords' activities. Communities Scotland's policy on RSLs' wider role clearly states that they must have the support of their residents before getting involved in wider work. Amendment 65 will provide a sound legal foundation on which to facilitate the broad objective of ensuring that RSLs play as full a part as possible in improving the communities in which they operate. I move amendment 65.  Amendment 65 agreed to.

We have heard strong arguments, which are sincerely felt, for Patrick Harvie's amendment 1 and for Karen Whitefield's approach. Frances Curran's view is that we should go further than Patrick Harvie proposes. There has not been a hint of disagreement with the underlying proposition that we must do all we can to tackle global warming by reducing carbon emissions. The Executive supports that sentiment entirely. The question is how best to proceed. As Karen Whitefield has suggested, energy efficiency is a major policy concern for the Executive. We think that it is vital that the issue is addressed in a comprehensive way. We are seeking to intervene in the vastly complex system that is the nation's economy in order to find ways that energy—the lifeblood of that system—can be used more efficiently. In a modern democracy, our powers to affect the decisions of individuals in all walks of life at home and at work are properly limited, so we will have to use ingenuity and imagination as well as our ability to legislate.  We need to influence people, and to do that we need to send out credible messages that are meaningful and relevant to people's everyday lives. That is what we are seeking to do as we develop our energy efficiency strategy, to show everyone in Scotland that there are practical, meaningful things that we can all do to improve energy efficiency. We will give the greatest emphasis to those measures that can make the biggest impact on the level of emissions. Where do targets fit in? On 30 June, the First Minister announced a commitment to establish Scottish climate change targets in devolved areas and we are developing a framework for those through the review of the Scottish climate change programme. Taking its lead from the Scottish climate change programme, the comprehensive  energy efficiency strategy will set out its specific contribution in that area. Within that overall context we think that the component parts of the strategy should be driven by specific measures encouraging tangible, concrete action. Our warm deal and central heating programmes are prime examples of how that approach can work. Highly practical and effective action is tackling fuel poverty and energy efficiency simultaneously. The warm deal has insulated 218,000 homes and, in the private rented sector, has reduced tenants' annual fuel bills by an average of £99. The central heating programme has achieved average annual savings of £376 for people over 60 in the private sector. Those programmes have been driven by expectations of what they can achieve and have exceeded those expectations, fully justifying the investment of £200 million of taxpayers' money. It is that type of approach that is needed to make a practical difference for housing, rather than the targets that amendments 1, 1A, 1B, 1C and 1D propose, which take us no further forward on what housing measures should be used and what they will achieve. Targets should be considered in the appropriate context. In the case of energy efficiency, that context is the Executive's overall strategy, which will be launched next year. In the housing context, the measures that we should focus on are specific actions, and what levers are available to us and how we should use them. Just as important, we should consider how we can join up wherever possible to meet fuel poverty and other objectives in just the way we are already doing with the central heating and warm deal programmes. I therefore support Karen Whitefield's amendment wholeheartedly and ask members to vote for it. I also ask members to support amendment 86, which is a consequential amendment, following on from the repeal of part VIII of the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987.

Amendment 64 will introduce a new section that will give ministers a power, in defined circumstances, to direct certain registered social landlords to authorise other registered social landlords to exercise their housing management functions. As I am sure members will be aware, the amendment is intended to remove potential legal obstacles facing Glasgow Housing Association. A commitment was made to tenants in Glasgow at the time of the transfer vote to devolve control of housing to local communities as quickly as possible. The GHA feared the impact that European Union procurement laws might have on renewing the interim management contracts that it has with local housing organisations. The bill gives us the chance to nail that issue on the head and to ensure that local control is maintained. Amendment 64 will enable ministers to ensure, through use of a power of direction, that there can be no doubt that the LHOs have an exclusive right to carry out housing management functions locally. The power of direction is a limited one. It will apply only where there has been a whole-stock transfer from a local authority, and ministers will need to be satisfied that the direction is appropriate to meet the spirit of the proposals that were put to tenants before the stock transfer. Moreover, use of the power is time limited to five years from commencement of the provision. The amendment will not affect any stock transfers that are currently going through, including Edinburgh's. Our commitment to second-stage transfer and to devolving power to local communities remains absolute. It is right and sensible to take these powers now to protect the guarantees that we gave to tenants, rather than to leave it to chance. As a result of amendment 64, the GHA and the local housing organisations in Glasgow will be able to concentrate on working towards delivering second-stage transfers. I move amendment 64.

Well, there are certainly several points to answer. I will begin with the points that Christine Grahame raised. She said that we had made a mess of the procedures in the months gone by. All I can say in response is that she made a mess of explaining it. As I have been saying for several weeks, it is absolutely clear that second-stage transfer is quite different from the particular procurement issue that has arisen. I assure Christine Grahame that we are clear that amendment 64 is perfectly compatible with European law; so, too, will be any direction that we make under the power. In response to Des McNulty, I will explain in more detail how the provisions will work. Amendment 64 does not involve legislating to alter procurement law—obviously, we cannot do that. However, the procurement regulations do not apply where there is an exclusive right for one  contracting entity to provide services. Amendment 64 will create a power that will enable ministers, through a direction to the GHA, to remove any scope for doubt that the LHOs have such an exclusive right to carry out the functions concerned. The provision will ensure that the interim management arrangements take advantage of the existing exemption in European Union procurement law. Tricia Marwick asked several questions about the gap between 14 December and the enactment of the bill. Given that the act will come into force very early in 2006, we are in discussion with the GHA on how to manage the short period of time between 14 December and the time at which the direction is made.

It has always been the Executive's intention that the bill would include a mechanism similar to the charging order regime in the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987 that would enable local authorities to recover the costs of works that they have carried out. Amendments 54, 55 and 56 will introduce an updated version of the charging order, called the repayment charge, which will retain the main features of the charging order. A local authority is entitled by the bill to recover certain expenses it has incurred—there is no time to list them all. Amendment 54 will provide that a local authority may recover such amounts by placing a repayment charge on the living accommodation concerned, or on the site when a house has been demolished. The repayable amount will be due in 30 equal annual instalments, but early redemption is possible and is likely to take place when the house is sold. Amendment 55 will provide reassurance to local authorities that the money that they spend when owners fail to carry out work that is required is secure and recoverable from any owner of the property, once the repayment charge has been registered. The repayment charge will be a continuing burden that will not be extinguished by sale of the property. Amendment 56 will give ministers powers to make by order further provisions about repayments under a repayment charge, and about early redemption. I move amendment 54.  Amendment 54 agreed to.  [Amendments 55 and 56 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.]

Amendment 57 deals with concerns about levels of unlawful eviction and harassment, which were raised in an amendment at stage 2. That earlier amendment called for local authorities to appoint specialist officers to pursue cases of illegal eviction and harassment under the existing provisions in the rent acts. However, we feel that the introduction of private landlord registration from 31 March next year will provide a new and effective route for local authorities to deal with landlords who treat their tenants in such ways. Discussion on the issue has been hampered by a lack of clear evidence on the incidence of unlawful eviction and harassment. Section 92A of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 requires ministers to assess the effectiveness of existing obligations and voluntary arrangements before they make a letting code, which would be a factor in the test whether a person is fit and proper for registration. Amendment 57 makes it explicit that that assessment will include the question of unlawful eviction and harassment. I am happy to support the amendment, because of the extra assurance that it will give.  Amendment 57 agreed to.

At first, Tricia Marwick's amendment 47 seems innocuous: it simply seeks to add to the list of matters that the tenancy deposit regulations may cover. The list is discretionary, so other matters that are not listed may also be covered by the regulations. Even without amendment 47, ministers could prescribe in regulations what will happen to interest that is earned on tenants' deposits, therefore Tricia Marwick's amendment is not necessary. I have other concerns that lead me to ask Parliament to reject amendment 47—it could create two further difficulties. First, we propose that tenancy deposit schemes should, as far as possible, be self-financing. If all the interest was returned to tenants, schemes would be limited to being funded by other means. That might entail a compulsory fee for using a scheme, or require the use of Government resources that would have to be diverted from other areas. Secondly, the inclusion of amendment 47 could raise the expectation that a tenant will receive all the interest on their deposit. That would significantly constrain the debate on the range of options for dealing with tenancy deposits. The focus would then be on schemes that would maximise interest for the tenant, rather than those that will be most cost effective in relation to the extent of the problem. We intend to consult on a number of possibilities for safeguarding tenants' deposits, including a range of financial options for funding such schemes. Some of the options include custodial schemes, in which the money would be held by an independent third party. Other options may not entail a custodial arrangement. At this stage, we neither want to rule in nor rule out whether tenants may get all the interest accrued on their deposits. At present, it is rare for a tenant to receive any interest on a deposit that is held by their landlord. Although some options for tenancy deposit schemes might rely on part of, or even on all, the interest that is earned on tenants' deposits to fund their operation, that would still be an improvement on the current position. Use of an element of the interest that is earned on tenants' deposits may be a small price to pay for the additional security that such a scheme would bring. On the basis that amendment 47 is unnecessary, and that it would raise expectations in what might not be the most cost-effective  arrangement, I invite Tricia Marwick to seek to withdraw her amendment.

These amendments concern a tenant's right to make adaptations to suit a disabled occupant. The bill provides for landlords or the court to have regard to codes of practice and guidance issued by the Disability Rights Commission when considering whether it is reasonable to refuse, or apply conditions to, a tenant's application for consent to make such adaptations. It is right that a code of practice issued by the commission in this connection should have such statutory force because it must be approved by the secretary of state after consultation with Scottish ministers. However, guidance issued by the commission does not have any form of Government approval, and so it is better that it remain purely advisory and that it should not have statutory force. Amendments 15, 16, 19 and 20 therefore change the relevant provisions in the bill to refer only to codes of practice. I move amendment 15.

The equivalent provisions for England and Wales refer only to codes of practice and not to guidance. I would like to reassure Christine Grahame further by saying that the Disability Rights Commission in Scotland is also aware of the amendments and has no issue with them.  Amendment 15 agreed to.

I assure Tricia Marwick—in fact, I reassure her, since I was clear with the committee about the matter at stage 1—that the issue is a key priority for the Scottish Executive. I give Karen Whitefield the same assurance that the Executive has a genuine commitment. I talked to the committee about ring fencing money as one way to deal with what I know are concerns about the variations in the amount of money that is  spent. That is certainly still on our agenda. Tricia Marwick suggested that we were disadvantaged compared with England, but the evidence from comparing the spending per head in England and in Scotland does not point in that direction. I point out to her that we do not yet know the results of the review in England; only one measure—that which concerns children, to which she referred—has been announced. However, that is not the subject of her amendment. I appreciate that Tricia Marwick wishes to ensure that the arrangements that we proposed at stage 2 are progressed as quickly as possible. However, as Euan Robson said, her amendment is impractical. I will explain why when I discuss its detailed implications. The Executive amendment at stage 2 that introduced subsections (2A) and (2B) into section 70 was intended to allow careful assessment of the level of need that disabled people have for various types of house adaptations in various circumstances, with a view to extending the arrangements under the section. We proposed those subsections because we were very concerned and open-minded about the issue, as I made clear at stage 1 in May. We were also responsive to the concerns that the Communities Committee's report flagged up. The process will be complex, as it will require the gathering of better and more detailed information than is currently available and the consideration of priorities, resources and other ways of meeting individual needs. It will link into the development of greater co-ordination between health, housing and social work agencies and a review of the means test for grants for adaptations to take account of the costs that face disabled people. We are strongly committed to the review, which will be undertaken soon—unlike what has been suggested elsewhere, it will not be kicked into the long grass. We will do that work in conjunction with relevant interests and it will inevitably take a little bit of time. We will then go through the full process for making regulations under the affirmative procedure, which will include public consultation and the preparation of a regulatory impact assessment. I remind members that the purpose of the regulations is to reassure people that the situation that they fear—that disabled people on low incomes will not receive grants—will not arise. Tricia Marwick's amendment 23 would require a review two years after section 70 came into force. We do not intend to delay the introduction of mandatory assistance while we go through the processes that I described, as that would deny people the right to assistance that the section will provide. The review would therefore look back on a period following the establishment of mandatory  assistance, during which it is likely that the extent of mandatory assistance would have been reviewed and that the available assistance would have been changed. Therefore, the review for which the amendment calls would cover a period of considerable change and—crucially—at best only a short period in which the changes that are envisaged by subsections (2A) and (2B) could be in force. In summary, it will take us a little time to bring the regulations into force. We will do that as quickly as possible, but that is bound to take a bit of time after the bill's enactment. A review after two years would not cover a significant period of full implementation of section 70, so it would not be meaningful. As Karen Whitefield reminded us, such a review would also be a significant piece of work that would divert resources from the implementation of the steps that section 70(2B) envisages. I therefore ask Tricia Marwick to withdraw amendment 23 and I repeat our absolute commitment to ensuring that proper provision is made for disabled people.

Cathie Craigie's amendment 13 is the conclusion of an extended discussion that took place during both the consultation and the committee's scrutiny of the bill about the extent to which tenancy management issues should be reflected in the various measures that regulate the private rented sector. There is already a range of substantial and meaningful legal requirements on landlords. One of the many benefits of the registration of private  landlords is that it will make those obligations clear. Research suggests that, at present, many landlords and tenants are unaware of those legal requirements. We want to assess the effects of registration and voluntary accreditation before we decide whether it is necessary to go further and make the letting code that is provided for in section 155. Our approach to the matter is driven by our desire to base our policy on evidence. There is little hard evidence on the extent of breaches of the law on tenancy management. To legislate without good evidence might undermine the success of voluntary accreditation without clear cause. That would be unfortunate because voluntary landlord accreditation shows every sign of being a valuable and self-sustaining initiative that raises standards in the private rented sector by harnessing market forces. Amendment 13 recognises those arguments and strikes a balance between the issues that were raised at committee. It does so by requiring the private rented housing panel to contribute other evidence on what is happening in the private sector. When a tenant complains to the panel about a repair issue, it is likely that he or she will mention other issues that are causing problems. It is likely that the panel would advise the tenant on how to obtain assistance on those non-repair issues, but the amendment will reinforce that approach. It will ensure that the tenant's concerns are noted and that the evidence of management problems that emerges in that way is recorded and made available. I am therefore happy to accept amendment 13.

I appreciate why Christine Grahame wants to build the extra elements in question into the procedures of the private rented housing panel, but it is not necessary or appropriate to include the provisions in the bill in order to achieve fair and sensible consideration of cases. The president will refer cases to a committee unless he or she has reason to reject them. The president will certainly want to consider any information that is available—whether written representations or other types of representation, which Euan Robson reminded us about—and will want to be satisfied that the case is genuine and that a committee sitting as a tribunal is needed to resolve the dispute. If written representations were made in time, the president would certainly consider them. Section 23(3) is designed to allow the president to gather further information if doing so would be helpful. The president would be open to criticism if  representations were received and not taken into account. Therefore, amendment 80 would not add anything in practice. It would also give the president a statutory duty to consider representations without providing any timetable or other arrangements for their submission. Amendment 81 deals with mediation. We intend to develop the use of mediation in the panel's processes because where mediation works, it is far preferable to having an imposed decision. A formal requirement to offer mediation could hold up cases in locations in which suitable mediation services are not available—I think that Christine Grahame recognised that in constructing her amendment. However, a provision that permits the president to propose mediation adds nothing to what the president will be able to do anyway. I assure Christine Grahame that I will encourage the president to find ways to promote the availability and use of suitable mediation where possible, although I think that the president will need little encouragement to do that. Section 23 will allow the president to defer a decision if there appears to be a reasonable prospect of the parties resolving the dispute. Amendment 82 could be read as restricting the scope for the president to do that where no representations have been made but the president nevertheless thinks that there could be scope for a voluntary resolution of the dispute. In the light of the arguments that I have made and assurances that I have given, I ask Christine Grahame to seek to withdraw amendment 80 and not to move her other amendments.

Section 12 is intended to exclude agricultural holdings from the repairing standard. An agricultural holding is primarily let for an agricultural purpose. If there is a house on the holding, that is a secondary issue and, accordingly, it should be excluded. In practice, the maintenance of the house is normally the tenant's responsibility under an agricultural holding agreement. For both those reasons, it is inappropriate for the landlord of such a holding to have the same responsibilities as a landlord letting a house in the normal way. That was recognised in previous legislation and we are carrying that recognition through into the modernised legislation. The committee was concerned that the definition might not cover all the situations in which those considerations apply. Therefore, we have reconsidered the issue and in amendment 72 have expanded the definition to include the new types of tenancy introduced by the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 2003 and also crofts and smallholdings. Mary Scanlon's amendments 73 to 76 seek to achieve the same effect, but do so less comprehensively, refer not to the house but to the holding and do not allow for the situation of a farmer who lets a house to a third party. When that happens, it is right that the farmer should meet the requirements of the repairing standard, but Mary Scanlon's amendments would relieve him or her of that obligation. On a more detailed point, amendment 73 deals with cottars. Cottars' houses that are on crofts or agricultural holdings will be caught and exempted by amendment 72. We do not feel that other cottars' houses would fall within the general principle on which amendment 72 is based—that the prime purpose of the tenancy is to run an agricultural unit—but if further clarification on that point is desirable we will consider using the general ancillary power to make supplemental provision. I therefore ask Mary Scanlon not to move amendments 73 to 76. Amendment 87 deals with a different aspect of the protections afforded by the provisions in the bill. The existing definition of a tenancy includes any occupation of living accommodation under a person's terms of employment. The amendment  would alter the definition of a tenancy so that it includes only tied tenancies where the house is leased and it is ancillary to the person's terms of employment. People whose occupation of a tied house did not fall within that narrower definition would be denied the protections of the repairing standard or the tenant's right to make adaptations to suit a disabled occupant. It is hard to see why such a person should not have those protections or why a reasonable employer who provides a house should not want them to apply to the employee. After all, the house is provided in exchange for the occupant's rent or, in the case of tied tenancies, the occupant's labour. Perhaps even more important, amendment 87 could open up a loophole for an unreasonable employer to avoid the obligations by providing the house under an occupancy arrangement rather than a lease. I move amendment 72.

There are two ways of looking at section 12. First, I will deal with the legalities and technicalities of the repairing standard duty. More fundamentally, I will consider what is right from the tenant's point of view. First, I reassure Euan Robson and Mary Scanlon that there is absolutely no question of our straying into reserved areas. However one constructs the matter, there is an arrangement with an employer about a job, and there is an arrangement with an employee about a house. They are two separate matters—even if they are in one contract. On a specific point—and this is important, because Mary Scanlon deployed it as a central argument—tied houses are not excluded from the regulations on the registration of private landlords. Manses, as a group, are specifically excluded, not tied houses. The crucial and fundamental point is that a tied house is the home of its occupant; therefore, it should meet the repairing standard. By the same token, the letting of a house, whether under a lease or in an employment contract, should be managed in a fit and proper way. If an employer provides a house, he or she should have a responsibility to the occupant, as does a landlord under a lease. It is important to confirm the status of an employee in a tied house as a tenant for the purposes of the bill. There is a perception that people in tied houses get free accommodation, but that is not the case; they pay rent in the form of labour. Someone who pays rent in any form should be recognised as a tenant and should have rights as a tenant, including the right not to be expected to remain in substandard accommodation. It is important that people in such circumstances have legislation that protects them. That is the heart of our objection to Mary Scanlon's amendment 87. I have nothing new to add on amendments 73 to 76. Our amendment does more comprehensively what Mary Scanlon seeks to achieve. The fundamental point is one of principle. Mary Scanlon's amendments do not allow for the situation of a farmer who lets a house to a third party. If that happens, it is right that the farmer should meet the requirements of the repairing standard. Mary Scanlon's amendments would  relieve him or her of that obligation. We do not find that acceptable.  Amendment 72 agreed to.

I congratulate Colin Fox on securing the debate. He began his speech fairly by reminding members of two announcements that have been made this week—on the £20 million  affordable housing development on Skye and the suspension of the right to buy in the Highland area. In praising what is happening in Midlothian, he referred to the prudential borrowing regime that we introduced. Therefore, he praised some developments. Obviously, in the first half of his speech, Colin Fox's main concern was the supply of affordable housing, and several members echoed that concern. Of course I take the supply of affordable housing very seriously. Mark Ballard reminded us of the significant increase in money in the current three-year spending period, which is why 16,500 houses for rent are being built, as well as 5,000 low-cost home ownership houses. The £400 million that is going into affordable housing this year is 23 per cent more than the money that was made available last year and is part of a £1.2 billion package over three years. I do not say that complacently. Of course, we are seriously and thoroughly assessing requirements for the next spending review period, particularly in the light of our commitments on homelessness. Colin Fox referred to house prices rising fast in Edinburgh. Rightly, the main focus of our investment programme is on affordable rented accommodation, but we have started the widely welcomed homestake scheme, which will enable many people to buy a home who could not otherwise afford to do so. An open market homestake project is being piloted in Edinburgh, to which many people in Edinburgh have already applied. Much of the debate has focused on the local situation in Edinburgh, and that is appropriate given the forthcoming ballot on community ownership. I will say a little more about the Edinburgh situation in a moment. First, I will address three points that Colin Fox raised in relation to community ownership more generally. First, he was rather disparaging—as Murray Tosh reminded us—about the £300 million of debt that is being written off in Edinburgh. A large part of the rents that people currently pay goes to service that debt. From now on, tenants will be able to see their rent going into the modernisation of their homes, which they want so much.

We have had arrangements with the Treasury on debt write-off since the start of the community ownership programme. Fiona Hyslop is right to suggest that the debt is being written off by the Treasury. There are demands for that to be done and for public  investment to be made, which would double the amount of public expenditure that was involved. That would be equally true whether we, in Scotland, or the Treasury wrote off the debt. Colin Fox also referred to housing PFI. I am not sure whether he used the word "privatisation" openly tonight, but he usually does. I want to make it absolutely clear that this is not privatisation. Housing associations are non-profit-making bodies. For a long time, I have admired the community-based housing associations and co-ops in my constituency, and we know that there is a strong tradition of those in Glasgow and elsewhere. They are not private, profit-making bodies, so we should stop saying that they are. Colin Fox's third point, which I will touch on later, was about paying back more in rent. However, there is a generous rent offer here in Edinburgh.

I think that I have already addressed the financial point. Community ownership involves tenants far more centrally; that is an important part of community ownership. Glasgow has been mentioned. I remind members that, this year, £127 million is being invested in housing in Glasgow, which is twice what was invested in the years before the stock was transferred. That has delivered 12,500 central heating systems, more than 13,000 new roofs, more than 8,000 kitchens and more than 3,000 bathrooms, and there is a lot more to come. On Colin Fox's second point, I advise members that, through second-stage transfer, tenants in Glasgow will have an even stronger role to play than the one suggested in the wording of the motion.

If I am going to keep to seven minutes, I had better not take any more interventions. One of the main aims of community ownership is to ensure that all the houses are brought up to the  housing quality standard that we require of all social landlords by 2015. One of the important features of the offer in Edinburgh is an accelerated delivery of the Scottish housing quality standard. There will be new, modern kitchens and bathrooms for all houses in the early years after transfer and major regeneration in four priority estates, including new housing to replace more than 3,000 houses that cannot be raised to the standard of warm, comfortable, safe homes, which everyone deserves. An additional 10,000 homes will also be built over the next 10 years to help to meet the challenge of ending homelessness, and there will be the affordable, stable rent policy to which I have referred, with no increases beyond inflation guaranteed for five years. Of course, tenant participation is a key feature of what is proposed in Edinburgh and of the other community ownership transfers that have taken place. The proposed transfer of the City of Edinburgh Council's housing to the new City of Edinburgh Housing Association will give tenants the opportunity to have the loudest voice in making decisions about how their homes and neighbourhoods are managed; in setting priorities for repairs to buildings and the upkeep of the environment, with more than £500 million to invest; and in participating in making policies to ensure safe communities with warm and attractive homes. All tenants will have the opportunity to participate in the management of their homes through membership of the new association or through the network of area boards that will have a significant decision-making role in relation to priorities for housing and neighbourhoods in their areas.  In Dumfries and Galloway, the new landlord—Dumfries and Galloway Housing Partnership—is in the process of devolving decision making to its tenants even further. Through four district management committees, tenants at the local level are making decisions about local services and standards. Recently, that work was recognised as an example of good practice, and the partnership was the runner-up in the tenant participation good practice awards 2005. Tenant participation and even more than that, with the second-stage transfers in Glasgow, are at the heart of community ownership. That is the opposite of privatisation.

I am not being allowed to take an intervention. The offer to tenants in Edinburgh is excellent. I know the benefits that it will bring to my constituency. I am sure that the tenants of Edinburgh will consider the offer and vote in their best interests.  Meeting closed at 18:56.

I am pleased to have this opportunity to recognise the work being undertaken on this issue by both the Scottish Parliament short-life working group on communication impairment and the communication impairment action group. We are currently considering a research proposal that was submitted by the communication impairment action group and hope to be able to respond to it shortly. We are also undertaking a number of initiatives across departments to address the needs of people with communication impairment.

I certainly agree that the issue cuts across many different portfolios in the Executive. The idea of mapping the issue and involving the people who are affected is an attractive feature of the research proposal. I was pleased to be at a presentation about the proposal given by the communication impairment action group, and I liked the way in which it based a lot of the action research on the experiences of people who have communication impairment. I was generally impressed, but a lot of assessment has to be done by our social research professionals. We should be able to respond in general terms before too long.

I think that that is already recognised as an issue in general terms, but we will need to address the particular difficulty that Eleanor Scott mentioned as well as speech communication impairments.

Again, that illustrates the point that I made about the issue's cross-cutting nature—it cuts across many, if not all, Executive portfolios—which is also a distinctive feature of the proposal that was made to us. Obviously, I was conscious of the health aspects, but the issue goes far wider. Certainly, considering how the issue affects offenders in the justice system will be important.

Through the Cabinet delivery group on closing the opportunity gap, which I chair, I am working with my ministerial colleagues across all portfolios to ensure that effective and targeted action is taken to deliver better opportunities and outcomes for Scotland's most deprived neighbourhoods. In the communities portfolio, we have set a specific closing the opportunity gap target to regenerate the most deprived neighbourhoods. We are delivering on that with £318 million over the next three years through the community regeneration fund, which is targeted at the most deprived 15 per cent of communities.

I certainly fully recognise the challenges presented in Glasgow. We know that there has, in fact, been great progress there. There has been, I think, a 15 per cent increase in employment there over 10 years, which is much higher than in the rest of Scotland. However, we also know that a large number of people in Glasgow do not benefit from that employment rise. Therefore, I am pleased that employment opportunities are at the heart of the new regeneration outcome agreement, which I will launch in Glasgow on Monday. On overall resources, there has been a significant increase for Glasgow if we compare the community regeneration fund with the two funds—the social inclusion partnership fund and the better  neighbourhood services fund—that it replaces. Of course, Glasgow also benefits from many other funding streams—for example, the working for families fund. However, I certainly acknowledge the challenges of Glasgow and I am fully committed to working in partnership with Glasgow City Council and agencies there to deal with the problems. That is why I sit on the Glasgow community planning partnership. I recognise, of course, that more still needs to be done.

Many parts of Scotland benefit not just from the community regeneration fund but from targeted expenditure. It is always interesting to hear from the Scottish National Party —the deputy leader has just walked into the chamber, and I am sure that she would have been interested to hear—comments such as the member's comment, which implied that we should move resources from Glasgow to Aberdeen. We all recognise the particular challenges of Glasgow, but Aberdeen and many other places also benefit from the community regeneration fund and many other funding streams. If Brian Adam is suggesting changes in the formula for that or for whatever other expenditure—I know that he used to make the same argument in relation to health—he must say which areas of Scotland he wants to see lose because of such changes.

Today's debate has been excellent. It has provided an opportunity for a full and frank airing of the challenges that confront us in delivering our commitments under the  Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003. I can, of course, say clearly that the 2012 target remains our target. However, we have to face up to the challenges of meeting that target and come up with appropriate solutions. The debate has been useful and, on the whole, balanced—although some members failed to acknowledge any of the progress that has been made. Karen Whitefield usefully reminded us of many of the actions that have been taken. For example, all local authorities have local homelessness strategies and there has been broad progress on national health and homelessness standards and on the Scottish homelessness and employability network. Alex Fergusson reminded us of the progress in this session of Parliament on rough sleeping. Reference has also been made to progress on housing conditions—we have ambitious plans with the Scottish housing quality standard—and on the central heating programme, both of which have done much to improve health. Christine Grahame talked about that. Even the supporting people budget with its current challenges is twice what it was only four years ago. Christine Grahame reminded us of some of the homelessness figures in various local authorities, but I point out that homeless people now have new rights that they did not have in 1999. Much of the debate has been about housing supply, which is an issue that we take very seriously. Murray Tosh made an interesting speech and said that Bramley did not recognise the backlog. I disagree. Bramley recognises the backlog; the model builds in the clearance of the backlog over 10 years. However, that is not the last word as far as we are concerned. Work to update and improve further the modelling of estimates of affordable housing requirements is already under way—the very research that Murray Tosh asked for. I have said before that our current projections are not the last word. That is why we are undertaking work nationally and locally to inform the planning of future affordable housing supply beyond the current spending review period. We are working jointly with local authorities on that.

I will give way in a moment, but I have to make some progress. Karen Whitefield said that work on the numbers had to be related to funding. Of course, that will feed directly into the next spending review. A key feature of the debate related to the allocation of houses. Mary Scanlon raised the matter, although her figures were not the official  ones that I have for Argyll and Clyde, which are that 48 per cent of new lets and 39 per cent of all lets go to homeless households. However, of course there is an issue. Elaine Smith and Karen Whitefield talked about it, but Alex Fergusson was exaggerating when he said that there was no hope for people on the waiting list unless they were priority homeless. Currently, 23 per cent of all social rented lets in Scotland go to homeless people, although, of course, the figure is much higher in certain areas. Homeless people must be given reasonable preference when being allocated housing, but they are not the only category of people to be given such preference. Others who are given the same reasonable preference are people in housing that does not meet the tolerable standard, people who live in unsatisfactory housing conditions, people who have large families and people in overcrowded housing. I give way to Murray Tosh.

They certainly do in general terms, but more work is being done on the issue. I do not regard Bramley's work as the last word on the matter, although it was a useful and important contribution at the time. Many members raised the issue of the right to buy. Euan Robson said that the exemption to the right to buy in places that have been designated as having pressured area status has never been used, but I recently approved such a designation for East Renfrewshire Council and I know that several other local authorities are considering the possibility. Such designations, which were introduced under the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, are the way forward. We will publish a report on the right to buy next year, but I feel that there is already scope for action to be taken in areas that have a problem. Several members mentioned antisocial behaviour. We should remember that the number of people who applied as homeless last year after losing their previous tenancy because of antisocial behaviour was 220. That is a minuscule proportion of all homeless people. Antisocial behaviour is an important issue, but we must keep it in proportion. As Karen Whitefield reminded us, being tough on antisocial behaviour can sometimes prevent  evictions. Des McNulty also raised concerns about antisocial behaviour—we all sympathise with the four constituents to whom he referred. When the provisions in the 2003 act come into force, local authorities will be able to decide whether to offer a short secure tenancy or non-tenancy accommodation to people who become intentionally homeless as a result of antisocial behaviour or because they are subject to an ASBO. The non-tenancy option, which has been called bottom-line accommodation, will be coupled with appropriate support to help to end the underlying problems.

I think that the current period is adequate, but I will be happy to consider any more detailed points that Des McNulty wants to highlight. Euan Robson raised the issue of advice and information. Again, the provision of advice and information is a requirement under the 2001 act. Proactive advice and information that seeks to reach out to people before they reach a moment of crisis can be key in preventing the crisis from happening. I know that many local authorities are not only developing advice and information strategies but carefully considering what the best means might be for providing and disseminating that effectively. The Scottish national standards that are in place are designed to ensure that such advice and information is of good quality. Tommy Sheridan mentioned housing benefit problems. Local authority homelessness strategies must include standards for dealing with housing benefit claims and targets for improvement. It is not acceptable that a family should be threatened with homelessness as a result of failures in the administration of housing benefit. Section 12 of the 2003 act requires courts to take into account the impact of any such failure in rent arrears repossession cases. That section came into force in July last year. David Davidson raised points about the private sector. Increasing use of the private sector was emphasised in the consultation document. Discussion is also well advanced with private rural landowners about their role in the provision of affordable housing on private land that would not otherwise be available. Mary Scanlon raised points about the suspension of the local connection test. We will not place an unmanageable burden on local authorities as they work to meet already challenging targets; hence, we intend the  requirement for a local connection to be suspended, rather than abolished. The enabling legislation provides for a measured and sensible approach, including the option of reversing a suspension if any problems arise. A whole lot more could be said about homelessness prevention, which is a big agenda. We want local authorities to do more work on prevention. In the recent local authority projections for 2012, only one local authority factored in the impact of prevention. We are examining those forecasts seriously in the lead-up to the statement to the Parliament, but it is obvious that different local authorities have arrived at their projections by using different methodologies. Water was mentioned by several members, including Tricia Marwick, Donald Gorrie and David Davidson. However, Tricia Marwick was well wide of the mark in saying that there had been no ministerial intervention, given that Scottish Water has been given the specific objective of providing sufficient strategic water and sewerage capacity to enable all anticipated new housing developments between 2006 and 2014 to be connected to the public networks. If there was time, I could speak at length about the practical action that Scottish Water is taking in its investment programme, which will run from 2006 to 2014. On 3 October, for example, the Executive gave Scottish Water directions on investment that confirmed the investment requirements that it placed on Scottish Water for its next investment programme. Scottish Water has already started work on those with local authorities. It has been right for this debate to take place before a statement is made to the Parliament in a few weeks' time. As Euan Robson and Patrick Harvie said, homelessness is a phenomenon that should not occur in a modern society. I reiterate and make clear that the 2012 target is still the target. The abolition of priority need is about social justice. It is about fairness, equality and opportunity. It is about providing access for all to a fundamental right—the right to a safe, secure and affordable home. We must not and will not fail to deliver that right to the people of Scotland.

It is desirable that I make it absolutely clear at the start of the debate that there will be a statement before the end of this year and that this debate is part of the process that will feed into the statement.

There has been significant progress in achieving equality between women and men since the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 was passed by a Labour Government. However, we still have a long way to go, as women continue to experience discrimination and inequality in the workplace and in many other areas of life. The Westminster Parliament's Equality Bill attempts to address the issue. Subject to the consent of the Scottish Parliament, it offers the chance to introduce a new duty on Scottish public authorities to promote gender equality. The duty will mark a shift in the nature of gender equality legislation from compliance to proactivity. It is a pragmatic and proportionate duty with a focus on outcomes that will help us better to deliver more effective policies and services. It will drive the mainstreaming of gender equality across all activities of the public sector, which is a critical element in challenging discrimination and inaction. The Executive has been working hard with the Equal Opportunities Commission through our participation in a pilot project to develop gender action planning work in our Health Department. That work, which has been very positively received, will not only assist the EOC in preparing for the implementation of the duty but be of great assistance to us. Lessons are being learned and plans are being made. We welcome the opportunity to take this work forward as members of the Equal Opportunities Commission's United Kingdom and Scotland advisory groups on the gender duty. Scottish Ministers will make regulations for Scotland in relation to the specific duties. We are jointly consulting with the UK Government on what the specific duties that will assist public authorities to comply with the gender duty should be. There are many issues to consider if we are to deliver the new duty. After the consultation, we will have a clearer picture of those issues and challenges. At this stage, however, I would like to highlight the three key proposals for the specific duties: that public authorities must produce gender equality goals and schemes; that they must conduct  gender impact assessments to ensure that policies and services meet the needs of women and men; and that they must develop and publish a policy on developing equal pay arrangements. The third duty will include measures to ensure fair promotion and development opportunities as well as measures to tackle occupational segregation between women and men. There is a great deal that we can learn from the implementation of the parallel race equality duty and from the work that has taken place on the forthcoming disability equality duty. Public sector organisations are already engaged with the duty to promote race equality, and the gender duty will build on the progress that has been made. The Equality Bill will also establish the commission for equality and human rights. The proposed commission will, by March 2009, replace the Disability Rights Commission, the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Commission for Racial Equality. The remit for the proposed commission will cover England, Wales and Scotland. It will have three key functions, namely equality, human rights and good relations between communities. The proposed commission will fulfil all the promotion and enforcement of legislation roles for race, gender and disability that are currently undertaken by the three existing commissions. It will also undertake a promotion and enforcement role for the other equality strands of religion and belief, sexual orientation and age. In addition, the new commission will have a promotional role in respect of human rights. There may be occasions when it would make sense for the CEHR to operate in devolved areas. The Equality Bill will provide for that to happen only when the CEHR has the consent of the proposed Scottish human rights commission. The proposals for the CEHR and other measures in the bill were considered by the Equal Opportunities Committee on 13 September, when the committee took evidence from the equalities co-ordinating group. The group and stakeholders more generally broadly welcome the proposals that are contained in the bill. That said, I note the understandable concerns that the new commission should be established and operate in such a way that it fully takes account of the needs of Scotland. In conjunction with the equalities co-ordinating group and other stakeholders, ministers and officials in Scotland have been working hard with our Whitehall colleagues to ensure that the new organisation will meet the needs of modern Scotland. We will continue to work to ensure that that is achieved. In particular, I have raised with Meg Munn, the Westminster minister with responsibility for equalities, all the issues that  Cathy Peattie, as convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, wrote to me about. The motion focuses on the key benefits to Scotland that we believe will come from the introduction of a duty on public authorities to promote gender equality. I move, That the Parliament agrees the principles contained in the provisions of the Equality Bill, including the power to impose duties on public authorities, so far as those provisions relate to matters within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or confer functions on the Scottish Ministers, and agrees that those provisions should be considered by the UK Parliament.

Scottish Ministers approved the Fife structure plan in July 2002 with a modification that required the identification of a green belt around St Andrews and the boundaries to be defined in a local plan. Therefore, the exact definition of the green belt is a matter for Fife Council, as the planning authority.

As I said in my answer, the precise details of the green belt are for Fife Council, although there will be a local inquiry and the reporter will, no doubt, have a view as well. As Ted Brocklebank acknowledged, our role is to lay out the policy. An important Scottish planning policy was issued in the summer, which clarified the key objectives for green belts and acknowledged and emphasised the role that green belts can play in protecting and giving access to open space within and around towns and cities. I will highlight two features of that. First, the policy advocates a fundamental review of existing green belts, to ensure that they can accommodate growth over a 20-year period. In other words, we want a long-term view to be taken. Secondly, and crucially—this relates to our wider proposals for planning modernisation—the policy places a stronger emphasis on the development plan than was the case previously. It stresses that the establishment and review of the green belt should be carried out by local authorities through the development plan process. We have various new proposals for public involvement in that, which will mean that, in future, the public will have a stronger input into decisions about green belts.

The word "appropriate" is fundamental here. The other issue that I emphasise is the need to take a long-term view. There has been a tendency for incremental encroachment on the green belt. We want planning to be long term, and the new Scottish planning policy emphasises that and ensures that that will be the case.

We have a whole set of new proposals on development plans in our planning white paper. We consider development planning to be at the heart of the system. The new public engagement around that is a key feature of  our planning reforms. Our set of proposals will improve the existing situation. I cannot comment in detail on the proposals in Fife, particularly as they will be subject to a local inquiry. People will have a chance to express their views then.

Communities Scotland has been working with community planning partnerships, each of which has now developed a regeneration outcome agreement that will provide the basis for targeting the community regeneration fund and other resources. In the three years to 2008, the community regeneration fund will invest £318 million in deprived communities around Scotland.

Obviously decisions about which projects will be supported are a matter for the community planning partnerships. I know that Fife will get more than £6 million for such projects in the spending period and that projects will focus on key matters such as employability, improving health and building stronger and safer communities. The precise spending priorities will very much be decided through the community planning arrangements, although obviously Johann Lamont and I take a great interest in the regeneration outcome agreements and ensure that they are effective in meeting the priorities that have been set. If Marilyn Livingstone has particular concerns about projects, I would be pleased to take them up.

Within three years, we expect to fund 1,000 homestake houses a year across Scotland. That will make affordable housing available to many on low to modest incomes who aspire to home ownership. Homestake is a crucial part of our affordable housing investment programme, which will lead to the provision of more than 5,000 homes for low-cost home ownership and 16,500  homes for affordable rent over this and the next two years.

Homestake will benefit rural areas to a considerable extent. I note that 10 per cent of the units that are currently planned are in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. That will complement the money that already goes to investment in rural housing—£97 million, which is a record figure, is the rural share of the housing investment programme for this year. In general terms, the share of the investment that is going into rural areas is increasing. Homestake will be particularly attractive to those in rural areas; it will help first-time buyers and others.

When I launched the white paper in June this year, I said that it was our intention to reform the planning system from top to bottom and not merely to tinker with it. That is why the package of proposals in the white paper is so comprehensive, encompassing all parts of the planning system: the preparation of development plans; the processing of planning applications; appeals; inquiries; and enforcement. The package is not only comprehensive but far-reaching. The forthcoming planning bill will lay the foundations for the reforms but they will need to be taken forward in a raft of secondary legislation, circulars, guidance and advice notes. Some of the issues that are raised this afternoon will probably be more appropriately dealt with in one of those ways. The package contained within the white paper has been developed in response to a range of demands from different interests with varying perspectives, and a great deal of consultation and discussion was required to ensure that the proposals are robust and consistent with the objectives we have set for the planning system. In our partnership agreement we promised that we would implement reform to strengthen the involvement of local communities, speed up decisions, reflect local views better and allow quicker investment decisions. In summary, we are aiming to promote a more efficient planning system that facilitates the critical decisions essential for Scotland's continued growth, alongside enhanced opportunities for the public to participate in the policies, proposals and decisions that shape the environment in which they live and work. The white paper built on the programme of recent planning consultations to provide a reform package based on four key principles: first, developing a planning system fit for purpose, with a new hierarchy headed by an enhanced national planning framework; secondly, improving the efficiency of the planning system; thirdly, ensuring that all interests, including local people, are properly included in planning decisions; and fourthly, emphasising that development be socially, environmentally and economically sustainable. There is little point in putting effort into transforming and modernising the planning system unless that leads to better outcomes. Our reforms  must be aimed at facilitating better quality investment in public services, infrastructure, jobs and the regeneration of our communities. They must also ensure that where development is needed in our cities, towns, villages and countryside, it enhances the quality of the environment. As we said in the partnership agreement, our top priority is Scotland's economic growth and that growth must be sustainable. I wish to summarise briefly progress on the planning reform agenda since the launch of the white paper at the end of June. We knew that this complex package required further explanation and discussion with as many of those interested in or affected by the reforms as possible. Over the summer months, my ministerial colleagues, officials and I have engaged in an extensive programme of meetings and discussions with a variety of interests around the country. Councillors, council officers, community representatives, professional bodies and practitioners, business, environmental groups and members of the public have had the chance to hear our reasoning behind the white paper and to comment on it. Our approach has been to explain the package in an open-minded way and to listen to views about where either clarification or, indeed, a different approach might be considered. It has proved an extremely valuable exercise. The feedback from the many sessions will be considered alongside the written representations that we received in response to the white paper. I am pleased to say that we received more than 250 representations, many of which were detailed in their consideration of the issues that we raised. We have not yet had time to digest fully all the responses, but we will ensure that our final decisions on the content of the proposed planning bill and the accompanying package of reforms are based on a full and properly considered analysis of the representations that we received.

I do not have a figure at the moment, but when we have that information, I will write to Mike Rumbles with it. Some evident themes are already emerging from the consultations that we had over the summer and from the written submissions that we are now analysing. Perhaps the most important message to emerge is that there is broad support for the general thrust of the white paper's proposals. There is a recognition that the criticisms of the system that we have identified are, to a greater or lesser extent, justified, and that measures of the kind that we propose are needed to improve the way in which the system operates.

That is a rather simplistic analogy that does no justification whatsoever to the complexities of the argument. However, I will deal with that issue later, as will, I am sure, other members, such as Johann Lamont. I am also heartened by people's general feeling that we have sought to address the issues and concerns in a fundamental manner rather than tinker with the system. There are, of course, areas in which it is felt that we could have gone further, and there are points of disagreement and concern as well as areas on which more detail is required. I assure colleagues that we will continue to work through these issues with our stakeholders. In particular, there appears to be very wide support for the white paper's emphasis on enhancing the primacy and role of the development plan. Many welcomed proposals such as the statutory requirement on planning authorities to update their development plan every five years; simplifying the process for the preparation of a development plan with a single proposed plan; and the greater focus on scrutinising departures from the development plan. There was also broad support for our proposals to ensure that public participation in plan preparation is enhanced. I will say more about that in a moment. Moreover, there has been a general welcome for our concept of a hierarchy in planning, in which planning applications are treated in different ways according to their complexity and impact. There seems to be a recognition that it does not make sense for an application for a minor alteration to a single house to be subject to more or less the same planning procedure as an application for a major retail development or regional waste management facility. The new procedures that we propose for major developments have been welcomed, as has our intention to review permitted development rights at the minor end of the scale. There is also broad support for our proposal to give an enhanced role to the national planning  framework. I know that there are differing views on how the national planning framework should be prepared and adopted, and I will come to those in a moment. However, the underlying principle that at a national level there should be a more strategic and directional document that provides a general framework for the future development of Scotland has attracted support from interests across the spectrum. Central to the success of the package of measures that are outlined in the paper are the proposals to ensure better opportunities for local people to be involved in planning, to get their views across and to have them taken into account. There has so far been a broad welcome from all sides—

I will take an intervention in a moment. There has been a broad welcome from all sides for the many measures that we are proposing. There is a consensus that better public participation in development planning is essential. That will be secured by the neighbour notification of key proposals in the plan; the requirements to make the preparation and implementation of plans more transparent; the requirement on planning authorities to produce a statement on how they have consulted; the fact that the reporter will make a public assessment of the quality of the consultation that an authority has undertaken; the mandatory examination of plans where objections are not resolved; and the modernisation of inquiries to make them more accessible to the public. In development management, we will require far greater and more structured pre-application consultation with the local community and discussions with the planning authority. We have suggested categories in which that approach will be mandatory, but I am willing to consider extending them. I certainly think that that would be good practice in a wider range of planning applications. There will be a greater use of hearings to allow people to have their say. There will more transparency in the system, as authorities will be required to give reasons for approvals as well as for refusals. We should recognise that communities are already participating in planning issues.

I will take two interventions at the end of this section of my speech. It is encouraging to see that, in its first year, the community involvement category of the Scottish  awards for quality in planning has attracted 13 nominations, including both community-led and council-led projects. We need to build on the good practice that already exists to ensure that all community interests have the opportunity to participate in the planning decisions that affect their lives, and to do so in ways that are appropriate to them. A package of measures to support inclusion is proposed to accompany the planning bill. Those measures are: an awareness-raising campaign to explain the changes to the planning system and how people and communities can become involved; funding through the planning development budget to support planners and elected members in their engagement with communities; a pilot project on the use of mediation in planning; and the development of a common, integrated e-planning system for planning authorities. In addition, a planning advice note on community engagement will be prepared with the support of a range of stakeholders. It will provide advice on the new requirements for inclusion that are contained in the white paper; give practical guidance on approaches to community engagement; and highlight examples of best practice. Indeed, some of the projects in the community involvement category of the planning awards could have the potential to feature as examples of good practice in the planning advice note. I will take the two interventions now.

I would certainly support Brian Adam's suggestion in the interests of transparency.

As I said in last week's debate on affordable rented housing, local authorities can certainly designate land for  affordable housing. I accept that I undertook to look into other issues regarding the detailed implementation of such designations, and it is important that local authorities can make them. I am pleased that Highland Council, for example, has designated land for affordable housing in its latest local plan. I must now move on to the very important issue of enforcement. We acknowledge the difficulties that communities have faced. The white paper therefore proposes measures to encourage planning authorities to give enforcement a higher priority, with a requirement to produce an enforcement charter. It also proposes additions to the enforcement tools that authorities may deploy, such as higher fees for retrospective applications, the temporary stop notice and the introduction of start notices and progress notices, which are intended to aid monitoring. Further suggestions have emerged during the consultation process, and we are examining their viability. As members might expect, the responses have thrown up a range of questions. There are significant questions about institutional capacity to take on and implement the changes that are required. Do we have the right levels of resources and skills and the appropriate recruitment and retention frameworks to ensure that the right people are in place to deliver the new system? What system of monitoring and audit is required to ensure that planning authorities are encouraged and supported in meeting their targets or in improving their performance more generally? We will work with planning authorities and others to ensure that the capacity of the system to deliver is maximised. Provisions on the assessment of planning authority performance should provide the public with confidence that performance will be monitored and that action will be taken to make improvements wherever they are needed. We will be providing more detail about the role that we expect Parliament to play in shaping the national planning framework. Suggestions have emerged during the consultation process. We are less attracted to the idea that the national planning framework should be subject to an independent review—for example by a reporter—than to the idea that Parliament's role should involve helping to shape the framework from the outset, rather than just reacting to a near-finished product. Whatever processes are adopted, they will be nothing like the power grab of which a few have accused us. When the planning bill is introduced, we will be able to set out in greater detail the significance of including national projects in the national planning framework and the implications for their processing. When the view of that is clearer, I expect many of the concerns that have been expressed to be allayed.

I will give way.

We have certainly made progress, but Patrick Harvie will have to wait a little longer for the final resolution of that. I thought that Patrick Harvie would ask about nuclear power stations, which I shall mention since he repeated at the weekend the idea that our proposals would affect the approval or rejection of nuclear power stations. I repeat—I do not know how many times I have said it—that none of our planning proposals will in any way affect any planning applications for nuclear power stations if such applications emerge, although it is well-known that the Executive does not support that in advance of successful resolution of the nuclear waste issue. Am I running out of time?

Okay. No one will be surprised that some who welcome the many proposals to improve public participation in the planning system still call for the introduction of some form of rights of appeal for third parties. The white paper contains a package of proposals that is designed to balance the many interests that are involved in the planning system. The thrust of our proposals is to enhance public participation at the front end of decision making in the development plan process and in development management. We acknowledge that arguments still exist over whether that balance is precisely right. As we said at the white paper's launch, we are committed to engaging in that debate as Parliament reaches conclusions on the provisions that are to be included in the proposed planning bill. I have been heartened by the response to the white paper. We have the basis for a powerful programme of change and I look forward to hearing views from around the chamber. I am sure that many interesting speeches will be made.

The new pension rules that will be introduced from April 2006 are reserved to the United Kingdom Government. If there should be any evidence of the changes having a negative impact on the Scottish housing market—in the Highlands and Islands or anywhere else—the Executive will raise any concerns with the UK Government.

Obviously, we will keep an eye on it. However, the regulatory impact assessment of the policy concluded that there is unlikely to be a significant inflow of pension capital into residential property. It proposed that the consequences of investing in self-invested personal pensions will mean that, for most people, residential property will not be an appropriate investment and that the impact of the changes is likely to be small.  I remind Jim Mather and others that at the moment around 200,000 people hold specialised registered pension funds including self-invested personal pensions. I also remind him that more than 15 million people hold ordinary pensions and that most of them can invest in residential property via those pensions. It is correct to say that the changes will increase the number of pension funds that can potentially invest in residential property because the restriction on SIPPs will be lifted. However, we are talking about a very small proportion of people; currently, 1.3 per cent of the total number of investors can purchase residential property as part of their pension funds

I congratulate John Home Robertson on securing and introducing what I think has been one of the best debates that I have sat through in all the years of the Scottish Parliament.  I am passionately and open-mindedly committed to increasing the supply of affordable housing, including affordable to rent and affordable to buy housing. I say open-mindedly quite deliberately, as I have found tonight's debate very interesting. I shall read over it with care and I shall take on board and reflect on many of the interesting points that have been made. There is no one solution to the problem—or even just six or 10 solutions—so we need a jigsaw of policies to deal with it. If the Executive has not yet put parts of the jigsaw into place, I am more than happy to seek them out and put them in place.

I might in a moment, but I need to make progress. I am quite willing to challenge anyone—including Gordon Brown—if I think that they are stopping our policies, but I must say that Fergus Ewing has lost perspective on the chancellor's pension proposals. I do not believe that they will have the effect that Fergus Ewing suggested. Let me summarise what we are doing before I move on, in the second part of my speech, to planning. Our big programme for affordable rented housing will provide 16,500 homes over the next three years. That is the highest level of new provision for a generation. This year, our overall affordable housing investment programme will receive more than £400 million, which is a 23 per cent increase on last year. On low-cost home ownership, other members have mentioned the homestake scheme, which I launched last week. Homestake will help in particular first-time buyers and people on low incomes who are unable to pay the full price of a property. I can reassure Maureen Macmillan that an advantage of the scheme is that it provides a mechanism that allows registered social landlords to retain a golden share of properties in pressured areas so that affordable housing is not lost from the affordable sector. An important point is that homestake is overwhelmingly about new build. Given that several speakers are from Edinburgh and the Lothians, I should say that we are piloting in the Lothians a slightly different version of homestake that will run alongside the Scotland-wide scheme. The pilot will allow successful applicants to buy a home on the open market. However, there are many other parts to housing policy. Prudential borrowing, which John Home Robertson mentioned, is available to many councils. Community ownership will help significantly in tackling the issues in Edinburgh that Sarah Boyack and Susan Deacon mentioned.  Another issue is the additional income from reduced council tax discounts, but that has not been mentioned. We also have the amended right to buy. I have just received an application from East Renfrewshire Council, on which I hope to give a view very soon. If local authorities feel that they have a problem with the right to buy and the availability of affordable rented housing in their areas, they should use the powers that enable them to apply for an exemption. It seems to me that enabling local solutions to that problem was a wise move by the Scottish Executive. Before I move on to planning, I shall take Murray Tosh's intervention.

The current three-year target is obviously more than the previous target, at 21,500, but that was based on the evidence of Bramley and others and on local authority housing assessments. We remain committed to further improvement of the evidence base, and work is under way to improve the quality and consistency of local housing assessments. Of course, there are other land issues apart from planning. Forestry Commission land has been mentioned and there is a land banking scheme in the Highlands that I wanted to refer to. I can also tell Sarah Boyack something that is quite significant in relation to what she said about public sector land: we are considering the results of a recent consultation on new regulations, under the Local Government in Scotland Act 2003, to streamline the consents process for the disposal by local authorities of land at less than market price. That certainly goes some way to answering her point on public sector land. I shall move on to planning, because time is vanishing at an alarming rate. I want to talk mainly about PAN 74, but I remind members of SPP 3, on planning for housing, which requires planning authorities to meet the need for housing within their areas, encourages them to take a long-term view when allocating land for new housing through their development plans, and indicates in general terms how the planning system can support the delivery of affordable housing. The revised draft SPP 21, on green belts, which was issued this summer, is intended to reiterate that guidance and to encourage a long-term view to be taken of the need for land for development. The draft SPP 21  encourages use of green belts and of tools of long-term settlement planning, and encourages a review of existing boundaries. However, it is PAN 74 that has mainly been referred to, and it addresses the points raised by Murray Tosh, John Home Robertson and others about designating land for affordable housing. The key role of the PAN is to establish a benchmark in local authority areas where there is evidence of a shortage of affordable housing of 25 per cent of the units on market housing sites being made available for the provision of affordable housing for sale or rent.

The reality is that PAN 74 is delivering. Authorities such as City of Edinburgh Council have been using the affordable housing contributions for some time. When I visited Inverness last week, councillors there were praising PAN 74 for offering them many new opportunities to develop affordable housing. PAN 74 urges developers to work with housing associations to deliver affordable housing as part of market housing developments. Where a relevant policy has been included in the development plan, developers will be expected to make a proportion of housing on each new site available for affordable housing. The land for affordable housing may be sold to a registered social landlord for development, in which case it must be transferred at below market value. In response to Murray Tosh's point, I should also say that PAN 74 indicates the possibility that planning authorities can make interim policies for affordable housing when development plan review is not imminent. PAN 74 indicates that, in preparing development plans, local authorities can influence the delivery of affordable homes by allocating sites specifically for affordable housing. When I was in the Highlands last week, I was told that Highland Council has recently used that approach, allocating land for affordable housing in its finalised draft local plan for Wester Ross. John Home Robertson thought that he was going too far when he suggested compulsory purchase, but when a planning authority wishes to play an active role in prioritising the delivery of affordable housing on allocated sites, it can make use of compulsory purchase powers to acquire land allocated for affordable housing.

I am happy to consider the points raised by Murray Tosh—he might be about to make another one now. As I said at the beginning of the debate, I am happy to consider his points and other suggestions that have been made so that we can improve the way in which the system works. The fundamental point that I am making is that a designation of land for affordable housing can already be made. It may be that we need to get better at implementing such a designation.

I do not think that we can change the planning bill in that way at such short notice, but I accept that compulsory purchase may well have to be considered in another context. I am well over my time already and I have not had time to address several other points that were raised. In conclusion, I am happy to consider all the points that have been made and to establish what other actions can be taken through the planning system or in housing investment to address the problems that have been eloquently described. I am passionately committed to securing an increase in the supply of affordable housing by whatever means are at my disposal and I thank members for all the suggestions that they have made.  Meeting closed at 18:06.

I start by congratulating the Green party on introducing today's debate and I join Robin Harper and Bill Butler in paying tribute to the students from Drumchapel High School—I was pleased to speak to them before the debate. We should all congratulate them and wish them success in their campaign. We were all moved by what they told us and they have been a great force for good on this issue. Schools are at the heart of preparing young people to live in a multicultural and inclusive society. Having asylum-seeker children attend our schools is not just a positive experience for asylum seekers but for all the children in that school.

In a moment. The positive and harmonious relations in Drumchapel and elsewhere are a standing rebuke to the scandalous negative images of asylum seekers that are so prevalent in the media and elsewhere and that are so damaging to asylum seekers and refugees, to ethnic minority communities more generally and to the vigorous anti-racist policy that we are determined to pursue, all the more urgently after the appalling increase in race-hate crimes over the summer. I give way to whichever member it was.

It is absolutely appalling. I referred to the positive and harmonious relations between asylum seekers and others in the school, if that was the starting point for the intervention. We are determined to send out positive  messages about asylum seekers and refugees in Scotland. However, that is not enough, which is why we are determined to pursue practical action. We must recognise the realities of the split between reserved and devolved powers in this area, and, having spoken out openly against the voucher system when I had responsibility for those matters as Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, I will not take lectures from the SNP about challenging Westminster. The SNP and others must recognise the realities of what we can do and those issues about which we can only express our views and make representations. I refer the SNP and others to the key words in the amendment, which are that we will "continue discussions". I have already discussed this and other matters with the immigration minister, Tony McNulty. I have already conveyed to the Home Office the widespread concerns, but I will reinforce those following the views eloquently expressed in the debate. In practical terms, I will discuss this with a view to an agreement that the Home Office will work closely with services for children and young people. That is the practical objective around this specific issue. Within the powers that we have, we are willing to engage with the Westminster Government. However, over and above that, we have our own widespread responsibilities to asylum seekers and refugees, which is why two or three years ago we formed the Scottish refugee integration forum and we had a wide-ranging action plan, which we are implementing and monitoring on an on-going basis; £9 million is being spent on that. There are far too many projects to mention, many of which work with young people. Operation reclaim in Sighthill in Glasgow, for example, provides asylum seekers and indigenous Scottish children with a safe environment in which to play sport and form friendships. Many other projects and initiatives are being funded, for example the frontline housing advisory service, which is run by Positive Action in Housing. I mention Positive Action in Housing because of the major role that it has played in this area in general and in the Vucaj family campaign in particular. I shall be chairing a reconvened Scottish refugee integration forum very soon and will be updating the action plan. We are taking strong action in devolved areas. We are sending out and will continue to send out positive messages about asylum seekers as part of our anti-racist work. We shall also engage constructively with the Westminster Government.

The planning white paper, which was published in June 2005, proposes a comprehensive modernisation of the planning system. The proposals will make the determination of planning applications for development more  efficient, which in turn will assist with the provision of affordable housing.

Planning advice note 74 on affordable housing, which was published in March this year, provides detailed advice on ways in which planning authorities can support the delivery of affordable housing and emphasises that that must be done through the development plan, taking account of the local housing strategy. As part of that, planning authorities can specifically allocate sites for affordable housing within the development plan. It is open to the planning authority to prepare supplementary guidance in the form of a development brief for a housing site, setting out the type of development that is sought for the site and requiring the involvement of a registered social landlord.

I do not think that a separate use class is required, because, as Murray Tosh would know if he had listened to my first answer, that matter is already dealt with under PAN 74. Obviously, there are still issues about the price of land. Communities Scotland has a bigger budget this year than it has had for many years for distributing to housing associations. There has also been a separate fund to buy land. The other important development, through PAN 74, is the support of mixed housing developments and the possibility in pressured areas for the local authority, if it so wishes, to have 25 per cent of a private development designated as affordable housing. That, of course, helps to deal with the issue of land prices for registered social landlords in pressured areas.

I remind Mike Pringle and others of the existing policy, which is outlined in an act passed by the Parliament: as from 2002, where there is a pressured area, the local authority can apply for an exemption from the right to buy for tenancies. As was highlighted this morning in the media, East Renfrewshire Council and other local authorities have done that. The provision enabling local authorities with specific difficulties to do that is an important part of the housing legislation that the Parliament passed a few years ago. Looking to the future, we are committed by the same act of Parliament to make a report to the Parliament on the effect of the right to buy by September next year, which we will do. We have good provisions in place for those who feel that they are under local pressure.

I do not think that we need legislation to do that. We need two things. First, we need money. The investment has been provided—Lewis Macdonald announced it earlier in the summer when he was Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development. The second thing, of course, is to ensure that there is proper co-ordination between the housing plans of local agencies and the investment plans of Scottish Water. I accept that there is still more to be done to ensure that that happens effectively. However, that, rather than new legislation, should be the focus of our collective attention.

We are in discussion with the Scottish Executive fuel poverty forum about the future of the central heating programme and the warm deal and will soon discuss our proposed approach with a wider group of stakeholders.

We will certainly take action on the front that Shiona Baird flags up. Fuel poverty is a complex issue that involves several factors. She is right to remind us of the great progress that was made on fuel poverty in the late 1990s and into the new millennium. The proportion  of people who are in fuel poverty fell from 35 per cent to 13 per cent in six years. We do not have up-to-date figures, but the situation will be better than that now. We know that movements in the wholesale markets are putting energy companies under considerable pressure. Notwithstanding that, we expect companies to make every effort to ensure that their most vulnerable customers are not unfairly affected by any price increases. I am glad that some schemes are in place for that, although we must examine in more detail the new arrangements that were announced recently. It is important that energy companies protect their most vulnerable customers—that is the key way in which they can deal with prices. However, we will of course take action on the front that Shiona Baird highlighted.

The problems that relate to the oil price have been discussed at First Minister's question time and elsewhere. As I said in my last answer, we expect action to be taken to protect vulnerable customers in that situation. The nature of fuels will be considered and I will look into the point that Richard Lochhead has made.

I want to examine in more detail the new scheme that Scottish Gas announced for its vulnerable customers. We should remember that it has an existing scheme under which the recent price increase will not affect pensioners who are on pension credit. We should welcome that protection for those people, but I will examine in detail what Scottish Gas proposes over and above that for other vulnerable customers.

This has been a good and wide-ranging debate. Nicol Stephen started by outlining some of what we have achieved so far and how we will take action to maintain and build on that momentum by promoting renewables, capital investment and investment in people and skills and by cutting bureaucracy and red tape. First and foremost, I want to talk about how we connect economic growth with the prosperity and well-being of everyone, especially those who may be left behind because of who they are or where they live. It is vital that we have growth and prosperity so that we can close the opportunity gap. Providing routes out of poverty and ensuring equal opportunities can contribute, in turn, to further growth and prosperity. We have made good progress in tackling low-income poverty in Scotland in partnership with the UK Government. For example, 100,000 children and 100,000 pensioners have been lifted out of relative poverty. Of course, there is much more to do—we need to tackle poverty in its widest sense. Our approach of closing the opportunity gap focuses on where we can make the biggest difference to poverty and deprivation within our devolved powers. That means that we bring together our efforts to improve people's health: ensuring that children have a good start in life; supporting young people to help them to achieve everything that they can at school and to assist them in the transition to adult life; and ensuring that everyone has access to the financial services that they need to avoid unmanageable debt. That also drives us to ensure that we have strong, regenerated communities with access to good-quality housing that is warm and affordable. For many people, the route out of poverty means increasing their chances of sustained employment, perhaps through boosting their skills and confidence or through other kinds of support to overcome health problems, to find flexible and affordable child care or to manage household finances in the transition to employment. We are working on all those issues and starting to see good results, for example through our working for families programme, which supports parents with child care so that they can improve their position at work or get extra training and qualifications. That shows how our aims for the economy and our aspirations to close the opportunity gap for individuals go hand in hand.

I point out to Fergus Ewing that I have never before read out from a pre-prepared text for a closing speech. This is a slightly different kind of debate, in which I have to add extra dimensions from my portfolio, emphasising that the debate is about growth for a purpose and growth and prosperity for all. We are completing an employability framework for Scotland, which deals with the issue of economic activity, which Jim Mather highlighted, and with the not in education, employment or training group—the NEET group—which Christine Grahame highlighted. I am also driving forward an important piece of work on race equality and employment to tackle the inequalities that exist for ethnic minorities in the Scottish labour market. Our approach is all about creating the conditions in which economic opportunities can be realised and exploited to generate growth. It is also about ensuring that such opportunities deliver real benefits for the most deprived neighbourhoods in Scotland, joining up opportunity and need. If we are to succeed in that, we must work to tackle the multiple needs of the most disadvantaged neighbourhoods so that they are better able to take advantage of opportunity and participate in growth. One key way of achieving that is through the community regeneration fund—a single integrated fund worth more than £318 million—which will support strategic and sustained intervention in the most disadvantaged communities. Over the next month or so, I hope to complete the process of approving outcome agreements for the three years to 2008 for every community planning partnership in Scotland. In the autumn, we intend to publish a wide-ranging policy statement on regeneration to stimulate a broad debate on the way ahead. In our partnership agreement, we promised to reform the planning system to strengthen the involvement of communities, to speed up decisions, to better reflect local views and to allow quicker investment decisions. The ambitious and wide-ranging package of reforms that we have put forward in the white paper, "Modernising the Planning System", will achieve that and more. We will deliver a planning system that is fit for the 21 st century and that is better, fairer and more balanced. I have already said in the Parliament that it is our intention to reform the planning system, not tinker with it. We want a plan-led system that really works. That means a system that delivers the right  kind of growth: smart and sustainable growth, bringing investment and jobs, together with essential infrastructure, housing, schools and hospitals. It means a system that regenerates communities and listens to what local people say about the impact on their lives and environment. That is why we are proposing a planning system with a new hierarchy headed by an enhanced national planning framework, with a range of measures to improve the efficiency of the planning system and the effectiveness of enforcement; radical initiatives to ensure that all interests, including those of local people, are properly included in planning decisions; and an approach that emphasises that development must be sustainable, as Shiona Baird rightly emphasised, in social, environmental and economic terms. Do I have one or two minutes left, Presiding Officer?

That is even better. The efficiencies that planning reforms can deliver will have a positive effect on the delivery of new housing, which John Home Robertson emphasised. That includes affordable housing to help build our communities and maintain a strong, prosperous Scotland. Improved development plans, together with good-quality, up-to-date local housing strategies, should ensure that councils use the planning system effectively to meet housing need successfully over the longer term. John Swinney reminded us of the water constraint that has bedevilled housing development in recent years, but that has of course been dealt with by the announcement before the summer of a massive investment programme. We are undertaking a range of actions to help meet the aspirations in our communities. Many people aspire to be homeowners, and I know how difficult it can be for first-time buyers to get on to the property ladder. Earlier this year, we announced the homestake scheme to ease access into home ownership for those who aspire to own, but find that market prices are often beyond their reach. We are now almost halfway through the first year of the Executive's improved three-year investment programme for affordable housing. That will provide more than 16,500 homes for affordable rent and nearly 5,000 homes for low-cost home ownership by 2008. We have seen some of the key political dividing lines in today's debate. First the Tories, through Murdo Fraser, restated their obsession with slashing the public sector rather than releasing cash savings in the public sector to reinvest in the front line as we are doing. John Swinney reminded us of the Tories' dismal record on growth in the 1980s and 1990s, which contrasts with growth  today; Scotland is outstripping France, Germany and the euro zone, as Wendy Alexander reminded us, and more people are in work in Scotland today than in 23 of the 25 European countries. As for the SNP, again we saw Jim Mather being obsessed with more powers for this Parliament rather than with doing the right and best thing with the powers that we have. That is what we are doing to achieve growth with a purpose and enhance prosperity for all. That is what we are doing throughout the legislative programme, and I commend it to the chamber.

Sustainable development is at the heart of our proposals to modernise the planning system, as our white paper makes clear. A key way of doing that will be to ensure that sustainability considerations are taken into account in the preparation of all plans and programmes, from the national planning framework through to local development plans.

The white paper emphasises the central importance of planning for sustainable development and we are considering how that can be translated specifically into words in legislation. However, the substance of the matter is the critical issue. If people read the white paper with any care, they will see that it puts strong emphasis on sustainable development in relation to all development plans, including the national planning framework. A strategic environmental assessment will be carried out for all plans and there will be statutory consultees, including the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Natural Heritage. Also, it is  proposed that if an environmental impact assessment is required for individual planning applications, pre-application consultation will have to take place with local communities and enhanced scrutiny, including hearings, will be required. That comprehensive package of measures will ensure that sustainable development is at the heart of the planning system.

I am pleased to announce the publication today of the Executive's white paper "modernising the planning system", which follows a series of consultations and policy statements on planning and which will be the final publication on the issue before the introduction of a planning bill later in this parliamentary session. The proposals that are set out in the white paper fulfil the Executive's commitment to reform the planning system "to strengthen involvement of communities, speed up decisions, reflect local views better, and allow quicker investment decisions." I believe that we will achieve that and more through the exciting, ambitious and wide-ranging set of reforms that we are unveiling today. The reforms will deliver a planning system that is fit for the 21 st century and one that is better, fairer and more balanced. Most members accept that planning matters. The way in which the planning system balances the various interests of development, the environment and social justice will determine how Scotland looks in the future. Planning is a critical tool for creating the dynamic, forward-looking and confident nation to which we all aspire. The planning system also provides a framework and process for local people to have their say in how their communities evolve, which is an essential part of the challenge that faces the Executive. Too many people who are affected by development feel that the planning system is inaccessible and that their views are often ignored. I am determined to put that right and to ensure that environmental concerns are put at the heart of the planning system. Too often in the past, planning has been regarded in crude terms as either a bureaucratic and negative process, a brake on growth and a block to investment; or, alternatively, a tool for selfish developers to use to ride roughshod over local people's views. I want to reform the planning system, not tinker with it. I want a system that delivers the right kind of growth, which is smart and sustainable growth; a system for investment in jobs, essential infrastructure and housing, schools and hospitals; a system that regenerates  communities; and a system that listens to what local people say about the impact on their lives and environment. However, that cannot happen without a modernised planning system that is reformed from top to bottom. The current system does not meet our ambitions for a prosperous and sustainable Scotland, nor does it command the confidence of the public. That must change and I propose to ensure that it does. Although development plans have been at the heart of the current system for more than a decade, many of them are out of date. In fact, more than 75 per cent of local plans are more than five years old and more than half are at least 10 years old. That cannot continue. Local authority performance on processing applications also tends to be below published targets. Further, there is anecdotal evidence that far too much time and resource is taken up with small, minor applications, rather than with consideration of the major applications that deliver jobs, homes or public services. Let me be clear: I do not blame local authorities for the ills of the planning system. Many planning authorities do a good job under difficult circumstances and there are many examples throughout Scotland of high-quality, sustainable development that enhances the local environment. Our challenge is to ensure that the system that we introduce builds on the best practice throughout Scotland. One major problem is that the planning system is too complex and does not have a clear sense of how it should respond to the different demands that are placed on it. Our white paper proposes new procedures for dealing differently with developments depending on whether they are of national, major, local or minor significance. That will ensure that there is a clearer sense of what the planning system is for; that decision making takes place at the appropriate level; and that we can introduce specific measures to consider people's views at each level in the new system and to assess the environmental impacts. Our proposals to deal effectively with developments of national significance have been comprehensively misrepresented. We propose a sensible measure to ensure that the national planning framework plays a greater role in mapping out the key policies, strategies and developments that Scotland needs. Environmental groups and others have advocated such a proposal. The national planning framework will be drawn up through extensive consultation with stakeholders, subject to a strategic environmental assessment and decided on at the national level by the Executive, with the full involvement of the Parliament. However, giving the national planning framework an enhanced status will not automatically mean that developments will occur in specific locations. Development plans will  continue to be the main vehicle for debating the location, design and impact of specific proposals, with—as now—an important role for public examination and extensive environmental impact assessments. The white paper also makes sensible provision to distinguish between developments of major, local and minor significance. A small proportion of applications each year will be treated as major applications and, for the first time, special procedures will be put in place to ensure that they are processed with the efficiency that their potential impact on local economic opportunities and job creation merits. Many local applications will be devolved to the local level. Planning officers will be able to take decisions on relatively straightforward cases. Appeals against refusals by officers should be decided locally by the elected members, rather than by reporters. That radical and innovative reform will mean that, where decisions have been delegated to planning officers, elected members will rightly have the final say, bar any recourse to the courts. Those reforms, along with our intended examination of the scope for removing many householder applications from the planning system altogether, will rationalise and simplify a system that has become too complex and unwieldy. Our proposals will enable local authorities to allocate resources in a more focused way to the applications that need them most and to other matters such as enforcement. The bedrock of our reforms will be the revitalisation of development plans. The development plan process is still the best way in which to reflect local people's views and provide opportunities for them to shape and contribute to the vision for their area while proposals are still on the drawing board. Moreover, all development plans will be subject to strategic environmental assessment to ensure that the environmental impact of development is central to the vision of an area. We will require development plans to be updated every five years and responsibilities will be identified for the timing of the plans and implementation of their policies. We will also reduce the complexity of the system by requiring only one tier of development plan for most of Scotland, with strategic development plans only for the four largest city regions. Plans should be simpler and more accessible with clearly identified commitments to listen to local people, which will ensure that their views are taken into account fairly, fully and properly. When our new system is in place, it will be easier for all applications to be assessed on their fit with the development plan, which will ensure that the system is more predictable and transparent. That will also make the planning system more efficient, as decisions will be taken quickly on the basis of  their compatibility with the development plan. We will also increase the use of e-planning, improve the way in which planning agreements are concluded and introduce standard planning application forms. A planning system that is fit for purpose and more efficient is only half the picture. I strongly believe that our reforms will have failed if we do not make the system fairer, more inclusive and more transparent. I am therefore announcing today a raft of reforms to make the planning system more inclusive and better able to respond to environmental concerns. As I said, the revitalisation of development plans is the best way in which local people can feed in their views about the way in which their community should develop. For individual development plans, key proposals should be communicated directly to the local people whom the plans potentially affect. That reform will ensure that local people are aware of the plans at the earliest possible stage. Subsequently, during the development plan process, people will be able to make their views on the proposals known and then participate in a transparent and predictable decision-making process. The white paper also proposes that local plan inquiries should be made more accessible for local people, so that they feel better able to participate in that critical stage of the plan adoption process. Finally, to ensure that the measures are fully implemented, the quality of public engagement with development plans will be assessed and reported to ministers. That will enable ministers to ensure that all the procedures are followed properly and that local people have every opportunity to feed their views into the drafting of development plans. The measures will be greatly assisted by improved communication. The white paper proposes a new planning advice note to share best practice on how planning authorities in Scotland should involve local people in the system. That will be supported by a new information campaign to inform people about changes to the planning system and tell them how they will be more involved. The white paper sets out measures to guarantee local people more rights in statute to express their views on individual applications. For the first time, there will be statutory obligations on applicants to conduct pre-application discussions where applications significantly depart from the development plan or where an environmental impact assessment is required. The white paper proposes more frequent use of hearings before planning authorities take their decisions so that local people can put across their views directly, and it proposes that planning authorities should be required to give reasons for all their decisions and  to notify all individuals who have expressed an interest. I intend to extend the requirement to notify ministers of cases that are significantly contrary to the development plan. The fact that ministers are not satisfied with the level of engagement will be a reason for applications being called in for determination by ministers. That will ensure for the first time that developments will not happen if the views of local people have not been properly listened to. The white paper sets out reforms to bring new fairness to the planning system by ensuring that ill-founded appeals do not clog up the system and by restricting the grounds for all appeals. Those reforms will address the concern that applicants have an unfettered right of appeal whereas local people have no right of appeal. The white paper also proposes reforms to enhance the powers that are available to local authorities to enforce planning decisions. Those powers are an essential part of the planning system and ensure that people can have confidence in decisions that are reached fairly, openly and with maximum levels of public participation. I want planning authorities to adopt a more proactive approach to enforcement, to discourage unauthorised development and breaches of planning control, and to deal quickly, efficiently and rigorously with breaches that occur. Among the measures that I am announcing today to enhance planning enforcement provisions is the proposal that developers should notify local authorities when they are about to start development work so that local authorities can monitor on-going progress more closely. I also propose that local authorities should be able to impose temporary stop notices to allow them to stop development immediately where there has been a breach of planning control. Furthermore, I propose that all local authorities should produce enforcement charters to allow members of the public to know what powers local authorities have and how they intend to use them. I recognise that enforcement is a matter of great concern to local people. We will therefore keep the effectiveness of the measures under review. I call on all planning authorities to prioritise future resources for enforcement as part of reallocation exercises linked to the implementation of the package of reforms, and I do not rule out even bolder measures in the future if we are unable to make significant headway on enforcing planning decisions in the coming months and years. In the light of our proposals to ensure more fairness and balance and greater involvement in the new planning system, our white paper does not propose a third-party right of appeal. Our aim is to strengthen the participation of local people from the outset of the process in order to make the  system fairer and more balanced; to avoid building new delays and unpredictability into the system, which could add costs to development and act as a deterrent to investment in sustainable growth; and to strengthen rather than undermine local authority decision making. I hope that everyone in the chamber and throughout Scotland will consider the package of reforms as a whole and consider their views on issues such as rights of appeal in the light of the proposals. In conclusion, the reforms will promote the Executive's top priority of delivering the sustainable growth that Scotland needs. They will bring investment in jobs, housing, schools and hospitals and will regenerate communities. They will devolve decisions and appeals to local authorities wherever that is possible and will ensure that there is a planning system that is based on up-to-date, relevant and accessible development plans that have been drawn up with the full participation of local people and with full assessment of their environmental impacts. The reforms will, for the first time, guarantee local people their right to make their voices heard while proposals are still on the drawing board. The reforms will encourage debate, engagement and dialogue rather than confrontation and frustration and will ensure for the first time that listening to the views of local people is central to the development process. Above all, the package of reforms will deliver a fairer and more balanced system that is fit for purpose in 21 st century Scotland and a system that Scotland urgently needs. I commend it to the Parliament.

I welcome Christine Grahame's acknowledgement of the progress that we have made on development plans. In my statement, I emphasised that national developments will involve full consultation with all the relevant stakeholders, as well as the wider public, and the full involvement of the Parliament. More detailed information will be available once further work has been done on that. It is a complex question. The important thing that I am stating today is that there will be the full involvement of the Parliament in that process. That is a major issue and I have been keen to ensure that the Parliament is fully involved in discussing, debating and having input into it. National developments are one of the issues that people have been concerned about, and our views on the proposal have been misrepresented. The environmental interests have asked that the national planning framework be given an enhanced status, and we are ensuring that it will have a central status in matters with major strategic implications. Nuclear power stations will not be in the national planning framework. I have made it clear on more than one occasion in the Parliament that the arrangements for nuclear power stations are not affected by the proposals in the white paper. That they are is one of the misrepresentations that was put about following the leak of a certain document.

The white paper is not the only document that is relevant to planning. A revised national renewable energy planning policy statement will be issued soon, which will deal with wind farms as well as renewable energy more generally. In general terms, for major developments, local communities will have the new rights that I have talked about. They will have the right to pre-application consultation in the case of a major development and, as I have said, in the case of developments that are against the development plan, there will be new rights for hearings and enhanced scrutiny. Those rights will be guaranteed in relation to any developments of major significance.

As I have said, I believe that revitalising development plans will be the best way in which to maximise local people's opportunities to feed in their views about how their community will develop. The white paper sets out a range of proposals that will greatly increase local people's opportunities to participate in making those plans. I also propose a series of far-reaching new measures to guarantee local people more rights to express their views on individual applications. I touched on some of those a moment ago, in replying to Mary Scanlon's question. I do not doubt that, when the bill is introduced, people will debate the extent to which those rights can be adjusted and I am open-minded about that. The key principle that is being enunciated today is that, for the first time, the public will be involved at an early stage in relation to development planning and a wide range of planning applications. Of course, I acknowledge that the option of introducing a third-party right of appeal will continue to be the subject of debate as people take a view on the effectiveness of the proposals that are set out in the white paper. I assure Donald Gorrie that the Executive is committed to engaging in that debate as Parliament reaches conclusions on the provisions to be included in a planning bill.

I thank Sarah Boyack for her comments. I am pleased by her support for the requirement for up-to-date development plans. I will certainly be pleased to debate the wide range of issues that we are discussing today. I am sure that planning rights at the application stage will be discussed during that debate and I have already indicated that I am happy to enter into discussions about the details of that. Sarah Boyack's third point related to notification to the Scottish Executive. It is a new feature that any proposal that is significantly contrary to the development plan will be automatically notified to the Executive by the local authority. That ought to answer her concern. She raised the issue of wider rights of notification, but there are some problems with that proposal and what we propose will have the same effect that she seeks.

There are different views on the third-party right of appeal among the public, in the Scottish National Party and, I do not doubt, in other parties. I have given great attention to the matter. The call for a third-party right of appeal indicates that the current system is not working well, and I agree with that view. However, is bolting on something at the end of an unreformed process the right way to deal with a malfunctioning system, or do we need to take a more radical  approach that modernises the system from top to bottom and from beginning to end? My emphasis is on involving communities at an early stage and that is the emphasis of the white paper. As I said in my reply to Donald Gorrie, I know that the debate will continue.

I will deal with those points in reverse order. I agree with what Karen Whitefield said about cumulative effect, which she has talked to me about before. The matter will be taken on board in various Scottish planning policies. We are determined to deal with breaches quickly, efficiently and rigorously. The white paper outlines a series of measures, of which I mentioned only three in my statement. I left things open because we are determined to make progress on enforcement. We think that we have a series of bold, new initiatives, but we will assess how effective they are. We are certainly prepared to be open-minded if more needs to be done. It will be a statutory requirement that development plans must be updated every five years. That is a big change. In addition, the nature of the plans will be reformed so that the public can be more involved in the planning process. The plans will become simpler and will offer a clear vision of how areas should evolve. That the plans must be updated will be required by legislation.

I have a sense of déjà vu. I have not had a question from the back benches from Jim Wallace since 1997. I welcome him to his new position and thank him for the welcome that he has given to the emphasis that we are putting on more effective public engagement. Jim Wallace asked an important question about the national planning framework, to which I referred in my answer to the first question, which was from Christine Grahame. The issue is complex. We are talking about a new procedure—there has never been parliamentary involvement before, but we are determined to introduce it. Of course we must involve the Parliament in consideration of what is the most effective way to do that. Christine Grahame and others would criticise me if I were to dictate every detail of how the new procedure will work. The relationship between the Parliament and the framework—the creation of which will involve the use of many existing policy documents—will be a complex matter. A group will be set up to examine the issue and will report to the Parliament before the planning bill is published, so there will be many opportunities to debate the detail of how interaction with the Parliament will operate. What is important is that I am making clear today that the national planning framework will have the full involvement of the Parliament.

I am pleased to be untying local authorities' hands, which I am sure they will welcome. I welcome the fact that Cathie Craigie has again homed in on public engagement, because it is  central to what we are proposing. In the time available, I have not been able to go through the raft of proposals that we have produced. There will be a planning advice note to ensure greater consistency and the application of the best techniques. I will go into a bit more detail about what will be required for the development plans. Every development plan scheme will involve the production of a consultation statement, which will be tested at the examination stage. All development plans will have an examination stage—that is not the case at the moment. As I have said, ministers will be interested in that. On specific planning applications, pre-application consultation will take place for a range of major developments and also wherever there is an environmental impact assessment. That is an important part of the action that we are taking to ensure that the environment and sustainable development are at the heart of these reforms. Wherever there is an environmental impact assessment, there will be pre-application consultation. The greater use of hearings and enhanced scrutiny procedures will apply to other developments, particularly those major and local applications that go against the development plan in a significant way. Other measures that will be taken include improved neighbour notifications and a requirement to give the reason for all decisions. There will also be good neighbour agreements. Again, it is important that we ensure that, whenever there is an environmental impact assessment, a good neighbour agreement is put in place, so far as that is possible. Furthermore, we are modernising local inquiries. There is a raft of detailed proposals on greater involvement, which is at the heart of what is proposed today.

One of the problems that I described at the beginning of my statement is the way in which all applications tend to be dealt with in a similar way at the moment. The purpose of the hierarchy for planning is to ensure that the more important an application is, the more attention it will get and the greater urgency it will be dealt  with. Part of the procedure for major applications will be an agreement between the local authority and the developer about how long the authority should take to deal with the application. If the local authority is lax in processing the application, it will have to return the fee that the developer has paid. Measures will be built into the system to ensure that it operates more efficiently.

There will certainly be the piece of work on wind farms that I have described. Although that will be a separate Scottish planning policy, some of it will find its way into the national planning framework. Indeed, many important environmental initiatives will be part of that. At the moment, 64 per cent of planning applications are dealt with within two months and 81 per cent are dealt with within three months. As yet, we have not set new targets as part of the reforms. Obviously, a whole new procedure is to be put in place—indeed, many new procedures are to be put in place. We will have to see how it all beds in and then set new targets for the new situation. Many parts of what I have proposed today are relevant to Greengairs, including the involvement of the public in development planning and in major planning applications. Cumulative impact is indeed an issue, but I have indicated that that will tend to be dealt with in individual Scottish planning policies.

The description of the proposals as a "power grab to the centre" is one of the most ridiculous travesties of the truth that I have heard in all the six years of this Parliament. I am astonished that someone from the Green party is so negative about the national planning framework. Indeed, the Green party and other environmental groups have called for an increased role and status for the national planning framework, in which national environmental priorities will be highlighted. Patrick Harvie should think carefully. There have been discussions on this recently in the Procedures Committee. Obviously, he can pick something that is not environmentally friendly, but a large number of things will be. Is he suggesting that the democratic decision of the Scottish Parliament on the Borders railway, which the whole Parliament decided should go ahead, should be overturned by a local planning inquiry? If he is, he should reflect on that again. Perhaps Patrick Harvie should also reflect on other environmental issues, because I am asking everyone to look at the measures as a whole. Development plans will have statutory consultees, including the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Natural Heritage. There will be strategic environmental assessment for the national planning framework and for all development plans. There will be various other things that were called for in the Scottish Environment LINK manifesto for a planning bill, such as the use of good neighbour agreements. I have already highlighted the special procedures wherever there is an environmental impact assessment, which go beyond what was asked for by Scottish Environment LINK. I do not have time to mention new provisions on tree preservation orders, the updating of legislation on the historic environment and various other environmentally friendly measures. Patrick Harvie should look at the whole package and reflect on the language about a "power grab".

I begin by thanking the Communities Committee for its hard work in considering the Housing (Scotland) Bill and I acknowledge its vast knowledge of the issues, which I discovered when I attended the stage 1 evidence sessions. I also welcome the committee's general endorsement of the bill's principles. Its scrutiny of the bill has been extremely useful and we will consider its recommendations carefully ahead of stage 2. I am pleased that the committee recommends that the Parliament should agree the bill's general principles. I do not intend to discuss all the committee's recommendations today, but I will set out the Executive's position on key issues in the bill and the committee's report. It is important to place the bill in the wider housing context. The housing picture in Scotland has changed dramatically over the past 25 years. More than 70 per cent of Scotland's housing is now in the owner-occupied or private rented sector and owner occupation is the tenure of choice or aspiration for the majority of Scotland's people. Only around 20,000 houses fail the tolerable standard—that figure is down from 120,000 houses in 1979, which is a significant achievement. However, we still face a huge disrepair problem in private sector housing. According to the Scottish house condition survey 2002, around £5 billion-worth of urgent and pending repairs need to be addressed. With that in mind, I was pleased that the committee welcomed the bill as a means of improving the condition and quality of private sector housing in Scotland. It is worth remembering that the bill has benefited from a detailed policy development process. The bill's provisions are based on the work of the housing improvement task force, which was made up of a range of experts. The task force's final report, "Stewardship and Responsibility: A Policy Framework for Private Housing in Scotland", was well received by the Parliament when it was debated last year. The bill is underpinned by the principle that individuals should have responsibility for maintaining their homes. There is a strong public interest element. People have a right to be protected from the impact of poor-quality and badly maintained houses, as poorly maintained  private houses can impact not only on occupiers, but on neighbours, the wider community and, ultimately, the public purse. I was pleased to note that the committee supported the principle of individual responsibility and I agree with its views that we must change attitudes to home repair and that owners should take more account of the need to maintain their property. That issue was highlighted in press reports last week stating that the cost of renting a home is, over time, more than the cost of buying a home; maintenance received only the most passing of mentions. Owners must see the costs of ownership as more than just their mortgages—that is the culture change that the bill aims to promote. The bill has three main strands in aiming to balance the rights of individual owners with the responsibilities that arise from owner occupation. First, it aims to modernise the powers that are available to local authorities to deal with housing of poor quality and in poor condition. Secondly, it aims to improve the information that is available to house buyers. Thirdly, it aims to enhance the rights of private sector tenants. The powers that are currently available to local authorities to address poor housing conditions have served us well, but some of those powers have run their course. I was pleased to note that the committee was positive about the powers in the bill, which it believes will allow local authorities to address disrepair in private sector housing. I will not dwell on what the committee reported on that matter, but I note its support for the housing renewal area approach, the changes to the tolerable standard, the repairing standard, the single work notice and maintenance orders. The committee also made important points about the thermal insulation element of the tolerable standard, energy efficiency targets, the role of mediation in resolving disputes between landlords and tenants and the potential for expanding the role of the private rented housing panel. We will carefully consider those issues. It is important that local authorities should have the right powers, but how work is funded is also an important question. Our view is that individuals should have responsibility for maintaining their houses and that support should be targeted to where it is needed. The proposals around the scheme of assistance are therefore a central part of the bill, so I was reassured that the committee welcomed the scheme of assistance provisions and particularly the broader range of forms of assistance that local authorities will be able to offer. The committee is keen to balance local flexibility with national consistency. I share its view and believe that the bill allows for that balance.  There has been discussion in the evidence that was given to the committee and in the stage 1 report about the resources that are required for implementing the bill. I am talking about expenditure that is required to gear up to implementation rather than the costs of direct assistance to owners, which are a different matter—the Executive supports those costs through the private sector housing grant, which was introduced in 2003-04. The Executive has committed £72 million to the private sector housing grant this year, which means that spending this year will be over 40 per cent more than it was in the year before the private sector housing grant was introduced. That clearly demonstrates our commitment in the area. I am keen that resources should be available for the implementation phase of the bill and have asked officials to investigate how best to provide support. The committee has made some strong recommendations about the measures in the bill that affect disabled people, which I will gladly look at in more detail in considering whether to lodge amendments at stage 2. The provisions for assisting disabled people who need to adapt their houses aim to improve the existing body of housing legislation for Scotland by delivering assistance more effectively to that whole group, giving help that is necessary and appropriate to as many people as possible. The bill represents part of a package of measures that are intended to achieve that. It gives local authorities the flexibility to ensure that housing assistance fits with the joint future approach to co-ordinating assessment and resources and it makes councils' use of that flexibility transparent by requiring them to publish criteria. I am seeking ways in which to reinforce that package. First, we intend to review the means test relating to disability in the light of experience. Secondly, I am inclined to ring fence money in the private sector housing grant that we give to local authorities to ensure that an appropriate level of support is given for adaptations in each area. The committee calls for disabled people to be given a right to grant. I agree that that has the advantage of simplicity, but I am not sure that simplicity would necessarily mean effective, fair delivery. We must be realistic and accept that resources—notwithstanding the 40 per cent increase that I mentioned—are finite. It would be unfortunate to exchange careful assessment of priorities for queueing. The committee also calls for rights that are on a par with those that exist in England, where grant is means tested and subject to capping. Our proposals remove the statutory cap in Scotland, while the disabled facilities grant in England is currently being reviewed because of question marks over its efficiency and fairness. I  shall, however, carefully and seriously consider the committee's suggestions. In particular, I will consider how the proposals in the bill compare with the merits of, first, a right to means-tested grant and, secondly, a right to grant in various circumstances over and above that for the provision of standard amenities. I suggest that, if we are to go down that second route, it should be through powers to make regulations by affirmative procedure, so that the Parliament has the opportunity for scrutiny. We will consider that issue further in the run-up to stage 2. On the tenant's right to carry out adaptations, I am surprised that the committee feels that the bill is discriminatory in not providing for support from the Disability Rights Commission. The bill does not provide for the commission to give support for the simple reason that the commission is a reserved body and the Scotland Act 1998 prevents the Scottish Parliament from giving it any functions. We are, however, working with colleagues at Whitehall to ensure that support from the commission is available to people in Scotland. I hope that those efforts will be successful. The committee makes other comments on the differences between the tenant's right to carry out adaptations in Scotland and the equivalent right in England and Wales. We will consider each of those issues in the light of the different legislative framework that exists in Scotland and take a view on whether to lodge amendments. I will now say a few words about the bill's proposals for the private rented sector. That varied sector plays a valuable role in meeting housing needs. Providers range from large, established organisations to individuals who may let one house for a short period. Against that background, we have sought to strike a balance between the long-term strength of the sector and the need for standards and quality. It is interesting that, given its detailed consideration of the issue, the committee has concluded that none of the evidence that it heard indicated that the bill would impact on the supply of housing. That reinforces my view that the bill has got the balance right. I am pleased that the committee welcomed our proposals on the repairing standard, including the establishment of the private sector housing panel, along with the provisions on houses of multiple occupation and the powers to allow the introduction of a letting code. When I gave evidence in May, committee members raised the issue of a rent deposit scheme, which the committee now recommends be considered as an option. I am keen to ensure that there is action on the matter and I have asked officials to look at the whole area of the protection of tenancy deposits. The committee also refers to the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, which contains a specific  provision on equal opportunities. I am sympathetic to the committee's recommendation that there should be a similar provision in the bill, so I have asked officials to work on that as well. On the information that is available to house buyers, I was interested to read that most committee members share my view that market-led solutions alone would not address the problems that were identified by the housing improvement task force. I am also pleased that the committee supports the principles behind the proposals to reform part of the house-buying process in Scotland. In 2003, the task force recommended that the Executive should organise a voluntary, market-led test of the single survey concept. The task force also recommended that the option of legislation to introduce the single survey, should that be required, be held in reserve. The task force identified three potential benefits of the single survey. First, better information about the condition of property would be made available to house buyers. Secondly, the need for multiple surveys and valuations, especially in buoyant markets, would be removed. Thirdly, the inclusion of a valuation would provide a disincentive to artificially low upset prices. Those benefits underpin the single survey approach. Under the current system, there is a huge disincentive for house buyers to have a more thorough condition survey carried out. Every buyer faces the risk of being unsuccessful in buying a property or series or properties after having commissioned multiple surveys and wasted their money. Even offers that are made subject to survey—an approach that has been adopted in some areas but that is not favoured by all property professionals—tend to employ scheme 1 valuation reports, perhaps because of the risks that are involved in that approach. Therefore, at present, the vast majority of buyers rely on the cheapest form of survey—the scheme 1 valuation report—which provides relatively little information on property condition. That cannot be right.

There will be more detailed information in the single survey than there is in the scheme 1 valuation report. As Christine Grahame knows, we are considering the whole issue of the timing of the survey—the valuation is the key issue in relation to that. The stakeholders group is examining the issue, but I do not think that that argument overrides the main reasons for our  introducing the single survey, which I have outlined. Under the present home-buying process, the buyer obtains certain information about the property only after an offer has been accepted. That can delay the conclusion of missives and, in some cases, sales can fall through altogether. With that in mind, the task force has also recommended the introduction of a purchasers information pack, which would be provided by sellers of property at the start of the transaction process to make the process faster, more transparent and more consumer friendly. In recent months, there has been much discussion of those recommendations. That is hardly surprising, given that they propose a radical change to the process of house buying and selling. The issue appears not to be that house buyers need more information; it is how that information is provided and what should be covered. A great deal of work was done to develop the single survey pilot scheme across a number of participating professions, including surveyors, lawyers, estate agents and lenders. I am grateful to all those who were involved in the design and implementation of what is a radical shift from the normal way of doing things. Given the disappointing uptake during the single survey pilot scheme, I have reached the conclusion that the only way of ensuring that the information that the task force recommends is made available to buyers is to make the provision of that information mandatory. I know that some of those who are involved in the house-buying and selling process have concerns about that. As the committee recognises, the proposals represent a major change to the house-buying and selling process, so it is important that we get it right. It is also important that the new system is understood and accepted by consumers and professionals and that we strike the right balance between the provision of information and the cost of providing that information. The committee has identified several important issues that need to be addressed as we develop the scheme. I give an assurance that we will address them and that key stakeholders will be central to the development of the scheme. Work with stakeholders has already started on the details of the mandatory single survey scheme and the purchasers information pack. Preliminary work is also under way to develop a test of the purchasers information pack, which will take full account of the helpful and detailed points that have been raised by the committee. I will be happy to provide the committee with the information that it has requested about how the Executive expects the scheme to operate. I note that the committee has recommended that the regulations should be  subject to the affirmative procedure; I am minded to accept that recommendation. The bill contains provisions relating to the specific issues that right-to-buy purchasers and their landlords face. Those provisions are based on the experience of problems arising from right-to-buy sales when owners could not afford to maintain their house because they did not understand all the costs associated with ownership. Moreover, landlords have reported that improvement programmes are held up because owners cannot afford to pay their share. Under the bill, prospective right-to-buy owners will be given a clear steer as to what ownership, including maintenance and wider obligations, will actually cost. I note that the committee considers that additional information similar to that contained in a single survey and purchasers information pack should be available to right-to-buy purchasers. I am happy to consider that, but I caution against replicating the single survey provisions, as they might not address the specific issues around right-to-buy sales. When we talk about housing issues, it is easy to lose sight of the fact that we are talking about people's homes. Whether they be rural cottages, suburban semis or inner-city tenements, all houses should be fit to be homes. If homes are to meet people's needs, they have to be safe, secure and fit for purpose. In the past five years, the Scottish Executive has gone a long way in addressing Scotland's housing needs; I believe that the Housing (Scotland) Bill represents a major step forward in securing the house conditions that Scottish people deserve. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Housing (Scotland) Bill.

Communities Scotland is working with key partners on the details of how the scheme will operate. We plan to be able to award the first grants by the autumn and have so far identified 20 developments around Scotland where we intend to use the scheme.

I do not have detailed knowledge of the latter issue, although I know that it came up in relation to one of the Justice Department's bills. If Ken Macintosh writes to me about his outstanding concerns, I will take them up—I know that they apply to a small number of sheltered housing complexes. The distinctions about which he is worried will not apply to the mainstream shared equity homestake scheme that we are launching this year. Many housing associations have already expressed an interest in the scheme. I know that there have been preliminary discussions with registered social landlords about two sites in Ken  Macintosh's constituency. Given the issues that he has highlighted, I hope that there will be a successful outcome to those discussions. I have no reason to think that there will not be.

The Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill aims to provide a regulatory framework—with an independent regulator—that is clear and proportionate, that allows charities in Scotland to flourish and which gives the public confidence in the charity brand following previous instances of misconduct that have served to undermine public confidence in donating. The bill, which the charity sector has called for for a long time and to which we gave a commitment in our partnership agreement, is good for the charity sector and for Scotland. We all want an environment in which charitable activity can flourish. The bill is the result of extensive consultation, which the Communities Committee recognised and commended. I would like to record in the Official Report the Executive's thanks to all those who took part in the consultation and to those who have contributed to the bill's development. I also thank the Communities Committee and its staff for their hard work and their careful scrutiny of the bill. Last, but by no means least, I thank the Executive bill team and Johann Lamont, who did a lot of work at stage 2, as well as before and after it. The bill is now much stronger as a direct result of so many people having taken the time and opportunity to engage constructively in its development. I look forward to that engagement continuing as we move towards implementation of the act and development of the secondary legislation.

In our response to the Subordinate Legislation Committee's stage 1 report, we confirmed that the power in section 82 would not specifically create a criminal offence. The regulations may provide for an offence, but that can only be provided for in accordance with section 82(5) through the sanction of a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale. That was considered to be appropriate because we might need flexibility to deal with evolving fundraising methods in the future. It will allow the regulations to make different provision for different circumstances. Any regulations will be consulted on and will come before the Subordinate Legislation Committee. Once again, we have seen the strength of the Scottish Parliament's committee system, in that the Subordinate Legislation Committee was able to debate and grapple with important matters that were central to the objectives of the bill. There was robust debate on the public benefit test, but there was little disagreement with the bill's central keystone, which is that every charity should be required to show that it provides benefit and that decisions on conferring charitable status should be taken case by case by an independent regulator. During the parliamentary process, the Executive listened to the concerns of the Communities Committee and others about the list of charitable purposes. I believe that we now have the right list; it encapsulates the key purposes that the public think should be charitable purposes and is flexible enough to allow the test to evolve and grow. The bill and the charity test provide a robust regulatory regime that will give the public confidence in the charity brand.

I will do so in a moment. The bill lays out clear rules about what constitutes a charity and gives the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator the proper powers to deal with wrongdoing. The fundraising provisions provide further reassurance that people who donate to charity can have confidence in how their donations are used. They make provision for greater regulation and increased transparency in how the money from fundraising is raised.

Let me first say that, because I was looking round at the time, the last  word that I said before I took the intervention should have been "used" rather than "raised". On Patrick Harvie's question, we believe that section 103 will provide a flexible definition that describes charity trustees broadly rather than narrowly, and in a way that is not prejudicial to charities that have complex governance structures. We believe that that addresses the difficulties that have been suggested by charities, such as the National Trust for Scotland, which have constitutions that set out unusual governance arrangements. It is right that the constitution of a charity should determine who is in general control and management of the administration of that charity. I had better move to my conclusion so that other members can speak in this short debate. Much work remains to be done; we need to appoint the members of OSCR, set up the appeals panel and develop the various regulations that will provide the practical detail. I look forward to continuing positive and practical discussions on those issues throughout the process. I am delighted to commend the bill to Parliament and ask members to give it their full support. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The amendments address whether the Scottish charity appeals panel should be allowed to award expenses or compensation. The issue was debated by the committee at some length at stage 2. Following further consideration, the Executive has decided that the Scottish charity appeals panel should have the power to award expenses but not compensation. That is in line with the views expressed by the committee in the debate. Accordingly, amendment 12 will remove the subsection in section 75 that prevents the panel from awarding expenses to OSCR or to any person who appeals a decision. Amendment 19 will add a power to the provisions in schedule 2 to allow ministers to set out that the panel may award expenses to both OSCR and the appellant in certain circumstances. That is important to safeguard against malicious or vexatious appeals. The detail on making awards of expenses will be set out in the rules on the practice and procedure of the panel, which will be made following consultation with the Council on Tribunals. I move amendment 12.  Amendment 12 agreed to.

Amendments 13 to 15 relate to the bill's provisions on public benevolent collections. They were drafted after concerns were raised in relation to similar proposals in the Home Office Charities Bill. Section 84(2)(c) allows a benevolent body to hold a collection on land that it owns or occupies without obtaining local authority consent if the body must expressly or implicitly allow public access to the land. There is concern that land that a benevolent body occupies but to which the public have access by virtue of an enactment, such as the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003, would not be covered. Therefore, the occupier would be required to obtain local authority permission for the collection that they wished to hold on the land. That is a valid concern, so we have lodged amendment 13, which seeks to extend section 84(2)(c) to cover the situation. Amendments 14 and 15 are consequential on amendment 13. I move amendment 13.  Amendment 13 agreed to.  Amendments 14 and 15 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

During the consultation on the draft bill and the evidence taking by the Communities Committee and the Finance Committee, there were calls for a provision to allow trustees to appoint nominees in relation to trust investments. There were also calls for the bill to be amended to include a provision on the power of trustees to delegate decision-making powers. It was argued that that would bring improvements in both investment performance and income for some charities and trusts. The Communities Committee recommended in its stage 1 report that further consideration should be given to ensuring that trustees have the specific power to delegate investment of funds to fund managers. Amendment 41 provides a default power for trustees to appoint nominees in relation to trust investments and to transfer the title of the assets to the nominees. The purpose of Christine Grahame's amendment 60 is similar to that of amendment 41, but I believe that her amendment would be less effective than amendment 41 because it does not set out the key elements of the duty of care to which trustees must pay particular regard in exercising the power. Therefore, I ask Christine Grahame to withdraw her amendment 60. Amendment 62 will provide a default power for trustees to delegate to agents the management of investments, including discretionary management of investments. The purpose of Christine Grahame's amendment 61 is similar to that of amendment 62, but I believe that it would be less effective than amendment 62 because it does not indicate that this is a clarification of the current law, nor that the law extends to the discretionary management of investments. The Executive amendments were drafted in consultation with the Scottish Law Commission and they have its support. Therefore, I ask Christine Grahame not to move amendment 61. I ask the Parliament to support amendments 41 and 62.  Amendment 60, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendment 41 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.  Amendment 61 not moved.   Amendment 62 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Section 19 sets out procedures for protecting the assets of a charity that is removed from the register. It requires the body to continue to apply its assets in line with its charitable purposes, following removal from the register. Section 19(8), which amendment 55 seeks to remove, was intended to allow ministers to disapply the provisions by order in special circumstances. Ministers would have to have good reasons to exempt a body that was losing its charitable status from section 19, and any order that was made would be subject to the affirmative procedure, and would therefore have to be justified to and considered by Parliament. It is important to be able to disapply section 19 so that if, for example, a non-departmental public body lost its charitable status, property that had been obtained with public funds could remain under that NDPB's full control. I ask Patrick Harvie to withdraw amendment 55.

The central amendment in this group is amendment 31. It inserts into the bill a duty for auditors, independent examiners and reporting accountants to report to OSCR matters of material significance to the exercise of OSCR's functions under sections 28, 30 and 31. The new section introduced by amendment 31 will also allow those who examine a charity's accounts to report any other matter that they believe to be of relevance to OSCR's functions, but which is not covered by that duty. Amendment 42 ensures that a report made in accordance with that duty must be in writing. The amendments have been lodged in response to calls from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland and the Communities Committee that the bill as introduced did not give those examining a charity's accounts enough guidance or protection to enable them to report matters to  OSCR. I have some more details on those amendments, but I will turn instead to amendment 31A. It removes the reference to an external examiner who has been appointed to audit or examine independently a charity's statement of account being appointed by the charity mentioned in subsection (2) of the new section introduced by amendment 31. We lodged amendment 31A after it was pointed out to us that not all charities appoint their own external examiner. Amendment 56 is similar to one that was lodged at stage 2, and will not be necessary if the Executive amendments are agreed to. Amendment 25 links the removal of the restrictions on disclosure because of an obligation of confidentiality under section 25 to the new duty to disclose inserted by amendment 31. In doing so it answers ICAS's concerns that the provision did not extend to reporting accountants examining the accounts of a charitable company. Amendment 28 inserts further provisions into section 38 so that the duty to report and the removal of confidentiality also apply to auditors, independent examiners and reporting accountants when OSCR's functions have been delegated to Scottish ministers or another public authority. Amendments 23, 24, 29, 32, 39, 40, 43 and 44 are technical and their purpose is to reposition existing provisions as a consequence of the new section proposed in amendment 31. I urge members to support the Executive amendments in the group. I ask Donald Gorrie not to move amendment 56, as it will no longer be necessary. I move amendment 23.

The amendment removes the exclusion preventing local authority charitable trusts from being reorganised under sections 40 and 41 of the bill. It follows concerns raised by OSCR, and will allow local authorities to apply to OSCR to approve a reorganisation scheme, under the new legislation, of many charitable trusts held by them. We understand that several local authorities have indicated that the provision would  be of significant benefit, and it will allow more efficient operation of many small trusts. I move amendment 30.  Amendment 30 agreed to.

All the amendments in the group are aimed at the provisions relating to references made about a body's charitable status. Amendment 6 corrects an inconsistency in section 13. Section 13(4) does not refer to bodies that are "established under the law of Scotland", which is referred to in section 13(2). Amendment 6 corrects that omission and brings subsections (2) and (4) into line with each other.  Amendments 7 to 11 will allow OSCR and the Court of Session to act against charities that falsely represent themselves, or that are so represented by persons, as Scottish charities or registered Scottish charities. Without that provision, the requirement that charities are not to describe themselves as Scottish charities or registered Scottish charities is unenforceable. The bill already contains similar provisions in relation to bodies that represent themselves as charities or are so represented. I move amendment 6.  Amendment 6 agreed to.

The bill was amended at stage 2 to include a charitable purpose that would cover charities that are recognised under the Recreational Charities Act 1958. Amendments 3 to 5 respond to the concern that was expressed at stage 2 that that purpose was not broad enough to cover bodies that arrange recreational activities but do not own the grounds on which they take place. The deputy minister agreed that we would consider that further. Having done so, we believe that the purpose should be extended to include organising recreational activities as well as providing facilities. Amendment 21, in the name of Scott Barrie, is similar to one that he lodged at stage 2. We support what he is trying to do and fully recognise the importance of non-formal education and youth work. The purpose of "the advancement of education" already covers all forms of education, including non-formal education through youth work, as proposed in the amendment. Many charities that have a wide range of education purposes are already charities under the current law, and we certainly intend that that will continue. We are concerned that referring to specific forms of education in the bill could lead to the inference that other forms of education are not included. That is not to detract from the value that we place on youth work or non-formal education; it is merely that we do not wish that purpose to be artificially restricted. I hope that I have reassured Scott Barrie that our intention is certainly not to prevent bodies that provide non-formal education and youth work from becoming charities. I fully support the role that they play and repeat that non-formal education and youth work are already covered by the purposes. Amendments 2 and 48, in the name of Donald Gorrie, and amendment 47, in the name of Karen Whitefield, deal with the purpose of "the advancement of amateur sport". The inclusion of amateur sport as a charitable purpose originated as an extension of "the advancement of health" purpose. For that reason, the current definition of which types of sport are considered to be charitable purposes is the same as that in the bill as drafted. They are restricted to sports that involve "physical exertion and skill". We  are opposed to amendment 48, which would change the wording to "physical exertion or skill" because physical exertion is integral to the link with healthy activity.

I am not aware that that is relevant. However, if information is available to me, I will obviously give it to members later. The current provision would exclude sports such as chess, snooker or darts. Amendment 48 would allow those activities to be charitable under the sports purpose, and we want to resist the amendment because we are keen to maintain the link with the encouragement of healthy activity. The word "amateur" was included in the purpose to reflect the fact that it is the promotion of sporting activity by the general public that makes sport charitable. We do not believe that the use of the word "amateur" bars a club from employing a professional to coach and play for a team, as long as that is done to advance amateur sport. We understand the arguments that have been made by sportscotland and others about the use of the word "amateur" being outmoded, but we do not believe that amendment 2, which would remove the word "amateur", is the whole answer. That would not mean that high-profile professional sports clubs could automatically be charities, as they would in any event be barred by the asset distribution test in section 7(3)(a), but it could allow bodies that promote or support such clubs to be charities. We do not believe that those bodies are, or should be, charities. Instead, we prefer the wording that is used in amendment 47, which is aimed more clearly at the reasons why sport is a charitable purpose—that is, it is as an extension of "the advancement of health" purpose and bodies that encourage the general public to get involved in sport should have charitable status. I ask Scott Barrie to seek to withdraw amendment 21, Donald Gorrie not to move amendments 2 and 48, and members to support amendment 47, in the name of Karen Whitefield, and the Executive amendments.

A similar amendment was lodged at stage 2 and the committee rejected it because it would have resulted in OSCR having to consult every time it issued any guidance. Although amendment 46 would not cause that problem, we will continue to resist such an amendment to the bill; its potential to cause difficulties outweighs any benefit. As the bill stands, there is nothing in it to prevent OSCR from producing guidance: in fact, OSCR already produces guidance on the current legislation and we expect it to continue to do so. It is entirely unnecessary to include a permissive provision. On consultation, OSCR is already under a duty to consult on guidance on how it determines charitable status. It will also consult on some of  the other guidance that it will issue. In deciding on the guidance on which it is to consult, OSCR—as a public body—is under a duty to be proportionate, accountable, consistent and transparent. Not only is it unnecessary to place a duty on OSCR to consult, to do so could have a negative impact on OSCR's regulatory function if, after repeated challenges of its assessment of what is significant under such a duty, OSCR were obliged to consult on even minor administrative guidance. Therefore, I ask Patrick Harvie to seek to withdraw amendment 46.

The Executive will soon publish a planning white paper and a consultation paper on a revision to planning policy in respect of town centres and retailing.

I would certainly be delighted to meet Susan Deacon to discuss those issues. She has raised them with me already, so I know something about her concerns, but a further meeting would be most welcome. I pay tribute to the role that she played in the campaign. I know that several key issues about the conduct of inquiries, the need to ensure that we engage early with communities and speeding up the planning process have been raised by that application as well as many others.

Unprecedented levels of investment will go into the social housing stock in Glasgow city, with £1.5 billion being invested over a 10-year period in Glasgow Housing Association stock. This year, £127 million is being invested. In the current year, we will also invest more than £68 million in the city to improve the quality and availability of  social housing that is provided by other housing associations.

I was pleased recently to see housing developments in Frank McAveety's constituency, although not the particular development to which he refers. Along with Johann Lamont, I had a meeting recently with the Glasgow Housing Association to discuss second-stage transfers and other issues. We will have a follow-up meeting within the next few weeks. We are keen that second-stage transfers should go ahead as fast as possible. Some details regarding the disaggregation of stock are still to be resolved, but Frank McAveety can be assured that we are strongly committed to the process of second-stage transfer and to its taking place as soon as possible. We will repeat the point and get an update on the situation at our next meeting later this month.

The strength and value of the voluntary sector have been referred to many times in the debate, but I repeat and reinforce that point. I acknowledge the extraordinary breadth and depth of the work of the voluntary sector and pay tribute to the thousands of paid workers and volunteers who make up that growing third sector, which is a major service provider and agent of change that contributes to economic and social objectives. I particularly value the sector's independence, its frequent emphasis on community action from the ground up and the many ways in which it provides help and support to those who are in need. I was conscious of that in my previous portfolio. For example, I was aware of various organisations that improve mental health services throughout Scotland—such as the Scottish Association for Mental Health—the food co-ops to which Elaine Smith referred and the many patient support groups for particular illnesses. It is the same, of course, in my new portfolio. For example, I am conscious of groups that are working around domestic abuse, such as Scottish Women's Aid. I am also conscious of credit unions and organisations that are working on local regeneration. Such groups are fashioning programmes of improvement from below, and are working with people to help them take greater control, which is supported by Donald Gorrie, Christine Grahame and others. We are already committed to supporting the voluntary sector in a number of ways, by providing funding, by improving regulatory frameworks and by setting out our strategy to increase the quality and quantity of volunteers. We shall now build on the considerable progress that we have made. Funding has been a major issue in this debate, and was emphasised by Christine Grahame in her wind-up speech and by Donald Gorrie and others earlier in the debate. Scottish Executive funding for the voluntary sector is substantial. Our financial commitment to the sector now stands at more than £400 million each year. Even so, funding is a persistent concern. Too often, funding is awarded on a short-term basis, with the result that organisations spend a large proportion of their time chasing new funding sources and reapplying for grants. That can mean stopping and starting projects on the ground, which can lead to the disruption of services that often support the most vulnerable in our communities. We want to make it easier for voluntary organisations to do what they do best by focusing on service delivery. The Executive is committed to providing a rolling programme of three-year funding. We want continuity of funding for  outcomes, so that good projects on the ground are not threatened with closure because of short-term funding crises. To that end, I am delighted that with our partners, SCVO and COSLA, we have managed to agree some principles for taking forward the strategic funding review. Through that, we aim to move towards an investment culture in which funding decisions are made on the basis of working together to deliver the best services for the people of Scotland. SCVO, COSLA and the Executive are committed to taking forward those principles, including a move towards full cost recovery. Some issues relating to the impact that full cost recovery might have on the voluntary and public sectors are still to be resolved, but the principle of full cost recovery is widely accepted. We need to work on how we will apply that principle across Government, local authorities and the voluntary sector. We will shortly undertake a piece of work to examine the benefits, risks and costs of implementing full cost recovery, and to inform a realistic and manageable way forward. Good progress on funding has been made in the strategic funding review, but the language of the SNP tries to take us backwards. The current distinction between core and project funding is regarded by all the partners, including SCVO, as unhelpful. It can lead to organisations artificially splitting costs between those two categories, and can lead to a focus on processes and outputs, as opposed to the valuable outcomes that we are all working towards. This is all about continuity of funding for outcomes, which is why we will not support the SNP amendment.

That is not the position that has been adopted by the partners in the strategic funding review. The important issue is continuity of funding. We are trying to get beyond the distinction between core and project funding, and the SCVO accepts that. Linda Fabiani asked about how the futurebuilders programme is progressing. It is now up and running and starting to issue a considerable number of investments that will make a difference. It has been a popular programme. She also asked whether grant-aided time-limited funding was adequate in itself. Of course more must be done. On Monday I visited Almond Valley Heritage Trust in Livingston, where I launched social investment Scotland's new £6 million loan fund to complement futurebuilders—£3 million was  provided by the Executive, which was matched with a further £3 million from the Bank of Scotland. The new fund, called futurebuilders plus, will provide loan finance to support the activities of social economy organisations that are seeking assistance from the futurebuilders Scotland investment fund, and will enable the continuation of the lending activities undertaken by social investment Scotland. Jim Mather and Mary Scanlon mentioned specific social economy organisations with approval.

I have no time, I am sorry. Mary Scanlon mentioned the Shetland Soap Company, which has developed with futurebuilders support. I visited a similar soap company in Edinburgh recently and met people with mental health problems who are doing real jobs for a high-quality commercial soap production enterprise. That is a working model of opportunity, equality and fairness for everyone who lives in Scotland and it is what our investment in the social economy is all about. I say to Elaine Smith that an announcement about the co-operative development agency will be made very soon. Mary Scanlon also mentioned the compact. We have recently published a revised and strengthened compact to reinforce the relationship between the Executive and the voluntary sector. Within the compact, the independence of the voluntary sector is celebrated and I believe that its responsibility to work with us and challenge us contributes to the effective and efficient development and delivery of policy across all policy areas. I am pleased that local compacts are developing. For example, Edinburgh has an innovative compact that shows commitment to increasing the role of the voluntary sector in policy development, decision making and service delivery at all levels in the city. There are a number of other points to which I want to respond, but first I will deal with the substantive issue of volunteers, about which Marilyn Livingstone and Karen Whitefield—among others—talked eloquently. Scotland needs a steady supply of volunteers and organisations that have the skills to get the best out of them. Our volunteering strategy shows how we can get such a supply and we provide the innovation, commitment and resources to back it up. We have relaunched the millennium volunteer programme, which will receive more than £1.6 million over the next two years. We are stimulating the supply of volunteers through project Scotland, which the Scottish Executive will provide with more than £11 million of funding over the next three years. On  Tuesday, the First Minister launched project Scotland and opened it for business. Getting the programme off the ground has been a truly remarkable achievement. The Russell committee report, which was published in March, concluded that more needed to be done to engage young people and get them involved. It identified a range of barriers to volunteering, including tax and benefits concerns, which we are taking up with the Department for Work and Pensions. Project Scotland is addressing the other issues and delivering on the ground something concrete that the young people of Scotland today can regard as an important opportunity. It is already acting as a model for full-time youth volunteering elsewhere in the UK. Over the next year, we will think about how to develop project Scotland, especially its international element. Investment in such programmes reaps benefits, not just in the form of an improved supply of volunteers for voluntary organisations, but in the form of the life-changing impact that volunteering can have on volunteers. I think that I have time for a few more replies before I wind up. Mary Scanlon mentioned the money that was spent on a building in Inverness, but that building is not just for the SCVO—it will house a range of voluntary organisations. I understand that one of the organisations that is in discussions with the SCVO is the Inverness CAB, to which Mary Scanlon referred. A broad range of community organisations will benefit from the new building. Mary Scanlon suggested that money was being spent on that building rather than on money advice, but I remind her of the millions of pounds that are being spent on money advice and of the forthcoming financial action plan, which will inject another £5 million into money advice and related services, such as those that are provided by credit unions. Donald Gorrie made some points about the operation of the disclosure system, but I agree with Karen Whitefield that the safety of Scottish children is paramount and that we need to protect our volunteers. I acknowledge that there have been difficulties with the system and, for that reason, we are working closely with Disclosure Scotland to improve its operational efficiency. I had better move to my conclusion. We have covered a great deal of ground in the debate and I want to restate the importance that we attach to working with the sector to develop further our vision for the future. I am looking forward to launching the new process of engagement between the Executive and the sector at our away day in Edinburgh next Wednesday. I want us to explore new areas of growth and potential within the voluntary sector. We will consider the continued increase in the number and diversity of  ways in which individuals can contribute to society, whether through charities, social enterprises, co-operatives, self-help groups or campaigning organisations. We will think about new ways for voluntary organisations to deliver public services that add value to those that are provided by the state. Other issues that we will explore are the continued growth in community-focused organisations, which allow us to come together to take part in arts and sports, to learn new skills, to support our children and young people and to care for our older people, and the value and potential of the sector's policy development and campaigning role, through which it challenges us all to do things better. The voluntary sector is playing a growing role in the big issues of tackling poverty, fighting crime and improving health. Voluntary organisations that are grounded in local communities are uniquely well placed to create the social capital that Karen Whitefield spoke about at great length and with great insight. The Executive is therefore strongly committed to supporting a growing third sector that is valued for its ingenuity, independence and for the vital role that it plays in building social capital, delivering services and supporting those in need. I commend the motion in my name, along with the Green amendment.

Seven local authorities—Argyll and Bute, the Western Isles, Inverclyde, Renfrewshire, Stirling, Edinburgh and Highland—have joined the Executive's community ownership programme. Subject to the wishes of the tenants involved, the transfers will result in a further 80,000 homes transferring into community ownership.

I recall that visit fondly. Since then, I have taken a close interest in the matter and have been absolutely determined that some issues of detail should be resolved very soon. I guarantee that the ballot will go ahead in the not-too-distant future. That will be of enormous benefit to the Western Isles. When I went there, I announced the £15 million support package from the Executive, but over and above that will be the writing off of £38 million of historic housing debt. That is a splendid deal for the people of the Western Isles.

My answer referred to the local authorities that are new to the programme, but, as we know, there have been three others, from which we expect £2 billion-worth of investment over the next 10 years. I recently met representatives of Glasgow Housing Association, which I imagine Linda Fabiani has in mind. Last year, it delivered an investment programme of £110 million, including 10,252 new central heating systems, the internal upgrading of 3,300 homes and the external improvement of 4,400 homes.  This year, the investment programme will increase to £135 million.

I congratulate Rosie Kane on securing this debate on the reform of our land-use planning system. I share her desire to ensure that there is greater inclusion of local people in planning decisions. That is why the Scottish Executive will actively address inclusion in its reform proposals. I am happy to acknowledge the active citizenship of Rosie Kane and others in relation to the M74. However, I am not here to debate the merits or otherwise of that proposal. For one thing, I am not the Minister for Transport, and for another, the matter is currently the subject of a challenge in the courts. In our partnership agreement, the Executive said that we would improve the planning system and that is exactly what we will do. There are two main themes to the improvements that we will make. We will create a more efficient planning system that will deliver the right development where and when it is needed. Sustainable growth will be at  the heart of that. It is equally important that we will ensure that local people and communities have better opportunities to participate in the planning of their areas and in the decisions that affect them. I can therefore reassure Rosie Kane that one of the major thrusts of our reform package will be to ensure that local people are properly engaged, are clear about the future direction of development in their areas and are able to contribute, confident that their voices will be heard. It is no secret that we intend to ensure that the role of the national planning framework is continued and enhanced. The "National Planning Framework for Scotland" document has already received considerable acclaim and support from all interests in the planning system. There have been calls from many sides to give the framework greater status, not least from those representing environmental interests. We agree that there are decisions, essential to Scotland's future, that need to be taken at the strategic, national level—as Donald Gorrie suggested—and believe that the national planning framework is a key vehicle for setting out those decisions. In particular, the national planning framework will need to be clear on the spatial implications of other key strategic policies, such as transport, water and sewerage, waste and regeneration policies. We will need to map out how we will meet our obligations under European environmental law—in relation to waste disposal or wastewater treatment, for example—and ensure that those obligations are properly accounted for in the planning system.

I will speak about the local planning process later, but the key message to get across is that decisions should be made at the most appropriate level. There is absolutely no doubt that planning authorities are and will remain at the core of our planning system and are best placed to make decisions on local matters. The national planning framework will undergo strategic environmental assessment, which involves an environmental report that must be subject to full public consultation and the issuing of a statement about how environmental considerations have been taken into account. As a result, the key national strategic planning document will be subject to a thorough public examination of the potential environmental impacts. There can, therefore, be no question of removing the public right to influence Scotland's  future development. It is quite the opposite, in fact. I repeat the point I made at question time last week that our planning reforms contain no proposals to change the procedures on nuclear power stations. It is no secret that our reforms will seek to put development planning at the heart of decision making. That is a crucial area of work in which we need to ensure that local people are properly engaged, which they are not at present. In future, plans will involve local people more effectively, continue to protect the environment—which they will do more effectively—and determine how applications are decided. To be able to participate fully, local people should have the right to be informed at an early stage that preparation of a new plan is beginning. They should have the right to be able to influence that plan, which will set out proposals for how their local area will develop. I noted what Carolyn Leckie said about influence; local people do not have a great deal of influence now, but we certainly intend that they should have more. They should have the right to expect that decisions on individual applications will be taken in accordance with the plan unless there are overriding reasons to decide otherwise and they should expect a greater degree of scrutiny of decisions in which that does not happen. There are many other ways of involving people in individual planning applications that will be described in the white paper. Crucially, that involvement will be at an early stage, which is precisely what Donald Gorrie wished.

Carolyn Leckie raised the third-party right of appeal. I was going to refer to it later, but as it has been raised now, we might as well discuss it. Some people think that introducing a third-party right of appeal would be the most effective way to ensure local participation, but others disagree, favouring earlier and effective involvement with influence to increase the ways in which local people can have a proper say in the system. There is a hard choice to be made, as I said at question time last week. We all want more effective involvement in the system, but the question is what the most effective way of doing that is, being mindful of other consequences of a third-party right of appeal, which Wendy Alexander mentioned. One thing that is common to most arguments is the idea that we need to restore confidence in the planning system and ensure that decisions are taken in the public interest.

I will finish what I was saying about development plans and then I will take an intervention if I am allowed to, although I am probably overrunning my time. It is crucial to a new, more effective and inclusive planning system that we ensure that the process of making development plans is efficient, predictable and transparent, which is not the case at present. The local plans that the majority of councils have adopted are more than five years old and around a quarter of them are more than 15 years old. That is why a main aim of our reforms will be to reinforce the centrality of up-to-date and relevant development plans. That will be an essential part of ensuring that there are better opportunities for local people to influence the decision-making process. As I said to Murray Tosh, the renewed emphasis on local plans will reinforce the role of planning authorities at the core of the planning system. Development plans will also be subject to strategic environmental assessment, so there will be better opportunities not only for local people in general to have an influence at that crucial stage, but for environmental interests to have such an influence.

I think that I have dealt with the fishing for future policy announcements—I think that that was fishing for something else. The member can try fishing with Nicol Stephen if he likes, but I suspect that the matter is as sub judice for him as it is for me. The planning white paper will be published in the near future. Until then, I can only urge people to be patient and to keep an open mind. When the  time comes, it will be necessary to examine the full range of improvements that we will make for the long-term benefit of all Scotland's people. The programme will aim to improve the opportunities for local people to participate in the process and to make the system fairer, more efficient and more suited to a dynamic, growing Scotland, while at the same time placing more value on Scotland's heritage and environment.   Meeting closed at 18:06.

Close to the entrance to the Kohima cemetery in north-east India there stands a second world war memorial to the British Army, Second Division. Upon that stone are inscribed the following words: "When you go home, tell them of us and say, for your to-morrow, we gave our to-day." Some 57,000 Scottish soldiers, sailors and airmen gave their todays between 1939 and 1945 so that we here in this chamber, and everyone the length and breadth of Scotland, could have our tomorrows. Last Sunday marked the 60 th anniversary of the end of the war in Europe, and on 15 August we will commemorate the anniversary of the end of the war with Japan. In commemorating those dates we are doing much more than simply celebrating the cessation of hostilities in a war that ravaged much of Europe and the far east; we are showing our respects, paying our debts of gratitude and remembering those who fell so that we could have the opportunity to live in peace and freedom. We are saying to the Scots men and women who served between 1939 and 1945—and indeed to all those who have served in the armed forces—that we recognise their contribution, their commitment, their courage and their valour. We, as the Scottish nation, are saying to them that we will not forget their comrades who made the ultimate sacrifice, who gave up their today and all their tomorrows and who, sadly, never returned. The Executive, and, I am sure, the Parliament, is happy and deeply honoured to have placed on record, on behalf of the Scottish people, its recognition, respect and utmost gratitude to those Scots who have served in defence of their country and way of life. On Sunday past, the nation commemorated victory in Europe day when we remembered those who fought for our futures. The First Minister paid his and the nation's respect to the veterans of the 1939-45 conflict when he attended a VE day service and parade in Dundee. Throughout the summer months the Executive will continue to represent the Scottish people at similar events, including the national commemorations of the end of world war two in Edinburgh on 10 July.  However, war is fought not simply on the battleground, and considerable recognition of and credit for the civilian element of the war effort on the home front has to be given. Perhaps it is difficult for most Scots nowadays to imagine what life was like at home between 1939 and 1945. Britain was an island under threat of invasion and towns and cities lived in fear of bombing raids by the Luftwaffe. Food supplies were dwindling and rationing meant that people had to do the best that they could with limited provisions. However, the people of Scotland showed tremendous resilience and courage in standing up to threats and fears. They showed that the battle against tyranny could be fought as well on the home front as it could be fought in Europe, north Africa and east Asia. An advertising poster of the day might have described a job in the Women's Land Army as "a healthy, happy job", but in reality the work was hard, strenuous and dirty. Women would work for up to 50 hours a week with the minimum of equipment to bring food to the tables of the nation. Those in the Women's Voluntary Service gave their time unconditionally to relieve the hardships that many families suffered as a result of bombing raids. More women contributed as nurses and air raid precaution wardens and in civil defence. Industry would have been severely diminished if women had not contributed to the war effort in munitions factories such as that at Bishopton and in heavy industries more generally. The officers and men of the merchant navy also deserve special recognition. Their tireless and heroic work while under constant threat from the invisible U-boat enemy did much to secure food supplies to Britain and to our allies in the Soviet Union by means of the Arctic convoys. It is only fitting that 30 veterans of the Artic convoys should receive special medals this week from the consul general of the Russian Federation in recognition of their efforts. [ Applause. ] Finally, and not least, on the home front, we should acknowledge the work of the Bevan boys—the young men who, with minimum training or experience, worked alongside Scotland's miners to ensure energy for industry and warmth for the people. The work of none of the people whom I have mentioned can be underestimated, and we must never forget people's contribution on the home front. However, another group of veterans needs to be recognised—those who spent time incarcerated in prisoner-of-war camps. A great many people endured terrible torture and suffering in camps in the far east or experienced indignity and humiliation in Hitler's stalags. Many did not return, but succumbed to the torture and pain or were executed while trying to escape. War—sadly—brings out humankind's brutality as well as its  resilience and tenacity. We must never forget the Scots and people from all the other nations who suffered or died while being kept as prisoners. The Executive fully supports the efforts of Veterans Scotland and the Royal British Legion Scotland in organising the commemorative events that are planned for July and August this year because we must never forget. I ask members, through supporting the motion, to record their gratitude to, and recognition of, organisations and charities for the sterling and committed work that they undertake. The list includes Erskine, the Scottish Veterans Residence, Combat Stress, the Royal British Legion Scotland and the Earl Haig Fund Scotland, and it goes on. Without the dedication of such organisations, Scotland's veterans community would lose valuable services that are specifically tailored to their needs. The Executive is working closely with those organisations in considering ways to help veterans to meet the challenges of the present day. It is important to the Executive that veterans are treated like everyone else in Scottish society and are not denied, because of their circumstances, opportunities for training and employment or access to decent and affordable housing and to health and social care that they need. Through discussions with veterans organisations, we know much about the problems that are faced by some service personnel when they leave the forces. Of course, the majority make a successful transition back into civilian life, but a minority need extra help to make the transition as smooth and trouble free as possible. Unfortunately, we know that there are veterans who need care and support, who are in danger of falling into poverty and social exclusion, who are at risk of becoming homeless or who face barriers as a result of physical and mental health problems. Veterans can face particular problems in integrating back into civilian life. For example, some who joined up at a young age may have little experience of adult life outside the services, which can make independent living hard. Others may have health problems, which can lead to and exacerbate homelessness. That is why the Executive is liaising closely with the Ministry of Defence to advance the homelessness task force recommendations in this area. In particular, we have revised legislation and guidance to ensure that homeless people who are vulnerable as a result of their service background are entitled to permanent accommodation. Moreover, we will reissue updated guidance on housing for veterans to local authorities and registered social landlords during the summer. The Ministry of Defence has also taken a number of initiatives to tackle homelessness. I look forward to continuing to work with the MOD,  the armed forces, Veterans Scotland and the wide range of veterans benevolent services to ensure that the risk of homelessness is averted. A successful move to independent civilian life is not simply a matter of housing. A lack of qualifications or transferable skills can make finding employment difficult for ex-service personnel. Employment is important for all of us, but for veterans it can be especially so. I have stated previously the Executive's belief that employment is the best way for people to avoid or to get out of poverty. For veterans, employment can also provide the basis for establishing new social networks and friendships that can have a positive impact and assist them in making a successful transition from military life. The Executive's new closing the opportunity gap approach puts employment at the heart of the Executive's social inclusion and anti-poverty strategy. As part of that, we are developing an employability framework that aims to improve the co-ordination of services that can improve the employment prospects of those in our society who face particular barriers to employment. The framework will be published in the summer. At a meeting with veterans organisations and the MOD in January this year, officials from the Scottish Executive were interested and concerned to hear that many veterans are beginning to suffer from psychological problems—on average, 14 years after leaving the services. During that time, their lives in civvy street may have been uneventful, but once problems arise they can be seriously affected. Safeguarding the mental well-being of Scotland's veterans is important to the Executive, not only because of the debt of gratitude that we owe, but because we recognise that veterans risk not only their physical health but their mental health during active service. Each year the Scottish Executive Health Department sends a letter to all national health service boards reminding them of the arrangements for priority treatment of war pensioners. In addition, this year we have sent a letter to NHS boards drawing their attention to the gulf health pack and asking them to bring it to the attention of all general practitioners. Moreover, all Scotland's veterans have access to care, treatment, advice and support from NHS Scotland. Local authorities and voluntary organisations provide a range of mental health care services, treatments and supports that are available to all ex-services personnel. It is evident that the reintegration of some veterans into civilian society can be accompanied by a wide and diverse array of problems, barriers and situations that they need extra assistance to overcome. That is as true for veterans as it is for any other vulnerable group in society, but how  often do we think of veterans when we talk about excluded or disadvantaged groups? It can be all too easy for veterans to become the invisible group. One of our immediate tasks is to raise awareness, not just across government but among service providers and the public, of the issues that veterans face every day across Scotland. That is why the Executive is fully supportive of the efforts of Veterans Scotland, the Royal British Legion Scotland and others to promote the welfare of veterans during veterans awareness week this summer. Veterans must not be denied opportunities for training and employment or access to decent, affordable housing and health and social care. We need to provide assistance while always recognising that veterans, like everyone else, deserve to live with dignity and respect. In recent times, significant progress has been made on veterans-related work in Scotland. We will continue to work closely with our colleagues in the Ministry of Defence and the veterans organisations, so that we can continue to make a real difference for those members of the veterans community who are most in need of our support. This time last week, millions of Scots went to the polls in the United Kingdom general election. Without victory in Europe and over Japan, we can only imagine whether we would have had that opportunity. Unfortunately, it took six years of total war, costing on average 10 million lives a year, to secure that democratic freedom. Tens of thousands of Scots gave their today to secure our tomorrows. For that, the Executive, the Parliament and the nation will be forever grateful. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges a debt of gratitude to all Scottish veterans who served their country in World War II; recognises the ultimate sacrifice made by 57,000 Scots during that period of conflict, and encourages everyone in Scotland to support the commemorative events this summer.

Our planning white paper will set out a range of reforms to ensure that local people have better opportunities to participate in the planning system.

We are giving full consideration to rights of appeal, with regard not only to third parties, but to how the system can operate more effectively and more fairly in relation to developers—Pauline McNeill is right that that is one aspect that we are examining. More generally, it is well known that there are disagreements in society and in the Parliament about the details of the most effective way in which to introduce more community participation into the planning system. However, we are determined to pursue that objective and to create better opportunities for local people to have a say. In many cases, local people feel alienated from the planning system and unable to have the input that they want. There are disagreements. Some people think that third-party rights of appeal are the key way of achieving greater participation, whereas others think that that is not the most effective way. However, let us be clear about the principles. We are determined to deliver better community participation in the planning system. That is one of the two key pillars; the other is, obviously, the  efficiency of the system. For me, community participation is absolutely central to the reforms that we will deliver.

Sandra White should wait to see the whole package of reforms that we will bring forward in the near future before she makes sweeping statements that are based on selective quotations from allegedly leaked documents. She makes the charge that we have given no consideration to third-party rights of appeal. If I can exaggerate slightly, I have considered little else for the past seven months. We have given serious—and I mean serious—consideration to the issues and we have examined the underlying problems of the planning system. We want to ensure that we are governed by the principle of greater community involvement in the system. Sandra White emphasises that aspect of the issue, but I have heard other people say that, if I really want to help their community, I should do other things. One of the key things that we certainly will do—Donald Gorrie introduced the idea in a question this morning—is to ensure that people have a right to be involved early in the process, in respect of not only development control, but development planning. Communities will be more effectively involved at an early stage. Let us be clear. Some of the details are still being worked out, but I believe that, when we introduce our proposals to the Parliament, they will be broadly and widely welcomed by communities throughout Scotland.

I am not sure that I fully understood the details of what Donald Gorrie said, but we certainly want to involve communities at an early stage. In answer to the charge of centralisation, we also want to ensure that local authorities are at the centre of the planning system. Of course, we fully recognise the crucial role of local authorities in speaking for and being accountable to local communities. However, I think that people should wait until they can see the full range and detail of our planning reforms before making wide-ranging criticisms of them.

The Scottish Executive's policy is clearly set out in its programme for government. We will not support new nuclear power stations in Scotland while radioactive waste management issues remain unresolved. In the event of an application coming forward, it would require the consent of Scottish ministers under section 36 of the Electricity Act 1989 and the Parliament would be fully involved in the consideration of such an important matter.

As the First Minister made clear this morning, we have powers to prevent nuclear power stations from being built in Scotland. I make it absolutely clear that none of the planning proposals that I or the Executive have been considering during the past few months will make any difference whatsoever to the arrangements for nuclear power stations. It is absolutely disgraceful that such an allegation has been made without one shred of evidence for it.

The Executive is committed to tackling pensioner poverty; for example, the Executive provides a number of free measures that help to maximise pensioners' disposable income, including the central heating programme and free local off-peak bus travel. Since 1997, 190,000 pensioners—almost three quarters—have been taken out of absolute poverty.

I welcome Cathie Craigie's comments about the central heating programme, which has been very successful. Some 48,000 systems have been installed and the targets have been exceeded by 1,000 in the latest year. I am concerned about the other points that were raised by Cathie Craigie—perhaps she could write to me with details. The EAGA Partnership is involved in quality control and we will ensure that it pursues that role with vigour. There will be a re-tender for the contract later this year, when we will examine the specifications. We will also examine the rules and regulations that have been written down, with a view to their possible revision. If Cathie Craigie would provide me with more detail, I would be happy to look into the matter.

Nobody is saying that the task is complete, but it is undoubted that we are heading in the right direction. The headline figure that I gave for the large number of pensioners who have been removed from absolute poverty since 1997 indicates that. Some £10 billion more is spent on pensions now than was spent in 1997, with half of that going to the poorest third of pensioners. Although it is controversial for other parties, it is the choice that the Government at Westminster made and it has borne fruit for a very large number of pensioners in Scotland.

I have been talking to many pensioners in recent times. They all welcome the major budget announcement that £200 will go to everyone aged over 65 years, which represents recognition that there are issues in this regard. As the member knows, we will have our own review of local government finance. However, we accept that all local government systems are fraught with difficulties. We have seen examples of that in recent times.

This financial year, the Executive will provide funding of £10.7 million to Dundee to ensure that homelessness is prevented and tackled and to provide affordable housing. That funding will be spent in accordance with the agreed local housing and homelessness strategies.

Great progress is being made in Dundee. I was pleased to see quite recently some of the new housing to which the member referred. The sum of £10 million that I announced is a 44 per cent increase on the allocation at the start of the previous financial year. More people will have rights under our progressive homelessness legislation, but Dundee is doing well on housing. For example, it is managing to house a large number of people who do not have priority as being homeless. Obviously, consideration needs to be given to the quality standard and to the strategy that Dundee wants to have in place for 2015. I know that there are still issues to be resolved in Dundee, but overall good progress is being made there.

The Lennoxtown Initiative is a community-led initiative, the aim of which is to regenerate the Lennoxtown area by achieving sustainable economic health and community well-being. The decision to progress that through the model of a company limited by guarantee was taken by the three partner organisations that are involved: East Dunbartonshire Council, Scottish Enterprise Dunbartonshire and the then Greater Glasgow Primary Care NHS Trust.

The decision about the model was taken by the three local partners: East Dunbartonshire Council, Scottish Enterprise Dunbartonshire and the then Greater Glasgow Primary Care NHS Trust, which is now part of NHS Greater Glasgow. I am told that the partners said at a recent meeting that they would take on board the concerns that have been raised and that they would consider the current governance arrangements to see whether they are appropriate. Decisions about those arrangements are a matter for the three local partners. I understand that the process is taking some time, but we should acknowledge the imaginative use that is being made of the capital receipts from the Lennox castle site, all of which will be reinvested in the Lennoxtown Initiative. I am confident that progress will be made before too long.

Rural areas will benefit significantly from the increased funding of £1.2 billion for affordable housing over the next three years. In the coming financial year, we will invest £97 million in rural areas, which will fund more than 1,900 affordable homes.

A significant increase has been made in the amount of money that is going into rural areas. Indeed, funding for rural areas now accounts for 29 per cent of the Communities Scotland programme as compared to 19 per cent when the Parliament was established. Clearly, funding is an important issue, but, of course, the other initiatives to which Richard Baker referred are also highly relevant. The extra money will go not only to social rented accommodation, but into the new shared equity schemes. I was in Aberdeen last week and was glad to hear that the city will be involved in the scheme. I am sure that the rural areas in that part of Scotland will also become involved.

I am sure that Alasdair Morgan heard the significant announcement that Lewis Macdonald made on that subject two or three weeks ago. The most significant thing to say about affordable housing is that the Executive is giving an extra £14 million specifically to the registered social landlord sector to enable the sector to pay its contribution towards infrastructure costs. We have made a significant increase in the investment in water and sewerage infrastructure and I know that that increase has been well received by housing providers throughout Scotland.

I am aware that Maureen Macmillan is actively pursuing that issue and has held a series of meetings with our officials on the subject—I am following the discussions closely. Like her, I am looking to see whether any new measures can be found to address the serious problem that she has flagged up. I congratulate her on all the work that she is doing on the matter.

Following the spending review, we announced our plans to deliver nearly 5,000 homes for low-cost home ownership across Scotland over the next three years. That represents an 80 per cent expansion of our low-cost home ownership programme. Last week we launched homestake, a new home ownership scheme based on shared equity. Homestake will help first-time buyers and people on low incomes who are unable to afford to buy a house on the open market. The first houses under the new scheme will be available later this year.

We are in discussions with mortgage lenders about the matter, because we hope that we might even be able to improve on the announcement that we have made if we can reach an agreement with them. As those discussions are still under way and I am to meet the Council of Mortgage Lenders next week, I do not want to go into the detail, but I agree with the thrust of what Paul Martin suggests. We have already announced a good deal, as a result of which we will get almost 5,000 homes for low-cost home ownership, but I hope that we will be able to increase that number, and to move in the same direction as England will be able to do after the budget yesterday.

Nobody is denying that, but the point that has been made is that there is a significant difference between what Linda Fabiani is talking about and completely new sites where there is no water and sewerage infrastructure at all. Nevertheless, I take on board what she has said. The £14 million for registered social landlords to which I have referred will be able to deal with those issues to the benefit of housing associations.

Local authorities are statutorily required to assess housing needs as part of their local housing strategy. As part of the affordable housing review in 2004, we published the results of a modelling of net need throughout the country. We will continue to work with local authorities to improve the basis of housing needs assessment, nationally and locally.

There are a range of issues in that question. Obviously, I am concerned about the situation of hard-working families. However, I am sure that John Home Robertson will acknowledge that many homeless families are in the same category. Clearly, a balance has to be struck. I welcome the fact that East Lothian Council has adjusted its allocation policy. Of course, that does not mean, in the long run, that all of the allocations will go to homeless families.  Clearly, there is a need for new housing in East Lothian and I am glad that the Communities Scotland budget for East Lothian is increasing by 57 per cent into next year, which will help the situation. I know that East Lothian is considering taking advantage of the prudential borrowing regime that it is able to benefit from. I am sure that that will go a long way towards addressing the problems to which John Home Robertson refers.

Linda Fabiani and Bill Aitken asked what happened to housing before devolution. Well, before devolution I was housing minister, briefly; there were no debates on housing; as Cathie Craigie reminded us, there were much higher  levels of rough sleeping, fuel poverty and local authority debt; and, before 1997, there were higher mortgage rates.

In a moment, when I get into my stride. Great strides have been made since then. Our policy is based on giving individuals and families choices at various stages of their lives. It is about being on the side of the aspiring home owner as well as on the side of those who need to rent a property. It includes a massive programme of improving the quality of housing, both private and social rented. As Karen Whitefield reminded us, it takes a broad view of housing and closing the opportunity gap for disadvantaged individuals and communities.

At a particular moment in time, that may have been the case, but I remind Brian Monteith that over the 18 years for which his party was in government, spending on public sector housing was certainly not higher than our proposed spending. I welcome the many positive responses in the debate to our policy paper and bill. However, some members have been a bit grudging about the funding announcements. Today we gave details of the 23 per cent increase in funding for Communities Scotland next year. George Lyon talked about Argyll and Bute—the increase there, for example, will be from £6.6 million this year to £12 million next year. I emphasise our strong commitment to social rented housing. Investment in affordable housing in the next three years will be £1.2 billion, the majority of which will go to the social rented sector. Some of those grudging comments were perhaps more about the shared ownership schemes, particularly the innovative homestake scheme.

I must make progress. Linda Fabiani asked who will decide whether homestake owners can buy outright. That will have to be agreed between the housing association and the grant provider, but the fundamental point is that, in that eventuality, the money, as Johann Lamont reminded us, is recyclable and can be used for another shared-equity home. The existing shared ownership schemes will be reviewed once the homestake scheme is up and running.  Another contentious issue is the single survey proposals. Brian Monteith was reasonable about the supply-side issues, which I will talk about in a moment, but completely unreasonable on the single survey. The market delivers some things, but not everything, and it certainly does not deliver for the buyer in this case, which is the key point. We propose to get rid of the multiple survey problem, which costs buyers in Scotland millions of pounds every year, and to address the estimated disrepair value of £425 million in houses that are sold each year. To pick up one of Mary Scanlon's points, we had a meeting with stakeholders on 22 February to ask for fresh ideas for meeting our policy objectives, but no new proposals were identified. It was made clear that the Executive believes that the rationale for the single survey scheme remains strong; that we have concluded that the pilot shows that the voluntary approach does not work; and that it is a realistic possibility that the powers to introduce a mandatory scheme will be used. We will continue to engage closely with stakeholders and consider carefully what information can be gleaned from the pilot. I turn to some broader issues that featured strongly in the debate. Susan Deacon emphasised planning modernisation and, along with Brian Monteith and Richard Lochhead, the importance of land supply. We have already announced our intention to streamline the preparation of development plans and ensure that they are produced on time and kept up to date. A key issue that development plans need to address is the long-term supply of land for housing. That will provide the certainty and confidence that are necessary not only for the development industry but for local communities.

Not at the moment. We have already announced our intention to examine with local authorities and housing providers an improved approach to monitoring the amount of land that is being made available for housing, but it is important that, when monitoring reveals shortages in the supply of land, early action should be taken to increase provision. Bruce Crawford and others mentioned the planning advice note on affordable housing, which has been broadly welcomed. He expressed concerns about the quality of such housing, but I remind him that subsidised housing must meet Communities Scotland's requirements and, ultimately, the quality standard. I also remind him that non-subsidised housing is subject to planning and building controls. Karen Whitefield emphasised the importance of public sector land release. Various members,  including Linda Fabiani have already mentioned the scheme that has been agreed with the Forestry Commission Scotland, under which registered social landlords are given a preferential opportunity to buy surplus land for affordable housing. We will seek to extend that scheme and we are also investing £3 million in an innovative land banking fund to address land supply for affordable housing in the Highlands.

Lewis Macdonald has already made a detailed announcement about that, and we have provided £14 million to registered social landlords to ensure that they can benefit from that announcement without any effect on rents or other costs. Patrick Harvie talked about energy efficiency, on which we have a strong programme. I will mention some of the relevant factors. We have the housing quality standards for all existing social rented stock and the Housing (Scotland) Bill that was published recently includes a basic minimum standard for insulation. We are also committed to ending fuel poverty by 2016 and have made significant progress on that already, including providing 46,000 homes with central heating systems. I will also say something on the right to buy, given the way in which it has featured in the debate. We understand the arguments that have been made on the right, but we carried out a substantial review and made significant changes to it in 2001 to achieve a better balance between the needs of the individual and of the community, and we are committed to report to Parliament next year on the effect of the right to buy. [ Interruption. ]

The report will look carefully at the effect of the right to buy on the nature and condition of the housing stock and at the need and demand for affordable housing. We will consider the merits of the cases that are made for further adjustments to the operation of the right to buy in the light of the evidence in that report. Work on the report is being taken forward this year, building on earlier work with stakeholders that proposed a framework for the report. We are setting up an advisory group to consider the  framework and to oversee the production of the report, and I will shortly invite key stakeholders to participate in that work to ensure that we take account of the issues that are of concern to them. Members will also know that we will make a statement on homelessness in a year or so to ensure that we have the detailed planning in place to fulfil our commitment to provide permanent accommodation for all unintentionally homeless people by 2012. Our package of devolved housing policies has been crowned today by the announcement in the Chancellor of the Exchequer's budget statement that he will double the threshold for stamp duty land tax from £60,000 to £120,000. That is excellent news for all first-time buyers, but it is particularly good news for Scotland, which has most to gain from such a measure, as it is the only area of the United Kingdom in which the average house price is around £100,000, which is roughly two thirds of the UK average. Currently, about six in every seven first-time buyers in Scotland are forced above the £60,000 threshold, so raising the threshold to £120,000 will save purchasers up to £1,200 in transaction fees. The range of new measures that have been announced in the past few days and that have been debated here today, including our new policy statement, the £404 million investment in affordable housing over the next year, the £1.2 billion investment in affordable housing over the next three years, the homestake initiative, planning advice, the aim to ensure that a quarter of all new housing is affordable housing and the planning announcements that have already been made—as well as the other announcements that will be made soon—are all major steps towards our objective of ensuring that there is an adequate supply of good-quality, warm affordable housing for all in Scotland. We now have the clearest picture ever of Scotland's housing needs. In the new policy statement, we set out a detailed plan of action, backed by a record level of resources. The challenge now is to translate all that into reality for everyone in Scotland. I commend our policy statement, our new bill and the Executive's housing policies to the Parliament.

As with previous phases of the campaign, an evaluation of the current phase of media advertising will be undertaken when it concludes at the end of March. The results will be published on the one Scotland website, alongside the evaluations of previous phases.

I assure Patrick Harvie that I and others in the Executive are discussing with London that review, which was announced only a few days ago. We are well aware of the excellent work that many organisations do and we have conducted a review that Margaret Curran initiated into local ethnic minority work. We fund many relevant initiatives. The one Scotland, many cultures campaign is not a substitute for them; it complements them and conveys strong messages. A key message in the current phase is that racism is a virus, but the campaign also has positive messages about people coming to live and work in Scotland. The campaign has been widely welcomed, but of course much more must be done, and we are doing much more.

I am pleased to open the stage 1 debate on the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill. I thank the Communities Committee for its rigorous scrutiny of the bill and welcome its endorsement of the bill in the stage 1 report. We agree with many of its recommendations. The bill aims to provide a robust, proportionate and transparent regulatory framework that protects the public interest and helps charities to flourish. The process began with the establishment of the McFadden commission in 2000 and the setting up of the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator in 2003 to monitor and supervise charities ahead of the legal reforms that are contained in the bill. The charity sector had been calling for legislative reform for some time and we worked closely with the sector to develop the bill. I am very pleased with the response to the consultation exercise and I believe that the positive report from the Communities Committee illustrates that we have a better bill as a result. I look forward to continued discussion with the sector as the bill progresses and as we move towards its implementation. The Executive is committed to encouraging a vibrant and diverse charities sector in Scotland, and the bill is a crucial part of that. The charity sector provides a great benefit to our society. It has an income of £2 billion a year, of which the public donates about £240 million. It is therefore extremely important that we create an environment in which the sector can continue to flourish. The bill is designed to do that by providing reassurance to the public that the many charities to which they give generously use their donations appropriately, but without placing an undue burden on those charities. The principle of proportionate and balanced regulation is central to the bill, and we agree with the committee that co-operation between OSCR and the Charity Commission for England and Wales will be key to the bill's success. The inclusion of the duty on OSCR to co-operate with other regulators is designed to encourage that co-operation.  I reiterate my welcome for the committee's report. I am particularly pleased with its support for the two-part charity test and for our approach to public benefit and I agree with many of its comments on charitable purposes. The committee's evidence taking and consideration have moved policy thinking on and I am grateful for all its work. We will be carefully considering the wider implications of the committee's numerous recommendations. I do not intend to discuss all the recommendations today, but I want to clarify the Executive's position in a number of key areas. I will start by mentioning the important issue of the independence of charities. Everyone agrees that charities ought to act independently and that trustees ought to act in the best interests of their charities. What we have not always agreed about is how to create a test of independence that is fit for purpose. One of the issues that was raised in evidence to the committee was the proposed test's potential to remove charitable status from the five national collections non-departmental public bodies. The committee said that, although the principle of independence is fundamental to the charitable sector, the restriction on third-party direction powers should not inhibit charities from continuing to operate under the same constitutions where there are public interest reasons for a link to a third party. We remain committed to promoting the independence of charities. That is not to say that the Government cannot set up charities or that charities cannot take on government functions, or even that charities cannot receive government funding, but it means that a charity's purposes must remain exclusively charitable and that charity trustees should act solely in the interests of the charity. The specific exclusion of third-party control in section 7(3)(b) was added to the bill to reinforce that. As a result of the evidence that was presented to the committee and in recognition of the unique role that is played by the five national collections NDPBs, we have already agreed to find a way to ensure that the National Library of Scotland, the National Galleries of Scotland, the National Museums of Scotland, the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland and the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh are able to retain their charitable status. The committee raised concerns about local authority arm's-length charities and the appointment of their charity trustees by the local authority. As the Deputy Minister for Communities, Johann Lamont, said in evidence to the committee, charitable status will depend on charities' purposes remaining exclusively charitable and their charity trustees being able to act solely in the interests of the charity. The fact  that the charity trustees are appointed by the local authority should in itself have little impact. The possibility that the independence requirement may have an impact on further education colleges has been identified. We have acknowledged that the test in its current form could impact in such a way as to be too severe or unworkable and we are examining the test to consider whether amendments are necessary. However, we remain firmly committed to the principle of charity independence and of charity trustees acting solely in the interests of the charity. The public benefit test has already been widely debated and I very much welcome the committee's support for the approach that has been taken in the bill. Much of the discussion has centred on independent schools and a number of views have been expressed on whether such schools should or would lose their charitable status as a result of the bill. The bill does not make judgments about specific types of charity but seeks to provide a robust test against which all charities can be judged. It is a key principle that all charities should have to prove that they provide public benefit before they can access the substantial benefits of charitable status.

Every charity will have to satisfy OSCR that it can demonstrate public benefit. That applies equally to independent schools as to anyone else. I know that, as his amendment to the motion indicates, independent schools are Tommy Sheridan's particular concern. Although the fact that a charity charges does not in itself mean that it ceases to provide public benefit, charges will not be able to be "unduly restrictive"—two key words in the public benefit test. By providing broad criteria of what constitutes public benefit, we have created a robust test that encapsulates previous case law but which, importantly, has the flexibility to adapt to changes in the sector and in public perception of what constitutes a charity. Allowing OSCR to judge each case on its merits is the right way to ensure that a fair and reasoned approach is taken to each case.

I will have to make progress, because I think that I am getting behind time.  The committee acknowledged that point but highlighted that it was a challenging and contentious task for OSCR. I believe that the appeals process and the duty on OSCR to consult on how it will determine charitable status will ensure a fair and open process for those important decisions. The other part of the charity test is to do with charitable purposes. I believe that we have developed a set of purposes that reflect the Scottish charitable sector and allow for development as perceptions of charities change. Although I am committed to creating a legislative framework that meets the needs of the Scottish charity sector and public, there are concerns that differences in what constitutes a charity in England and Wales and in Scotland could create a situation where bodies are recognised as charities in Scotland but are not recognised as charities by the Inland Revenue. However, what matters most is that we have clarity about what constitutes a charity in Scotland and what fits the public perception of what a charity should be. The committee makes that point in its report. However, I acknowledge the need for close working between OSCR, the Inland Revenue and the Charity Commission, on which I know that officials are working.

I think that I really need—

I do not know how much time I have to get through my speech. If I get through it, I will take interventions at the end. Another part of the bill that has excited debate is the continuation of the designation of certain religious charities, exempting them from some aspects of the regulatory controls in recognition of their internal control mechanisms. The issues have been well debated by both sides; the religious charities think that they should be exempt from OSCR controls that could impinge on the internal governance of the church and their independence from the state and others feel that there should be no exemptions from OSCR review at all. The bill strikes a balance between the two sides, providing a regulatory framework for all charities and, in the interests of transparency and accountability, it is right that all charities should be accountable to the Scottish public through OSCR for their charitable status. The status of OSCR has also been debated during the bill consultation and one of the main principles that the bill sets out is that OSCR is to be an independent regulator. The consultation on  the draft bill confirmed the earlier strong views that decisions on charity status and regulation of charities should be free from political interference. Modern practice is that independent regulators should preferably be bodies corporate, governed by a board of members, rather than relying on individuals to hold statutory powers. I am pleased that the committee's report agreed with the way that the Executive proposes to implement that. OSCR is to be a public body free from ministerial direction, except in relation to the framework for its annual report that is to be lodged with the Parliament. It is intended that OSCR will be made a non-ministerial office-holder in the Scottish Administration by a Scotland Act 1998 order. We are discussing with the United Kingdom Government the feasibility of a body corporate becoming an office-holder in the Scottish Administration. There is no precedent for that but, whatever the outcome, we are committed to OSCR being an effective and independent regulator.

I cannot speak for the Inland Revenue, obviously, as that is within the provenance of the United Kingdom Government, and so cannot give the guarantee that John Swinney seeks. However, I can say that OSCR, the English charity regulator and the Inland Revenue are seeking to co-operate with one another. I said at the start of my speech that I wanted the bill to set out a proportionate and balanced approach to charity regulation. That has been a consistent theme throughout our deliberations. The bill gives OSCR the necessary powers to prevent wrongdoing and to intervene to protect a charity's assets when a serious breach has occurred. However, the need to minimise dual regulation has been taken into account. Following consultation, the bill has been amended to allow charities that have no major activities in Scotland but which have members here not to register with OSCR, provided they make it clear that they are registered elsewhere. The day-to-day regulation of charitable registered social landlords has also been delegated to Communities Scotland, although OSCR will remain in control of their charitable status. The principle of proportionate regulation is found throughout the bill and will be continued in the subordinate legislation. The accounting regulations, which will be consulted on soon, will allow smaller charities to produce simplified  accounts while still giving OSCR and the public a clear picture of the charity's activities. Penalties for failure to comply with the legislation will be applied proportionately and will take account of the circumstances of the breach. If charities are to flourish in Scotland, it is vital that the legislation that we implement recognises the wide diversity within the sector and acknowledges the pressures on the small, one-person charity as well as those facing the large international players. I believe that the bill does that, but we are committed to working with the sector to ensure we do not inadvertently place unnecessary strains on charities. I welcome the committee's support for the provisions in the bill to regulate benevolent fundraising. Those provisions are key to ensuring transparency and accountability in the way in which funds are raised and to promoting public confidence in the sector, which is one of the main aims of the bill. We will continue to work with the sector as we develop the regulations on fundraising and public benevolent collections. The bill regulates fundraising by and for all benevolent bodies—not just charities—in order to maximise public confidence in donating to good causes. The committee recognised the importance of that approach. I am pleased that the committee supports the development of a scheme of self-regulation by the sector, with reserve powers in the bill that can be used if further statutory regulation should prove necessary. The Executive has agreed to allow the self-regulation scheme time to prove its worth. The sector has undertaken considerable work on that and we look forward to working with it as the scheme is finalised and put in place. In the coming months, work will be done to develop the regulations and to establish training and awareness-raising programmes. The relationship that we developed with the sector during the initial consultation stage is key to that and we will continue to work to engage it in the implementation process to ensure a smooth transition to the new regime. I look forward to working with the committee in the coming parliamentary stages. I am convinced that we can produce an act that allows the sector to grow while providing the necessary reassurance to the general public. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill.

I think that was a message of support. It means that the SNP at last recognises that, like so many other Sewel motions, this motion confers powers on the Scottish ministers. There is a new duty for Scottish public bodies to promote equality of opportunity for disabled people. I am glad that the Equal Opportunities Committee approved the motion in its deliberations.

In the light of representations from the commission and others, we intend to strengthen the measure further by broadening it to include a requirement that public authorities have due regard to the need to promote positive attitudes towards disabled people and the need to encourage participation by disabled people in public life.

Following the spending review, we announced our three-year plans for the investment of £1.2 billion in affordable homes to rent or buy. We have raised our three-year target for the supply of affordable homes from 18,000 to 21,500, of which more than 16,500 homes will be provided for social rent.

The implication of what Lewis Macdonald said is that, in our calculations, we estimated that 15,000 homes would require new infrastructure and that the others would not. He was obviously addressing the concerns that had been expressed by Homes for Scotland. I repeat that our target is not 15,000 new homes, as Homes for Scotland seems to be implying. About 24,000 new homes are being built every year—is many more than in previous years—and we expect that level to continue. We believe that the money that we have invested directly in the registered social landlord sector and more widely in water services will allow that number of homes to be built.

We are keen to encourage a quota of affordable housing when wider housing developments take place, and we are already seeing significant use being made of that in places such as Edinburgh. We intend to produce a planning advice note that strengthens that policy. The issue might well be considered when planning legislation is introduced. Obviously, as far as the overall need for housing is concerned, the general situation in Glasgow is different from that, for example, in Edinburgh. I certainly accept what Pauline McNeill said about her part of Glasgow, where there is a shortage of social rented housing. The option of considering parts of a city for an affordable housing quota could certainly be examined.

Local authorities are assisted by the provision of specific funding to prevent and alleviate homelessness. Over the spending review period, that funding will amount to more than £150 million, £61.5 million of which will support the legislation's implementation.

I enjoyed a long discussion about that and other matters with North Lanarkshire Council recently. There will be another meeting with my officials because we are still waiting for some detailed information from the council. According to the published figures for 2002-03, 18 per cent of allocations went to homeless people. The figure was 20 per cent in 2003-04. Both of those figures are below the Scottish average. I was told that the figures have increased considerably for this year; we want further discussion of that and the reasons for the increase with North Lanarkshire Council. The target for the new rights to permanent accommodation for all categories should be achieved by 2012, so we have seven years in which incrementally to reach that particular objective, which has been widely admired not only in Scotland, but throughout Europe and further afield. We have time to meet the target even if particular issues have accelerated the situation in North Lanarkshire. We want to find the reasons and see what can be done to help.

The Executive is implementing the Scottish refugee integration forum action plan, which is aimed at improving integration. A progress report will be published in the spring. Since 2001, more than £9 million of additional funding has been allocated to a range of projects aimed at assisting refugees to integrate.

I know that many refugees already contribute to Scotland's economy and I welcome that fact. That is one reason why we  have a positive attitude towards asylum seekers and refugees who come to Scotland. In the latest round of funding, the Scottish refugee integration forum action plan provided funding for many projects that help refugees, mainly in Glasgow. The role that refugees play in many workplaces throughout Scotland was explicitly praised by the Federation of Small Businesses in the meeting that I had with the organisation's representatives this week. We shall certainly do everything that we can to encourage the wider integration of refugees, including by encouraging them to play a part in the workforce.

I am grateful for the opportunity to introduce this important debate and to send out a clear message that there is no place for racism in contemporary Scotland. Scotland is diverse and multi-ethnic—it has been shaped by the ebb and flow of migrants over centuries. People have come to our shores from many parts of the world to live and work, and Scots have left to set up home abroad, sometimes voluntarily and sometimes forced by circumstances. The richness of our culture and tradition, our architecture and music, and our art and education is testimony to those influences. Scotland in the 21 st century continues to change; the country is growing in confidence and is becoming more dynamic, more forward thinking and more energetic. Contemporary Scotland has a varied complexion. It is rich in the diversity of its culture and communities and it has all the ingredients to be innovative, smart and successful. However, there are real challenges. First, we have an ageing and declining population, although innovative approaches such as the fresh talent initiative can transform that challenge into an opportunity. Secondly prejudice, bigotry, racism and discrimination too often shackle opportunities and our nation's potential. Scotland has a reputation for being open, friendly and internationalist in outlook, but that is not the reality for some people for whom racism, harassment and discrimination are still too often the experience. That is totally unacceptable. Neither is it acceptable that a climate of fear is generated around asylum seekers and refugees or that heightened international tensions are exploited to foster anti-Islamic sentiments. We want Scotland to be at ease with its diversity. We want Scotland to be a place of innovation and creativity; a place to which people want to come and where they are welcome. We are clear that action has to be taken and we are clear about the central underpinning message, which is: One Scotland—no place for racism.

There are many issues around the matter. I share Tricia Marwick's sentiments and pay tribute to the police and the many other organisations—led by Positive Action in Housing—who campaigned on the issue. The creation of the climate for change and shifting of attitudes are critical parts of the work to combat racism and promote race equality. Our one Scotland, many cultures campaign sets aspirations about the sort of Scotland that we want to live in. It raises public awareness of racist attitudes and behaviour and highlights the negative impact that they have on individuals and society in general. The campaign also celebrates the positive aspects of Scotland's multicultural society. Race equality and tackling racism are not only critical to achieving the kind of society we want to live in; they are fundamental to delivery of accessible quality services that are responsive and capable of meeting the diverse needs of the population. Tackling racism and promoting equality are also necessary for successful outcomes in flagship policies such as the fresh talent initiative. We must create a climate in which people want to stay once they are here. Today, I launched the third phase of the one Scotland campaign. On Monday, we will begin screening three new television advertisements that will run for six weeks and which will be complemented by cinema, radio and bus advertising. The television advertisements will highlight three different aspects of the issue. The first is the importance of in-migration, which will be linked to the migration of Scots to other parts of the world. The second is that of racism as a destructive element in society and a virus that should not be spread. The third is that Scotland is a diverse and dynamic country where there is no place for racism. The media campaign is only part of the Executive's work to promote race equality and tackle racism. It would be somewhat cosmetic to focus on advertising and media work without concrete activity to substantiate it. A range of measures are being taken throughout Executive departments. Of course, it is impossible to mention all that is happening, so I suggest that if members want more details they read last year's report on the recommendations of the race equality action forum and the Executive's race equality scheme action plans. However, I will highlight some key measures.  The first measure is the Health Department's fair for all approach, which I was pleased to drive forward in my previous ministerial post. That initiative seeks to create a national health service in which staff are professionally and culturally equipped to meet the distinctive needs of black and ethnic minority communities and in which employment practices are fair for all and reflect the communities that are served. The initiative was supported by the creation of a national resource centre for ethnic minority health. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has made significant changes to the way in which it is organised and operates to ensure the elimination of racial discrimination and the promotion of race equality. Asylum seekers and refugees are another major issue. The 57 actions of the Scottish refugee integration forum's action plan are being implemented throughout departments and a progress report will be published in the spring. Since 2001, the Scottish Executive has invested more than £7 million in projects that help refugees and their host communities to integrate, including additional funding for English classes. We will continue to work with the Commission for Racial Equality Scotland, Scottish Enterprise and others in considering the recommendations of the Whitehall strategy unit's "Ethnic Minorities and the Labour Market: Final Report" of March 2003 to ensure that key principles are implemented in Scotland. The Executive also collaborates with the CRE to support the independent review of police in Scotland. We have produced a range of educational materials for schools, including the new holocaust memorial day education resource—which was launched on 27 January—and the Kiddiesville FC website, which was launched in November last year. We have supported various pieces of work with young people, including Show Racism the Red Card, Heartstone and Young Scot and we have funded the Scottish Trades Union Congress's one workplace, equal rights campaign, which aims to tackle racism and promote equal opportunities in workplaces. Last, but by no means least, we are implementing the Executive's race equality scheme to ensure that we eliminate discrimination and promote race equality in all that we do. The Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000 shifted the nature of race legislation from compliance to proactivity, particularly through the introduction of a duty on public bodies to promote race equality. Although the impact of that change is only now beginning to be felt, its significance cannot be underestimated. It provides for mainstreaming of race equality in all activities, which is a critical element in challenging institutional racism and  discrimination. We know from work that the Prime Minister's strategy unit has undertaken—reinforced by subsequent work in Scotland—that there is an ethnic penalty in earnings. Even when class and qualifications are taken into account, most members of minority ethnic communities fare worse than those in the majority population do and, in Scotland, those whose heritage is Pakistani or Bangladeshi earn less in employment and are less likely to be employed. People from minority ethnic communities will account for half of the growth in the working population in Great Britain in the next 10 years, so failure to improve the labour-market achievement of minority ethnic groups in Scotland will have serious consequences. More than that, there would be a tremendous waste of talent. Grappling with the issues will require our being more sophisticated in our analyses and solutions. We know that there is systemic racism and bias—better known as institutional racism—and that it accounts for the significant proportion of racial inequality in Britain today. The way institutions and organisations do business can often unwittingly lead to racial bias and inequality, so getting organisations to change and address equality issues in all that they do is at the heart of the race relations changes and of combating the institutional racism that was highlighted in the Macpherson report following the murder of Stephen Lawrence. That underpins the Executive's equality strategy and is part of the one Scotland, many cultures campaign. The Executive is seeking to address the problem in its role as policy maker and employer. In the latter role, the Executive has improved the diversity of its workforce and has positively encouraged people from minority ethnic communities to work in the Executive. Significant international and domestic changes are taking place that are influencing our communities and providing a different context for race relations in Scotland. In response, we have undertaken a review of delivery of race equality work. We are anxious to see how best to use our resources and to ensure that we focus on the right priorities. The review builds on the work that has been undertaken by the Executive in the past three years. We are deeply indebted to the many people and organisations that have provided evidence and information to us, and to the individuals who have given time to provide us with advice. We received the final report this week and are now considering the evidence and the way forward. I intend to respond shortly with details of the actions that we will take.  In conclusion, much has been done in recent years to advance the race equality agenda. We benefit enormously from collaboration with communities and with key organisations that work in the field. That collaboration has enabled us to see and understand more clearly what needs to be done. We should not underestimate the challenges that we face or the complexity of the issues, but neither should we be deterred from addressing those challenges and issues. We want a Scotland to be proud of, which means one Scotland that has no place for racism. I move, That the Parliament fully welcomes the Scottish Executive's continued commitment to tackling racism and promoting race equality; welcomes the high profile One Scotland Many Cultures campaign and flagship Fresh Talent initiative; supports the continuing need to raise awareness of, and tackle, racism in Scotland and to celebrate our diversity; supports the range of Executive activities and actions to promote race equality including work in health, the police and education, and is committed to eradicating racism in Scotland in whatever form it takes to ensure that we create an inclusive and prosperous Scotland.

Although informal discussions about pressured area status have taken place with a number of local authorities, only one local authority—South Ayrshire Council—has applied for such status to date.

I am not aware that the current arrangements are too complicated, but if Bristow Muldoon or West Lothian Council feels that they are, I would be interested to hear from them. I know that West Lothian Council has had informal discussions with the Scottish Executive  and I would be keen to hear an informal response from the council on that issue. Bristow Muldoon highlights wider problems in the Lothians. Edinburgh is going for a major initiative on community ownership. That will produce a major expansion and the quantity of affordable housing that is required in this part of the world. West Lothian Council is not saying that it will go down that route, but I know that it has been innovative and adventurous in releasing land. That is another fundamental issue in the provision of extra affordable housing.

I congratulate Brian Adam on securing this debate and acknowledge his concerns over how the DWP will deliver a progressive and effective service in Scotland. The matter is, of course, reserved and I shall speak only about the intention behind the plans. However, I recognise that there is a distinction between benefits processing and the front-line delivery of face-to-face help and assistance and, from where I am sitting, it appears that those two aspects have become quite confused during the debate. The DWP plans are intended, for example, to release more staff for front-line delivery, providing face-to-face help and assistance, and to give personal advisers nearly a fifth more time to work with each individual. The plans are also intended to enable those who struggle to reach offices—such as the sick and disabled—to gain help in their homes and local communities and therefore to have improved access. The plans are intended to enable more services to be delivered in local  surgeries and to be delivered jointly with local authorities in local communities.

I do not claim to be an expert in this area; I am merely highlighting the fact that face-to-face help and assistance will be available. That is important to people. I leave it to others who are more immersed in this subject than I am to judge whether that is the whole story. I was talking about joint services with local authorities. A prime example is West Lothian connected—a multi-agency, one-stop shop in the Almondvale shopping centre that brings together organisations such as Jobcentre Plus, West Lothian Council, Lothian NHS Board, the Inland Revenue and West Lothian College. That illustrates how a wide range of services can be brought together to support our communities. Brian Adam specifically mentioned Grampian, Tayside and Fife as areas without any DWP local offices. However, there are, and will remain, customer-facing offices in Fife at St Andrews, Cupar, Leven, Glenrothes, Kirkcaldy, Cowdenbeath and Dunfermline. Grampian and Tayside have, and will continue to have, customer-facing offices in Aberdeen, Banff, Arbroath, Fraserburgh, Peterhead, Forfar, Montrose, Dundee, Blairgowrie and Perth.

I accept that what Mr Adam says has become the point that has been most emphasised in the debate. I am merely trying to redress the balance, because there has been confusion between the benefits processing issue and the wider issues of money advice and assistance, which I shall talk about shortly. Those things will not be lost because of the change. Mr Adam has a point, but some people have strayed rather from that specific point to imply that there would be far wider changes to the availability of face-to-face help and assistance. The efficient use of resources in delivering front-line services is, of course, for the DWP to manage.  However, I want to talk a little about how the changes will work together with our action in Scotland to close the opportunity gap. The motion mentions the provision of money advice by local authorities and the voluntary sector. The Executive acknowledges that money advice is an important part of the strategy to combat financial exclusion. We greatly value the important role that money advisers play in providing impartial advice and support when they are needed most. That helps people to deal with pressing debts and ensures that they are getting all the benefits to which they are entitled and can maximise their disposable income in other ways. Two weeks ago in the chamber, Johann Lamont and I spoke about our financial inclusion action plan. It outlines the action needed to help the people of Scotland to take control of their own finances. That, of course, is part of the way out of poverty. The plan clearly acknowledges the role that money advice services play. It pledges that we will encourage the provision of advice that addresses all the interlinked difficulties that people face in their financial and legal affairs and in housing, employment and other matters. That is why we continue to support the money advice sector via direct funding. We have already committed £3 million per annum, resulting in 120 front-line money advisers—half of whom are based in the voluntary sector. Those advisers are now in place. An additional £2 million per annum will be set aside from April 2005 for face-to-face money advice that will be distributed via local authorities. It is expected that that will create a further 70 front-line money advisers in addition to the 120 that I just mentioned. We want to ensure that money advice is available to everyone, especially the most vulnerable members of our society. We are therefore investing a further £2 million over two years in a range of projects that explore the needs of specific groups such as lone parents and minority ethnic groups in accessing money advice.

Indeed. Of the money that has already been allocated, 44 per cent has gone to the voluntary sector. I am sure that that will continue to be the case with the money that is provided in the new financial year. A key part of our closing the opportunity gap approach is to break the cycle of poverty by helping people into sustained employment. There are two key examples of how we are working with the DWP to make that aspiration a reality.

I am obviously concerned about anyone losing their job. I hope that the process to which the member refers will not result in any compulsory redundancies. With the DWP, we are committed to delivering our first closing the opportunity gap target, which focuses on reducing the number of workless people who are dependent on DWP benefits in seven key areas of unemployment in Scotland. A number of money advice projects are working in partnership with the DWP to help long-term benefit claimants make the transition to sustained employment. They include the pathways to work projects that are based in Renfrewshire, East Renfrewshire, Inverclyde and Argyll and Bute and the two working neighbourhood pilots in Glasgow. Demand for money advice grows daily. We want to help to ensure that the infrastructure behind services can adapt to cope with the new demands that are placed on them, so we are investing in second-tier advice and training for money advisers; accreditation for specialist advisers who draw up debt arrangement schemes; and a common information technology structure for the sector. In his motion, Brian Adam mentioned Grampian, Tayside and Fife. He might be interested to hear that Fife Council, for example, will receive £100,000 of the new money. That will boost its annual funding for money advice to more than £250,000. That is in addition to Executive support for its financial inclusion project, which links with a range of partners, including banks, credit unions and business support agencies, to deliver financial education and advice at a local level. The authorities that cover the areas of Grampian and Tayside will collectively receive almost £700,000 in the next financial year.

I will do so. Two things have emerged from the debate. Of course I will pass on the views of members, but the range of speeches that we have heard has made me want to do some further work, even though the area is reserved. Members have  expressed concerns but, as I have tried to indicate, I think that there is another side to the story. However, I will investigate the specific issues that have been raised and will convey those concerns to my colleagues at Westminster.  I hope members will appreciate that the Executive is committed to ensuring that the most vulnerable people in Scotland get the advice and support that they need. I assure members that we will continue to work with the UK Government to ensure that that is the case.  Meeting closed at 17:54

Over the next three years, we will  invest £1.2 billion in affordable homes to rent or buy across Scotland. We have raised our three-year target for the supply of affordable homes from 18,000 to 21,500.

We are determined to increase both the number of social rented houses that are being built and, crucially, the number of low-cost houses for home ownership. We have an exciting and innovative shared equity scheme to give people opportunities to get on to the housing ladder. I accept that there are severe difficulties, especially in some parts of Scotland, for first-time buyers. On social rented accommodation, I have announced the investment figures and the targets for new build, which show a 46 per cent increase by 2008 on what we have currently. We are expanding the programme considerably. As Dennis Canavan knows, the Parliament passed an amendment to the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 to ensure that we give a statement on the right to buy by September 2006. We have made arrangements for that to happen and there will be a thorough look at the issue. We will consider the case for any further adjustments to the right to buy in the light of that report.

Those are issues of development planning and it is key that enough land should be designated for that. Murray Tosh's first point relates to infrastructure. Lewis Macdonald will make a statement soon about the water industry investment programme. I have been in discussions with Ross Finnie and Lewis Macdonald about that, as it is a matter that has  been raised with me quite often since I took up my brief four months ago. I think that Murray Tosh will be pleased about the developments that will take place on the back of the investment plan.

The financial memorandum accompanying the bill included an estimate of £10 million a year as the potential cost, excluding donations, to those non-departmental public bodies that currently hold charity status, were they to lose it. The five cultural national collections NDPBs estimate that some £10 million per annum of projected funding for special projects is dependent on charitable funding over the next 10 years. The total average financial impact is now estimated to be some £20 million a year.

Johann Lamont and I are considering the issue seriously and in detail. I have met representatives of the national collections NDPBs within the past two weeks to discuss the matter and I have also been discussing it with Patricia Ferguson. The issue is complex. There was a recommendation in the McFadden commission's review about the independence of charities, which raised questions about NDPBs. I of course recognise the serious issues at stake and assure the member that we want to find a way out of the present difficulty. Johann Lamont will be giving details of our plans when she goes before the Communities Committee on Wednesday.

I thank Karen Whitefield for drawing that to the attention of the Parliament. The national collections bodies described some of those matters to me in detail when I met some of their representatives recently. We are determined to take action to address the problem. We have one or two options before us and Johann Lamont  will give details of our plans when she appears before the Communities Committee next week.

We do not see older people just as recipients of services, although it is clear that the Executive has an excellent track record in that regard, and many of the issues have been covered in the debate today. One of our key points is that older people are a resource. I was pleased to speak about that  recently in the volunteering debate and we are pleased to fund the retired and senior volunteer programme. We want to make sure that society has a far more positive attitude towards older people. We have heard a lot about their invaluable role as carers today. I am pleased that they are involved in the development of policy and I chair the older people's consultative forum, which is one of the bodies in which that takes place. In everything that we do, we are determined to challenge any stereotypes that people have about older people. Sometimes those stereotypes are related to ageism. I am pleased to say that Westminster legislation to make age discrimination illegal in relation to employment and training will be in place by 2006, as John Swinburne said. If ageism is to be found in any of the services that are delivered in Scotland, we will challenge that as well. As Paul Martin said, we want to concentrate most of all on what the Parliament can do, but I must respond briefly to the point about pensions, which dominated Christine Grahame's and John Swinburne's speeches. I thought that John Swinburne's comments about Gordon Brown were particularly unfortunate, given that the Labour Government has raised expenditure on pensions by £10 billion since 1997. We can argue as much as we like about the combination of means testing and targeting, but the reality is that if that £10 billion had been evenly spread among all pensioners, many pensioners today would be a great deal poorer. Christine Grahame should remember that 170,000 pensioners in Scotland alone have been lifted out of poverty since 1997—a reduction of 68 per cent.

I will do so in a minute, but I want to talk about devolved areas first. There was a lot of discussion in the debate about the central heating programme. At the latest count, 44,000 central heating systems have been installed, so Paul Martin underestimated that number. John Swinburne said that 70,000 people were still waiting, but we have no evidence that the number is so large. We believe that there are just fewer than 5,000 people on the waiting list, including people with the broken systems that Tommy Sheridan was concerned about.

It was certainly galling to hear the Conservatives speak about various matters today. I indicated the massive progress that has been made in the past eight years. Nobody is saying that that is the end of the road—I do not expect that it is. Paul Martin emphasised several initiatives for older people, particularly on information technology. I am pleased that several schemes are now in place to ensure that older people who are unable to access IT facilities at home can do so in their local communities and, indeed, in all libraries. Paul invited me to visit the alive and kicking project in Springburn, and I am very pleased to accept his invitation. Nanette Milne mentioned the proposed vulnerable adults bill. This is clearly a key area for us; after all, there has been much concern about protecting the vulnerable from abuse. I have to say that we will not tolerate such activity. The care commission, local authorities, health boards and bodies such as the Mental Welfare Commission already have powers to investigate allegations of abuse and we intend to strengthen the protection that legislation affords the vulnerable of whatever age. A bill will be presented to Parliament as soon as practically possible. Sandra White raised the other issues that Help the Aged has written to us about. I have to say that we are strongly sympathetic to—and indeed are taking action on—all its demands. If it is possible to say so without annoying my Liberal friends too much, I think that Labour is the only party that supports a fairer council tax. I believe that the Liberal Democrats do not support such a tax at all. Members raised many health and community care issues. We must take a balanced approach to such matters and recognise that there is much more to do. For example, the group that is considering a national NHS framework is carrying out a lot of work on older people, particularly those who have multiple chronic conditions, and on issues such as rehabilitation and prevention, which David Davidson raised. That said, we do not favour the model that he proposed. Mary Scanlon also highlighted many health issues, including delayed discharge. Once again, we have much to do in that regard, but we should also acknowledge that significant progress has been made over the past three years. When the action plan was launched in March 2002, the total number of delayed discharges was more than 3,000. That figure is now going down from 1,900. Of course, there is more to do about care homes, but progress has also been made on that matter. We must recognise that, for example, new money has been made available on the back of  the spending review announcement and that, since the national review group was established in September 2001, £140 million extra has been invested in the independent care home sector.

Mary Scanlon will have to provide some of the details of that in writing to Rhona Brankin. All I can say is that the model set out under the provisions Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 is for single care homes, and that is how all care homes are now registered. On David Davidson's point about medical aids and adaptations, the equipment and adaptations strategy forum was established to achieve a much needed sense of direction. Its report, which has been welcomed by ministers, makes a series of recommendations, and we will shortly set up an implementation steering group. John Swinney mentioned dementia. Again, progress is being made in that area. A short-life working group has reported and guidance has been prepared with Alzheimer's Scotland to offer a template and planning and audit tools. Donald Gorrie and Linda Fabiani raised the issue of carers, whose massive contribution I have already acknowledged. Once again, in the first four years of the Parliament, funding support for carers has increased significantly and the new legislation to which Linda Fabiani referred has been enacted. Moreover, since then, a carer information strategy group has been set up and its recommendations should help to deal with some of the issues that she raised. Identifying hidden carers is an important part of the policy.

Do I have time to take an intervention, Presiding Officer?

Then I will take Linda Fabiani's intervention.

The correct people to meet carers are the Minister for Health and Community Care or the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, so I will convey that request to my colleagues. That is not to say that I am not interested in and concerned about those matters, but that is the way in which we have to operate in the Executive. Irene Oldfather mentioned advocacy services. I am glad that I have been invited to speak tomorrow at the launch of NHS Lothian's advocacy plan. There is certainly a commitment from the Scottish Executive that anyone who needs an advocacy service should be able to access such a service. I know that boards are working with local authorities to develop plans and, having read the Lothian plan, I also know that very significant progress has been made and that there has been a big increase in the resources that go into advocacy. I will end, untypically, by quoting Nicola Sturgeon. Before Christmas, she said: "I am not knocking anything that the Scottish Executive is doing for pensioners"——[ Official Report , 4 November; c 11552.] I thank Nicola Sturgeon for that endorsement. However, I was slightly disappointed to see that although there were 40 promises in the manifesto that she launched with Alex Salmond in the leadership contest, only one related to pensioners, and it dealt with pensions. That the Scottish National Party is not engaging with the issues that this Parliament can take forward for pensioners is a problem. I thank all the members who have drawn attention to those issues in the debate.

Communities Scotland and Fife Council have agreed that North East Fife is a priority area for investment in new-build affordable housing. Investment in the area is therefore a priority for the development funding that is available to Fife through the Communities Scotland affordable housing investment programme. This year, we have increased development funding to Fife to around £13 million—almost 50 per cent above historic levels.

Iain Smith raised three important issues, over and above the financial issue that I raised in my answer. New affordable housing is important, and I remind members that it will increase by 46 per cent throughout Scotland over the next three years. There is the issue of the release of land. I was in Fife this morning, opening a Women's Aid refuge, and the land supply issue in particular was flagged up to me. There are big planning issues there, which I am told will be addressed locally. We are considering that within the wider context of planning modernisation. The extra money from the council tax changes will of course be of great use in Fife; I know that there are many second homes in Iain Smith's constituency. The third point that the member raised is potentially relevant, in that it is up to Fife Council if it wants to submit applications to designate pressurised areas. The thinking behind the changes to the right to buy in 2001 was that, if particular areas had a problem, we would consider carefully any applications for pressured area status.

The focus of today's debate will be on concrete policy decisions and actions that will lead to further progress in closing gaps, but we should start by acknowledging the very real progress that has been made over the past few years. For example, since 1997, through a combination of rising employment levels, increasing pay, new tax credits and a 25 per cent real-terms increase in child benefit, 100,000 children in Scotland have been lifted out of relative poverty and 210,000 children have been lifted out of absolute poverty. Similar figures could be given for pensioners and will be given in the debate on older people next week. However, poverty is extremely complex and all the research tells us that it is not only about income but about services and opportunities. That is why the closing the opportunity gap Cabinet delivery group, which I chair, has been determined to concentrate on the big opportunities and services that disadvantaged individuals and communities need and to do so in a more focused, systematic and cross-cutting way. The objectives and targets that we announced last year make clear our intention to close the opportunity gap for the most excluded in our society by supporting people into sustainable employment; breaking the cycle of poverty for our most disadvantaged children and young people; addressing health inequalities between our most disadvantaged and most affluent communities; tackling financial exclusion among our most vulnerable families; improving access to services for the most disadvantaged in rural communities; and regenerating our most deprived communities. Those objectives and targets range right across the Executive's portfolios and are backed by delivery plans that set out the specific resources that will be invested and the action that will be taken to achieve the objectives. The starting point for our closing the opportunity gap approach is a strong belief that work is the best route out of poverty for the majority of people. We realise that work will not be an option for everyone and that we must also take steps in partnership with the United Kingdom Government to secure a reasonable standard of living for those who cannot work. However, increasing employment opportunities and the ability of people to take advantage of them is central to our  approach because getting people into sustained and meaningful employment not only increases their income but improves their self-esteem and has a range of benefits for their physical and mental well-being. The closing the opportunity gap group is currently overseeing the development of an employability framework for Scotland with Allan Wilson in the lead. The framework will look at how activity within our devolved powers in Scotland dovetails with the work of Jobcentre Plus to provide a continuum into employment and increasingly skilled work for those who are able to work. I re-emphasise that last point: our approach is not about getting people into low-paid, low-skilled, entry-level jobs; we want to get people into sustainable employment, where they are supported to continue their personal development so that they can realise their full potential.

There are certainly financial issues, which will be addressed, but there are detailed work streams, involving key experts from throughout Scotland, which are considering the demand-side issues, the supply-side issues and those who are furthest from the labour market. This is a systematic and thorough piece of work, which will come to its conclusion in the summer. Employers have a crucial role to play in continuing to support people once they enter work. There is much that the public sector can do—we have already signalled the role that the national health service in Scotland will play—but we will also be exploring how we can support and encourage private and voluntary sector employers to play their part. One example of how we are supporting people into work is our working for families initiative. Many parents, particularly those in deprived areas, struggle to access the child care that they need to access work, education or training. We listened to what parents said they needed to assist them and, in 10 local authorities with the greatest need, we now have a range of projects that are helping parents to find and sustain appropriate child care. Those projects are starting to see successes, and when I visited North Ayrshire recently, I met parents who had already been helped into work. That initiative is an important targeted addition to the more general advances in child care since 1997. We must also tackle the appalling inequalities in health that exist between individuals and  communities in Scotland. For example, we know that coronary heart disease mortality rates in our most deprived communities are two and a half times those in the most affluent areas. Tackling those long-standing inequalities involves promoting healthy lifestyles and encouraging people to make the right choices in diet and exercise. Smoking is obviously an important contributory factor. Our support for smoking cessation services in deprived areas and our plans to ban smoking in public places will make an important contribution.

That issue has certainly been taken on board. It is something that I was very much aware of as Minister for Health and Community Care and I know that the new minister is aware of it, too. Levels of unemployment among those with mental health problems are of course unacceptable. That will be addressed under the employability framework as well as in the wider work on mental health. I will conclude what I was saying about health. Life circumstances are crucial, as is an understanding of the complex relationship between life circumstances and their biological consequences. That is why we are supporting the Glasgow centre for population health in its innovative work. We were pleased to hear a presentation from the centre at the closing the opportunity gap delivery group last week. We must improve access to services for the most deprived. We know that those who are most in need of health services are often those who access them least. That is why we have set up unmet needs pilots and supported them with £15 million. Those are mainly in the Greater Glasgow NHS Board area, where the greatest concentrations of deprivation exist, but also in the Argyll and Clyde NHS Board and Tayside NHS Board areas. Another important part of our approach is breaking the cycle of poverty for our most vulnerable children and young people. Too many young people do not make the transition to adult life successfully, blighting their lives and limiting  their future life prospects. To prevent more of our young people from falling into poverty, we will therefore also focus on providing our most disadvantaged children and young people with the support, guidance and development that they need. One group of young people about whom we are particularly concerned is care leavers. The latest statistics show that around 60 per cent of young people leaving care are not in education, employment or training, compared with a figure of 14 per cent for all 16 to 19-year-olds. That is clearly unacceptable. We must, and will, reverse the trend of disengagement by boosting the skills and confidence of care leavers so that they avoid poverty and exclusion when they leave school. One way in which we are doing that is through our care leavers partnership programme with Columba 1400, which aims to help young people aged 16 to 25 who are preparing to make the transition from the care system to independent living. I was planning to say something about the financial inclusion action plan, which Johann Lamont launched yesterday. That is another key part of our agenda. Since time is alarmingly short for me, I shall leave her to deal with that subject, and I shall conclude by commenting briefly on rural Scotland and regeneration more generally. Our approach in rural Scotland will focus on those areas with the greatest levels of deprivation and the poorest access to services. We are currently working on identifying those areas where improvements are most needed and Ross Finnie will shortly make an announcement about the communities to be selected. There is a particular need to make a difference to the lives of those who are living in our most deprived communities. People living in Scotland's most deprived neighbourhoods are more likely to be unemployed and to have poorer health and lower educational attainment. The quality of their environment is also likely to be poorer. That is why we have set a specific target to promote the community regeneration of the most deprived neighbourhoods, through improvements in employability, education, health, access to local services and the quality of the local environment. Before Christmas, I announced funding of £318 million over the next three years to support services and projects. That funding is now better targeted on the most deprived 15 per cent of communities in Scotland. We are determined that mainstream services be directed into those areas, so we are allocating the new community regeneration fund to community planning partnerships. We will be asking those partnerships to develop and deliver a regeneration outcome agreement, which will have to be approved by us within the next few months.  Our closing the opportunity gap approach focuses on where the Executive can make most difference to the lives of the most disadvantaged. It takes a joined-up approach to tackling long-standing problems and will work alongside United Kingdom Government initiatives to focus on where we can make the most difference. We are taking a long-term view and will not eliminate poverty overnight. However, we will make a difference in key areas and see significant progress over the next three years. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the progress made in reducing poverty and extending opportunities in Scotland but recognises there is much more to do; welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment to closing the opportunity gap for those most excluded in urban and rural communities, and supports the Executive's plans to deliver objectives and targets for increasing the chances of sustained employment for vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, improving the confidence and skills of the most disadvantaged children and young people, reducing the vulnerability of low income families to financial exclusion and multiple debts, regenerating the most disadvantaged neighbourhoods, increasing the rate of improvement of the health status of people living in the most deprived communities and improving access to high quality services for the most disadvantaged groups and individuals.

First, I congratulate Alex Neil on securing the debate and share the general support that he, Margaret Mitchell and Donald Gorrie have expressed for the voluntary sector's role in this and many other areas. I also want to highlight my determination to tackle poverty and deprivation in communities such as Craigneuk. As Alex Neil pointed out, the Executive announced just this month a funding package of £318 million over the next three years to tackle poverty in our most deprived communities. This funding, which has been called the community regeneration fund, is being carefully targeted to ensure that we focus on Scotland's most deprived areas. Earlier this year, we published the Scottish index of multiple deprivation to help to pinpoint areas that require our attention. As I shall point out in a moment, North Lanarkshire is a significant beneficiary of our new funding package. As a result, we have made a significant commitment to provide resources to tackle disadvantage. It is now vital that we ensure that the resources are used to make a real difference. That was acknowledged in a review of the social inclusion partnership programme, which we commissioned in 2002 from Cambridge Economic Policy Associates. The review highlighted the importance of tackling poverty on a wider front and the need to ensure that public services take a joined-up approach to addressing the needs of the people in our poorest communities. In particular, it pointed out that the funding made available through programmes such as SIPs and the community regeneration fund needs to be used alongside mainstream funding for public services. We listened carefully to those messages and to the views of partners working in the most disadvantaged areas, and have acknowledged the importance of joining up action to tackle local disadvantage. That is why we have given local community planning partnerships a key role in developing an integrated approach and building on the best social inclusion partnership experiences. Over the past year, community planning partnerships have been working hard to integrate  social inclusion partnerships and to manage a transition to the new approach, which is supported by the community regeneration fund and focused on closing the opportunity gap. The motion highlights a local situation in which the community planning partnership has been grappling with difficult local issues in this context. However, I must stress that the north Lanarkshire partnership has taken these local decisions within the context of the Scottish Executive's general guidance in order to reflect local priorities and circumstances.

A key element of our guidance on the community regeneration fund is that local people should be involved in any decision that is made. However, I will look further into the allegation that has been made. I have already mentioned the new community regeneration fund, which will greatly increase the funding that is available to the North Lanarkshire partnership. In 2004-05, North Lanarkshire's combined SIP and better neighbourhood services fund budget was £5.5 million; however, our recent announcement has increased funding through the community regeneration fund to £9.8 million this year, which will rise to nearly £12 million in 2007-08. That more than doubles what has been available through the SIP and BNSF programmes. As a result, this issue is not about a lack of resources or support from the Scottish Executive. Instead, it centres on using the available money to best effect and leaving local operational decisions to those who are in the best place to understand local dynamics and issues within the context of the Scottish Executive's overarching guidance.

As I said at the beginning of my speech, I recognise and pay tribute to the voluntary sector's key role in that regard. However, it is difficult to generalise about this topic, because each situation has to be looked at on its own merits. My enthusiasm for the voluntary sector in general cannot become a blanket enthusiasm for every voluntary organisation in Scotland. North Lanarkshire partnership has taken a serious and systematic approach to the matter.  For example, it has undertaken a sustainability review of each and every project that the SIP has funded on an inclusive basis and in sufficient time to manage the changes that have resulted.

I believe in maximum transparency, so I am sure that the report should be made public. I also made a point in response to Linda Fabiani about involving local people in decisions. SIP funding for the Craigneuk project was due to end in March 2004. The sustainability review started work in 2003, and the CDSU was fully involved in the process and was visited by the review team. All of this is what I am told, since I have no personal knowledge or experience of the project. The review team submitted its report to the North Lanarkshire partnership, which decided in December 2003 to end SIP funding to the CDSU with effect from April 2004—a decision that was communicated to the CDSU at the time, a full year ago. That was a local decision, made by those on the ground closest to the real needs of the area. I am also told that Scottish Enterprise Lanarkshire assessed the CDSU's work in relation to providing job access services to unemployed people, and concluded that the CDSU significantly underperformed in all areas. In addition, in reaching the decision to cease funding the CDSU, the partnership assured itself that there would be no detrimental effect on services to unemployed people in Craigneuk, although I note Margaret Mitchell's point on that. The community planning partnership believes that the Routes to Work model provides a more integrated approach, with mainstream funding commitments from Scottish Enterprise, Careers Scotland, North Lanarkshire Council and Strathclyde European Partnership supplementing the funding from the SIP and the community regeneration fund. I understand that North Lanarkshire partnership guaranteed that all CDSU staff would be interviewed for posts with Routes to Work, funded a further review of options for alternative services that the CDSU could develop, and offered staff time to help the CDSU implement an action plan. Two staff who took up the offer of interview have been offered posts with Routes to Work. The remaining CDSU staff declined the offer, I am told. While I do not in any way want to underplay the human dimension of those developments, we need to focus on the fundamental purpose of our interventions in this field—namely, to maximise our impact on tackling poverty and deprivation,  and to close the opportunity gap in our most deprived communities. We have made explicit through "Closing the Opportunity Gap" the targets that we have set out to achieve. We have engaged community planning partnerships to join up action at the local level and to recognise the importance of mainstream services. We have charged local community planning partnerships to deliver that new approach. In this case, it is North Lanarkshire partnership's judgment that an integrated approach to delivering job access services through Routes to Work will have the desired impact in Craigneuk and similar areas.  I thank Donald Gorrie, Margaret Mitchell and Alex Neil, in particular, for their contributions. They have given us all plenty of food for thought, and I shall certainly reflect further on the points that they raised.  Meeting closed at 15:28.

We have established an expert sub-committee of the national group to address violence against women and it will consider and develop a strategic approach to the range of issues involved. The work is at an early stage and  the national group will consider the need for the development of specific targets.

We recognise the serious problem of emotional abuse within the wider issue of domestic abuse. When I met Scottish Women's Aid this morning it made the point that it is wrong to think only of specific instances of domestic abuse because it is an on-going process that includes emotional abuse. The expert sub-committee that I referred to will work on a definition and it will take account of the United Nations definition, which certainly pays attention to the important emotional and psychological dimension.

So far, more than 27,000 systems have been installed in the private sector and we are aiming to install a minimum of 40,000 systems by 2006. In addition, the central heating programme in the local authority and housing association sectors will benefit many senior citizens. The programme was extended earlier this year to include the replacement of 4,000 partial or inefficient systems in the homes of those who are over 80.

The huge demand for the central heating programme is illustrated by the figures that I mentioned, which show just how successful the programme has been. However, there can be particular reasons, such as the need for a new gas supply or an electrical upgrade, why people may experience more than the normal period of delay. I certainly understand the issue that Kenny MacAskill raised about the Lothians, where five months is the average delay. Obviously, the Eaga Partnership is doing everything that it can to reduce that. However, I think that people will understand that the underlying reason for the delay is the wide demand for the programme.

As the system provides a whole package that involves a final inspection of the work that has been done, we think that the present delivery mechanism is the best way. At present, our policy intention is to drive down the waiting times within that framework.

Obviously, difficult issues would arise from prioritising such requests, given that alongside those to whom the question refers are those who have no central heating system. Installers should certainly be mindful of the issues that have been raised, but we must also remember those who have no system at all.

At present, we are looking at the future of the programme. As Cathie Craigie knows, I announced such an extension of the programme for the over 80s earlier this year. We will come forward with proposals for the future programme very soon. We will, of course, consult on those.

Community planning partnerships have a key strategic role in agreeing joint objectives and co-ordinating the support of individual partners to target and regenerate the most disadvantaged communities. In particular, they have been tasked with developing and delivering regeneration outcome agreements, which will demonstrate how community planning partnerships are targeting and closing the opportunity gap for both geographic communities and communities of interest.

One of the key reasons for the change was to have a more integrated approach, so that the money that was going into community regeneration could be supplemented by mainstream funding. In addition, in the move towards community planning partnerships, there was a determination to maintain and enhance local involvement in decisions about those areas. A new initiative called the community voices initiative has been started to ensure that local people are fully involved. As part of the changes, the overall amount that goes into the fund has been increased. Last week, I announced £104 million for next year, which is a £9 million increase on this year and an £18 million increase over the average of the past three years. Of course, there is a new formula that helps some more than others, but I am sure that Susan Deacon will welcome the fact that in addition to the community regeneration fund money that is going to Edinburgh, we will also have substantial investment—£7 million over this year and next—in the urban regeneration company in Craigmillar.

We have received representations from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, local authorities, providers, stakeholders and a range of other organisations and individuals. I have met COSLA and other stakeholders and listened to their concerns about the allocations that were announced on 1 October. I announced new allocations today, slowing down the rate of the necessary redistribution to provide greater protection for those councils that are most affected.

The first thing to say is that the new allocations give double the funding that we had in 2002 and double the per capita amount that is available in England. That is the background. In the figures that were announced today, the cash reduction for Aberdeen is 3.3 per cent over three years. All councils are being required to perform such service reviews and Aberdeen should be able to manage it. We should acknowledge the considerable sums of money that are going into supporting people. There have been some difficult decisions to make. There was a review and we know that housing benefit from Westminster had to be changed into a Scottish system. I understand the difficulties with that, which is why I have had several meetings with COSLA to ensure that those councils that were most affected by the changes had longer to make the adjustments.

The masts associated with Network Rail's new communications system benefit from permitted development rights, which grant them planning permission. Network Rail advises all planning authorities of the planned mast locations and invites them to comment on their proposals. Individuals or community groups should contact their planning authorities about discussions with Network Rail regarding the siting of the masts.

The correct procedure is to deal with the question through the planning authorities, but I cannot think of anything in the world that would stop Donald Gorrie writing to Network Rail if he wished to do so.

We have a very large programme for modernising the planning system. Currently, a proposal to review the permitted development rights is not part of that programme. However, given the large number of representations that have been made on those matters, I am certainly reflecting on them. We will certainly continue to think about that in the lead-up to the planning white paper and the planning bill that will follow in due course.

Over the next three years, we will invest £1.2 billion in affordable homes to rent or to buy. We have raised our three-year target for the supply of affordable homes from 18,000 to 21,500,  and more than 16,500 of those homes will be provided for social rent, with nearly 5,000 homes for low-cost home ownership.

Apart from what I said about the future, I note that investment in north Lanarkshire housing is up this year by 20 per cent. I also notice that, at the last count, there were no families in bed-and-breakfast accommodation in north Lanarkshire, and I welcome that. The main challenges for North Lanarkshire Council, as for other councils, will be over the next few years. We have set the challenging target of abolishing priority need by 2012—in other words, giving all homeless people the same rights. I am determined to make progress towards that target in stages, in partnership with local authorities. We are committed to making a statement next year about how exactly we will do that. If there are specific current problems, I would want to hear more about them, although when I last looked at the figure for allocations from the waiting list to homeless people in north Lanarkshire it stood at 18 per cent, which is below the Scottish average. If the situation has changed since then, I would be keen to hear about that from Elaine Smith.

As Christine Grahame knows, the reason for more people being homeless is that more people have rights under our progressive homelessness legislation, which is probably the most progressive in Europe. In other words, everyone who is homeless is now entitled to temporary accommodation.  I thought that Christine Grahame supported the bed-and-breakfast regulations. Those families had a right to permanent accommodation under the old homelessness legislation. There is nothing new about that. We are committed to conducting a review of the right to buy and producing a report in 2006. As I said when I was on television with Christine Grahame a week or so ago, we will consider all the options at that point. We will take into account what is required to meet by 2012 our obligations under the homelessness legislation.

I, too, congratulate Margaret Ewing on securing this important debate and on all the work that she has done in the area over the years, both here and at Westminster. I join her in paying tribute to Ann Loughrey of Energy Action Scotland for all the work that she has done during the past 12 years. I benefited from meeting her on many occasions in relation to both my housing and health responsibilities. Excess winter deaths is a serious but complex issue. It is not simply about living in a cold climate or poor housing. Recent research, which I studied for some time today, shows a variety of causes, including pre-existing respiratory disease. Other research shows that rates of excess winter deaths in countries such as Spain, Portugal and Italy are similar to those in Scotland, if not higher. Taking account of that complexity, we are doing our utmost to tackle the causes of excess winter deaths, from increasing pensioners' incomes to  improving people's homes and providing free flu jabs. We are having some success and the figures for people who live in fuel poverty are plummeting. Between 1996 and 2002, which is the latest period for which we have figures, the number fell from 738,000 to 286,000. As Margaret Ewing reminded us, much of that is to do with changes in income. That there was a high number of pensioners who lived in fuel poverty in 1996 must say something for the pension changes that have been made since 1997. I do not intend to go far into those controversies, but we should acknowledge that across the United Kingdom the Government is spending £10 billion more on pensioners than in 1997, and that is significantly more than an earnings link would have cost. Almost half of the spending is targeted on the poorest third of pensioners. We are meeting all our targets for the warm deal insulation programme and the central heating programme, which provides central heating to pensioners and tenants in the social rented sector who have none. Also, as Mary Mulligan reminded us, we offer a benefits entitlement check. However, that does not mean that we are in any way complacent. We know that some of the easy-to-treat homes have been dealt with and that we will be challenged in the future by homes that are more expensive to treat. We also know that some people need a higher income or cheaper fuel and that is why we encourage people to find out whether they are getting all the benefits and tax credits to which they are entitled and to switch fuels or suppliers if they can get a cheaper deal. The central heating and warm deal programmes are making significant inroads in the eradication of fuel poverty and the improvement of health—cold, damp housing can have serious health implications. Since the central heating programme started in 2001 we have installed more than 43,000 central heating systems. Those homes now benefit from central heating where none existed before. Our warm deal programme provides the most vulnerable people with a package of measures to help them to insulate their homes. So far, we have insulated more than 200,000 homes, which is nearly one tenth of Scotland's housing stock.

I will certainly look into that matter, which two members have raised in the debate and which has been raised previously.  Significant sums are available to take forward the central heating and warm deal programmes. So far, we have spent more than £116 million on the central heating programme and £55 million on the warm deal programme. The motion calls on the Executive to review the effectiveness of our schemes. We have commissioned research to do that for the central heating programme. A report published earlier this year showed that more than 60 per cent of recipients were fuel poor, which is one of the best targeting rates in the UK. Further, of those in fuel poverty who entered the programme, nearly 90 per cent were lifted out of fuel poverty by the programme. We know, therefore, that the central heating programme is a key tool in eradicating fuel poverty. The programme was extended in May 2004 to include applicants who are 80 and over and who have partial or inefficient systems. Looking ahead, Communities Scotland has produced a detailed fuel poverty report. We are studying the evidence to ascertain where fuel poverty is most prevalent now and what measures will be most effective in eradicating it. We will use that evidence to create a fuel poverty programme to continue our work after our current programmes end in 2006. We will consult on a future programme in the new year and would encourage everyone to participate. We know that fuel prices are rising and that that is bound to have an effect on the levels of fuel poverty. Last month, I challenged the major fuel supply companies in Scotland to offer a social tariff—that is, a lower tariff—particularly to people on pension credit. Since then, all the companies have requested to meet me to discuss the idea, and I met the first of them earlier today. I was also pleased to see earlier this week that the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets has called on the companies to improve awareness of the help and information that is available to their vulnerable customers. Ofgem also said that, in its opinion, the companies were able to offer social tariffs to their vulnerable customers and that there is nothing in their licenses, in competition law or in other consumer protection law that prevents them from developing such tariffs. More recently, I welcomed the chancellor's pre-budget report that provided extra money for pensioners aged over 70 and 80, respectively, for their winter fuel payment. Mary Mulligan referred to that. I know that that money will help many people with their fuel bills. Margaret Ewing raised again the question of landlords who would not allow their tenants to have central heating systems. There is only a small number of such cases, but it is still a problem. In the context of the forthcoming housing bill, we have consulted on giving disabled tenants of private landlords the right to make adaptations  to their houses to meet any particular needs arising from a disability. In some cases, that could include the installation of central heating. I will consider further whether it would be desirable and appropriate to introduce such a right, through the forthcoming housing bill, for elderly and disabled tenants more generally for the purpose of installing central heating. On help and advice, I am sure that members will know that there are energy efficiency advice centres throughout Scotland, which have an 0800 number. They serve the purpose of the helpline to which Margaret Ewing referred. I will, of course, take up Mary Mulligan's invitation to visit the project in West Lothian to which she referred. In reply to another of Margaret Ewing's points, I inform her that the eradication of fuel poverty by 2016 was, in fact, enshrined in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001. The cumulative effect of the various measures and actions that I have described is that a substantial number of people now benefit from warm and comfortable homes from which they did not benefit at the start of the central heating and warm deal programmes. It is, of course, a sign of a civilised society that it looks after its elderly citizens, and that has certainly been the focus of our efforts in relation to fuel poverty in particular. Those achievements illustrate our commitment and the importance that we place on the health and welfare of our senior citizens. There is much more to do. In saying that, we should acknowledge the progress that has been made.  Meeting closed at 17:59.

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing this important debate. Her motion covers her own constituency as well as the general issues. Volunteering is central to our vision of "a Scotland which cares for its people, where opportunities are increasing for everyone ... and where people have confidence in their communities". No one should be in any doubt that older people are a central part of that vision. Like Sarah Boyack, I acknowledge the superb work done by volunteers, particularly, in the  context of today's debate, by older volunteers. We all appreciate the enormous contribution that older people continue to make to society. Rosie Kane highlighted their voluntary work in education and health. Those sectors are the ones used in the report that has been published today, on which I congratulate CSV. The report concentrates on research into the benefits of volunteering. We know about the benefits for others, but Sarah Boyack and other members have highlighted the benefits for volunteers themselves. Volunteers can maintain and develop social contacts and enjoy the experiences that volunteering has to offer. Of course, as Sarah Boyack reminded us, volunteers can also improve their health and well-being, as volunteering provides a means to keep active and contribute to communities. Through the Scottish Executive's volunteering strategy, which was launched earlier this year, we will embed a robust culture of volunteering throughout society. We are proud to be starting from a position of some strength, since Scotland is fortunate in having a strong tradition of volunteering. We also have an infrastructure in place to promote and support volunteering. The Scottish Executive core funds a national network of more than 40 volunteer centres as well as Volunteer Development Scotland, which supports volunteering at a national level. Volunteering does not just happen. We know that people who get into the volunteering habit when they are young are much more likely to continue to volunteer later in life, including old age. By focusing on young people, we are aiming to create future generations that have not only got into, but stayed in, the volunteering habit. Through investment in young people and programmes such as project Scotland and millennium volunteers, we have the power to change the culture for the long term. The strategy is not a here today, gone tomorrow initiative; it is about building volunteering into the everyday experience of all Scots—of whatever age, background or culture—for now and the future. However, our focus on young people does not mean that we are neglecting other key life stages. For example, a key emphasis is the development of employer-supported volunteering, both as a means for staff to develop work-related skills and as a key element in the transition to retirement. The CSV "Retire into Action" report backs up the fact that the structure of volunteering can provide a flexible, sociable and effective replacement for the structure of work. As Mary Scanlon reminded us, older people must be able to find out about volunteering outwith the workplace. That is why the strategy highlights  the role of service providers for older people in carrying out the important task of raising awareness of volunteering, its benefits and how to get involved. That work is crucial to making volunteering part of the everyday experience of older Scots. The issue is not just about making older people aware of, interested in and enthusiastic about volunteering. Community groups and organisations that engage volunteers have a key role to play. It is essential that volunteer managers, who are often volunteers themselves, recognise the value of engaging all types of volunteers, regardless of their age, social class or culture. Donald Gorrie, Christine Grahame and John Swinburne highlighted age prejudice, which is being tackled through the strategy in general and which will be addressed through training, advice and guidance on diversity in particular. Such improved provision will be part of a broad programme of support that is available to those who recruit and manage volunteers. I draw members' attention to two illustrative examples of initiatives through which the Executive is providing financial and moral support to voluntary sector organisations that work with Scotland's older people. The first is CSV's retired and senior volunteering project, which is an initiative for older people that increases learning opportunities, supports our social inclusion agenda and promotes volunteering by older people. The Executive's funding package amounts to more than £0.5 million for the three-year period from 2003 to 2006 and has enabled RSVP to become involved in schools, health care projects and the provision of support to disabled people. RSVP also helps to deliver environmental volunteering projects and even mentoring projects for young people. Another example of successful volunteering by older people is the senior executive programme from Scottish Business in the Community. SBC enlists the services of volunteer retired business managers to assist voluntary organisations and groups in the community. Those retired experts have considerable skills that are of invaluable use to organisations. They help with finance, information technology, management, marketing, fundraising and media and public relations. As well as making an enormous contribution, they develop and maintain social contacts and enjoy all the experiences that volunteering has to offer. This year, volunteers in the initiative will contribute 20,000 hours. If that work was done by companies that charged professional fees, it would cost about £0.5 million. A hundred and seventy organisations have been assisted this year, but the figure is growing all the time. The Executive's contribution  to the initiative will be £285,000 over the three years to 2006-07. Sandra White asked about the year of the volunteer. I am considering options on that and I will make an announcement shortly. There should be no financial barriers to volunteering, which is why the Executive covers the cost of checks for volunteers. As a disclosure check should cause the least possible disruption, we established the central registered body in Scotland to support the voluntary sector on all aspects of disclosure. I am pleased to be able to tell members today that the latest figures from CRBS show a significant improvement in performance in the time that is taken to process disclosures. CRBS is now clearing applications for processing by Disclosure Scotland within nine working days. I hope that I have shown that the Scottish Executive is committed to promoting, supporting and developing volunteering by older people. We invest considerably through RSVP and the senior executive programme. We have a well-developed infrastructure through volunteer centres and Volunteer Development Scotland that supports volunteers and the groups and organisations that engage volunteers.  The volunteering strategy provides a clear direction to build on those achievements for the benefit of older volunteers and for us all. I commend all volunteers of all ages for the substantial contribution that they make to our nation. In the context of today's debate, I pay particular tribute to the thousands of older people who provide such an invaluable service to our communities.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

One month ago we debated fully the subject of domestic abuse in Scotland. Parliament then endorsed the Executive's motion and recognised the very serious and totally unacceptable problem of domestic abuse in Scottish society. It may surprise some, therefore, that Mike Rumbles has chosen to lodge his motion for debate when the issues have already been well aired. However, the reason that he has done so is not a secret. As he argued today, and on 4 November and on 25 November, he does not accept that domestic abuse is primarily a gender-based issue and that the nature and scale of domestic abuse perpetrated by men against women are totally different from that perpetrated by women against men and they require different solutions. As Carolyn Leckie said, Mike Rumbles cannot  escape the facts. Recorded crime statistics from 2002 show that, in over 90 per cent of cases of domestic abuse, the victim was female.

No, I will not because I am going on the march at six o'clock and I must get through my speech before then. In addition, as Mark Ballard pointed out, research that the Executive published in 2002 shows that, in general, male victims are less likely to be repeat victims of assault, to be seriously injured or to report feeling fearful in their own homes. As Carolyn Leckie said, men and women typically have different attitudes and perceptions concerning domestic abuse. Underlying that is the gender inequality and abuse of power that makes domestic abuse a gender-based problem that requires a gender-based approach. We must acknowledge the patterns of behaviour, challenge the attitudes that underlie those patterns and set domestic abuse within a wider context of violence against women, which was the subject of last week's debate. I believe that Mike Rumbles has misrepresented the Executive's position because nobody is saying that some men are not victims of domestic abuse and nobody is saying that they should not receive services.

I will do so. Nobody is denying that anyone who is a victim of domestic abuse should receive protection and support, to pick up on Donald Gorrie's point. It is wrong to say that the Executive is not funding services for men. I have visited the Central Scotland Rape Crisis and Sexual Abuse Centre in Stirling to which the Executive has given funding and which provides services for men. However, it is up to the Scottish Rape Crisis Network, which is an independent network, to make its decisions about who is affiliated to it. Moreover, the Executive funds Men Against Sexual Abuse through £31,000 of section 10 funding. That organisation is exclusively for male sexual abuse survivors and they typically offer helpline advice, support and counselling. As Stewart Stevenson said in the previous debate on the issue, to talk of violence against women is not to ignore violence against men. The Executive has repeatedly made it clear that our approach does not mean that we have a disregard for the small minority of men who are victims or for those who experience abuse within same-sex relationships. The domestic abuse strategy sets  out plainly that "The existence of violence against men is not denied, nor is the existence of violence in same sex relationships, nor other forms of abuse". Moreover, the law protects men who are victims of domestic abuse. Various legal remedies are open to all victims, as appropriate, such as interdicts and court orders or non-harassment orders. The Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981 offers further remedies to spouses and opposite sex partners. The criminal law applies equally to criminal acts that are perpetrated by women against men or that are perpetrated within same-sex relationships. Similarly, when it comes to support, Victim Support Scotland provides a free and confidential service to all victims of crime. The research that was carried out by the Executive, which has already been referred to, examined the prevalence of domestic abuse that was perpetrated against men in Scotland, gauged the nature, frequency and seriousness of that abuse, examined the perspectives of those men who had been abused and assessed the adequacy of levels of service provision for such men. It concluded that there did not seem to be a need for an agency whose specific remit was to support male victims of domestic abuse in Scotland. It also concluded that there did not appear to be a need for refuges for abused men, although some male victims would benefit from support and advice on housing and welfare. It suggested that men who were trying to separate from abusive partners might benefit from the provision of alternative accommodation for themselves and their children and better legal and financial support. It is right that homelessness legislation in Scotland recognises that everyone who is fleeing domestic abuse should have a priority need for housing; that applies to men just as much as it applies to women, as do regulations that set out the advice and information that should be available to homeless people. The research suggested that abused men were not making full use of the support services that are available to them, which perhaps indicates that some service providers need to publicise their remit more widely. As a consequence, ministers wrote to relevant agencies—local authorities and other service providers—to encourage them to make their services more visible to male victims. In future, if evidence emerges that there are gaps in service provision or legal protection, of course we will consider them. For example, we are in the early stages of discussion with lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender organisations to identify whether there is a need for research into issues to do with abuse in same-sex relationships.  However, the research on men and domestic abuse confirmed the position as we know it, which is that there is not a demand or a need for specific services to parallel those that are in place for women. Although much of the available support is mainstream and open to all, it is women who require the specific additional support that is offered through refuge provision, support to Scottish Women's Aid and funds such as the domestic abuse service development fund. The structural nature of women's inequality and the relative positions of power of men and women provide the context for men's abuse of women and mean that the approach that is required is both singular and specific. During the debate on 4 November, Mike Rumbles said: "We must stop pretending that only men are violent and that women cannot be violent."— [ Official Report , 4 November 2004; c 11624.]  No one is pretending any such thing. Women can be violent towards men, but that violence is not rooted in a deeper gender inequality within Scotland. That does not mean that we should ignore it—we do not—but the solutions are different. I continue to believe that the Executive's approach is right. By virtue of its scale and nature, domestic abuse can be seen as gender-based abuse. If we do not acknowledge that fact, we cannot be serious about challenging the inequalities that allow it to continue. I apologise for not taking interventions, but I hope that members will join me on the Edinburgh march against violence against women, at which I will speak. It is unfortunate that the march has to happen every year as part of the 16 days of action that are now so necessary, but we hope that, in the not-too-distant future, such marches will no longer be necessary.  Meeting closed at 17:58.

A wide range of Executive policies are in place and are making a real difference, for example investment in affordable housing, funding to support community transport projects, significant economic development investment, and 175 jobs in the Scottish Public Pensions Agency.

I will raise the matter with the Minister for Education and Young People, who heard the member directly, so I am sure that he will get back to her. Obviously, I was not expecting an education question. When I was talking about the Scottish Public Pensions Agency, it sprung to mind that Christine Grahame attacked that movement of jobs to the Borders, saying that it was little more than "cynical political manoeuvring". I hope that she is now willing to retract that and accept the analysis of Scottish Enterprise Borders, which estimates the annual economic impact of that move at £6.13 million and 289 full-time-equivalent jobs.

I am pleased that Scottish Enterprise Borders has put funding into those communities. I strongly support that and I will see what further work can be done.

I am not aware of any discussions on the issue, but I will investigate the matter and write to the member.

As a general rule, Scottish Executive funding goes to programmes that increase the supply of housing. However, there may be circumstances in which the purchase of properties is justified to meet particular housing objectives quickly. That is a matter for local authorities to consider in the light of their housing needs assessments and local circumstances.

As I said, the fundamental policy is to increase the supply of affordable housing. In the next three years, £1.2 billion will be targeted at that. Aberdeenshire Council has benefited greatly from the increased expenditure on housing—it received a big increase in its funding for housing in the past year. However, as I stated, those measures may need to be supplemented in some circumstances. We have increased the rights of homeless people and the number of people who have those rights, which obviously means that short-term as well as longer-term action needs to be taken. The fundamental policy is to increase the supply of homes, but the private sector should be used where necessary. I emphasise that because, as a result of the Homeless Persons (Unsuitable Accommodation) (Scotland) Order 2004—which will ensure that families are not in bed-and-breakfast accommodation for longer than 14 days—some councils may have to use the private sector.

I strongly agree with Mary Mulligan on that point. On Tuesday, I was pleased to convene one of a series of regular meetings between the Executive and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on housing, homelessness and regeneration, at which I made clear my total commitment to working in  partnership with COSLA on the challenges of homelessness and of housing and regeneration more generally. I repeated that commitment at yesterday's Communities Committee meeting, in which there was some disagreement with COSLA. I do not want to go into the details, although some of this morning's reporting of the disagreement was one sided. We engaged with COSLA as much as we could in the past year on the order that I mentioned, but it did not respond to the consultation on the matter. However, that is water under the bridge and I am determined to ensure that we work in partnership with COSLA on all the challenging housing matters.

That is not the main thing that is happening in housing in East Lothian. One of the most important developments for East Lothian Council—over and above the £1.2 billion that will benefit everywhere in Scotland—is the Executive's decision to allow councils to use a prudential borrowing regime. I know that East Lothian Council is keen to benefit from that regime, which will do a great deal for council housing in the area. John Home Robertson sounds as if he is attacking the right-to-buy policy in its totality—that, of course, is his right—but the Parliament took a view on the matter in 2001. We are committed to reviewing the policy in 2006, at which time he and everyone else can give their views. What he described concerns the purchase of a small number of private sector houses. As I said in my last answer, those purchases will be necessary for some authorities that have to take very quick action in order to meet the terms of the order. I think that East Lothian Council might be looking at its allocations policy to see what the proportion of lets that go to homeless families is. As John Home Robertson knows, Communities Scotland heavily criticised the council in its report on the subject.

I am proud of the fact that we, in the Scottish Parliament, are playing our small part in tackling a massive global issue. The United Nations has designated today and 25 November every year as the international day for the elimination of violence against women. It is, therefore, regrettable that arguments were made in the debate against having the debate at all. We are having two debates because we wanted to deal at the beginning of the month with the large issue of domestic abuse, around which there has been a lot of activity, and because, as many members have pointed out, there is a much wider agenda of violence against women that it was important for us to address today. Elaine Smith welcomed our intention to set up an expert group to look strategically at the issue. One purpose of the debate, among several, was to get the  opinions of members so that they can be fed in to that important piece of strategic work. The wider objection that came from the Conservative party and Mike Rumbles related to the fact that there is also violence against men. However, as Stewart Stevenson said, to talk of violence against women is not to ignore violence against men. It is very important that we focus on the specific issue. Cathy Jamieson has been leading an initiative relating to knife culture this week—that is a specific issue to focus on. Likewise, it is absolutely right that we focus specifically on the gendered nature of violence against women. That is something that Mike Rumbles fundamentally ignores in making the points that he continually makes on the issue. As Elaine Smith said, it is important for us to see the big picture.

No one is saying that it is; we are looking at patterns of behaviour. The nature and the scale of women's violence against men, when it occurs, are entirely different and do not take anything away from the fundamentally gendered nature of domestic abuse and violence against women in general. I will accept the SNP's amendment. I welcome the amendment and the various points that are made in it. The cultural aspect of violence against women has been picked up in various speeches. For example, Carolyn Leckie talked about the normalisation of violence against women in the media, which is an important dimension. Unless we address the broader cultural and social determinants of violence against women, we cannot deal with the issue. Rosie Kane highlighted the importance of prevention. Our agenda—which came originally from agendas that were created by women's organisations long before the Scottish Parliament existed—is based around the three Ps of prevention, protection and provision. As Rosie Kane said, we must start with children. There are various initiatives that help, such as the respect campaign that is run by the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust, which is used in schools. That must be a key part of our agenda. Along with Shiona Baird and Pauline McNeill, Rosie Kane also majored on the issue of human trafficking, which is fundamentally a crime that is committed by men against women and children. I want to mention two initiatives to address that. The Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 contains provision to make trafficking for the purposes of exploitation a criminal offence. The commencement order was  made earlier this month, and the new offences will come into force in Scotland on 1 December, incurring a maximum penalty of 14 years. There is also a project in Glasgow, funded by the violence against women fund, to develop work on the issue of trafficking for the purposes of prostitution and to ensure that appropriate services are in place for individual women. That is one of several projects that are funded by the violence against women fund. Pauline McNeill and Elaine Smith mentioned the proposal for a rape and sexual assault centre in Glasgow. Officials from the Health, Justice and Development Departments have met project members to explore how that proposal can be progressed. I viewed the proposal very positively when I was the Minister for Health and Community Care and will do the same as the Minister for Communities. Part of the purpose of today's debate is to open up the wider agenda around issues of violence against women. Donald Gorrie and Pauline McNeill talked about prostitution from different perspectives. As members know, an expert group on prostitution is considering the issues related to that and its report will be submitted to the Minister for Justice shortly. As part of an impassioned speech on the international struggle against violence against women, Cathy Peattie spoke about female genital mutilation. As members know, at the end of October we introduced to the Parliament the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Bill to strengthen the existing legal protection against female genital mutilation. Carolyn Leckie, Donald Gorrie and Mary Scanlon talked about rape and the problems that exist in that area with the law. We have asked the Scottish Law Commission to undertake a review of the law relating to rape and other serious sexual offences and to make recommendations. For Mary Scanlon's interest, I point out that the review will include male-against-male rape. The Crown Office is also conducting a review of its investigation and prosecution of rape and serious sexual assaults. Carolyn Leckie and Elaine Smith raised the important issue of pornography. I agree that we need a serious debate about that issue. I also agree with Carolyn Leckie that pornography is predicated on abuse and I look forward to the Equal Opportunities Committee's consideration of the matter. Christine Grahame raised several issues in her speech, including that of domestic abuse courts. I was pleased to launch such a court in Glasgow in October. The member suggested that the issue might better be dealt with by family law courts. I hesitate to get into a dispute with a lawyer, but the  basic point is that domestic abuse and violence against women is a criminal offence and should therefore be dealt with by a criminal court, rather than a civil court. That is a key message for us. Christine Grahame also rightly reminded us of the use of rape as a weapon of war. We all share the horror and revulsion that she feels at stories of the systematic use of rape in war throughout the world. These are war crimes and crimes against humanity that are rightly outlawed under domestic and international law. I am sure that the Parliament joins me in deploring their occurrence. There is no one in the chair to tell me how much longer I have, so I will continue. Christine Grahame asked whether people knew about the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. An evaluation of that issue was carried out, as a result of which the Executive wrote to more than 180 organisations this August to remind them of the remedies that are available under Scots law to protect against abuse. The act has also been publicised in other ways. There has been progress, but I accept fully that much more must be done. Christine Grahame also asked about the evaluation of advertising campaigns, which shows that the adverts result in greater public awareness. The member recognised that point in the previous debate on this issue, when she pointed out that there were far more calls to the domestic abuse helpline following the advertisements. I remind those in the Parliament who, unfortunately, expressed concerns about today's debate that violence against women is but one type of violence in our society. Margaret Mitchell mentioned Scotland's homicide figures. Of course the figures that were published yesterday are too high, although there has been a recent welcome fall. Too many Scots are still being injured or killed at the hands of young men with knives, in particular. As the Minister for Justice said yesterday: "too many young men carry a knife ... perhaps because they think it makes them look hard or in the mistaken belief that this will give them some form of protection." The Executive is turning its attention to that issue. Earlier this week, the First Minister outlined a range of new proposals to tackle the problem. The new measures that the Executive will develop in further detail as part of a wider strategy to tackle violence will mark a major step towards ending the problem. Such targeted approaches to specific issues are the right way forward. In the same way, tackling the specific gendered nature of violence against women is the right way forward, if we are serious about challenging the occurrence of such violence.  Work to develop a strategy on violence against women is in its early stages and I am pleased that the Parliament has had an opportunity today to give its input to the debate. Work will progress under the banner of the national group to address violence against women and I am sure that the Parliament will maintain its commitment to eliminate violence against women in Scotland and will continue to support work in that direction. I thank the many magnificent speakers that we have had in what has been a splendid debate.

We have accelerated the installation of free central heating systems for the most vulnerable people by extending this year's programme to include people over 80 years old who have partial or inefficient systems. We are considering how we might target most effectively the fuel poor in future programmes.

We are now mainly considering the new spending review period between 2006 and 2008, because the current programme has been established up until April 2006. Our commitment in that programme is to all older people and the social rented sector. As people will acknowledge, that represents the biggest ever investment in an energy programme and is targeted on the most vulnerable. Of course, we want to cut delays as much as possible; some delays are unavoidable, but I am sure that some can be dealt with. We will do everything that we can to ensure that the people who are entitled to free central heating installation get it as quickly as possible.

I certainly understand Margaret Ewing's frustration. I am sure that naming and shaming landlords is one option, although I do not think that she would regard that as adequate. John Home Robertson, who, like Margaret Ewing, has a longstanding interest in the matter, asked a question about it, which I think that Johann Lamont answered yesterday, indicating that since 2001 seven people had been refused a central heating system by their landlord. I am sure that we all agree that that is seven too many. As the answer indicated, nothing can be done under the current legislation, but members will know that a housing bill is planned. We are considering the registration of private landlords and action has already been taken on some aspects of that under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. We might be able to consider the matter in that context, if not in others. I thank Margaret Ewing and John Home Robertson for drawing it to our attention.

I was not aware of that issue and I thank Elaine Murray for drawing it to my attention. It would be wrong to give a snap response to her question, but I will certainly look into the matter and get back to her with my considered thoughts.

There are three parts to eliminating fuel poverty. We are doing all that we can in relation to energy efficiency. As I said, the programme is the biggest ever. The second issue is the price of fuel and members will be aware that I wrote recently to the fuel companies about that. The third part of the equation is income. I cannot in one answer rerun the debate that we had about pensions two weeks ago, but I am sure that John Swinburne will acknowledge that the poorest pensioners have benefited enormously from the measures that have been taken by the Labour Government since 1997.

I said that I had sympathy with that point of view when Margaret Ewing expressed it. I am sure that the key issue that Margaret Ewing, John Home Robertson and others will want us to address is what can be done in regulations and the legislation to ensure that landlords do not take such action. Under the current legislation, there is nothing we can do, except name and shame the landlords.

I have met the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities several times and listened to its concerns. I hope to make a new announcement shortly.

I disagree that COSLA's final proposals are fairer, because they would involve very slow movement towards the new formula. We have a problem, because nobody is saying that the formula is wrong. It is based on the numbers of elderly people, disabled people and homeless people and—crucially—on deprivation. If we go towards that formula very slowly, we will have a problem of unmet need and an equal number of authorities will complain that they are losing out. We must strike a balance. The new formula is right, but I have been willing to slow the process of transition towards it, which is the right balance to strike. I await COSLA's final response to my proposals.

I am sorry; I did not hear the whole question. Funding for the supporting people initiative has doubled in the past two years. People are saying that there has been a bit of a cash pull-back in the review that was undertaken, but we should remember that the funding is still double what it was two years ago and is twice the figure per head in England, which is a relevant factor. The sums of money are significant. As part of the new formula, all services will be reviewed and providers and councils will be involved in that review. Some of the information that Sandra White seeks will emerge through that.

I am always willing to meet Des McNulty and Jackie Baillie, and I will certainly meet them to discuss the subject. The West Dunbartonshire situation illustrates the issue. Spending per head there is £235, which is way beyond the Scottish average of £92. There is an issue about the way in which the fund is not based on any needs formula. That issue had to be addressed. We have to move towards the formula but slow down the process of change that was originally planned.

The fact of the matter is that overall resources are decreasing. This is a transfer from the Treasury, although the Executive has topped it up. We should remember that the resources have doubled during the past two years. We have to keep that in mind. The changes that I have proposed will help Dumfries and Galloway to a considerable extent and the final details of that will emerge when I make my announcement. I have not just proposed to slow down the process of transition; I have also been willing to put in some extra transitional funding for 2007-08, which is crucial for slowing down the changes. I have made significant improvements that will help Dumfries and Galloway. I am not clear about what the member is suggesting but if I was to do everything that he wants, I am sure that there would be a large number of MSPs standing up to tell me that I was not meeting unmet need in their constituency.

A lot of those decisions on how to spend the money have to be local decisions, but they should and will be informed by the reviews that will be done. From the reviews that have been done across the UK, we know that there is some scope for efficiency and I do not think that anyone in COSLA denies that. That has to be considered and priorities will have to be addressed within the significant sums of money that will still be available throughout Scotland for the supporting people initiative.

Many of those specific decisions will be for the local authorities involved, but I am sure that they will look carefully at their existing services and, if good services exist, I am sure that they will want them to continue.

I do not agree with the comment about mishandling. There is no matter on which I have had more meetings in my first five weeks in this position than the supporting people initiative—there has been almost a meeting a week with COSLA, at which we have had prolonged discussions of the subject. I cannot say that we agree entirely, because members of COSLA do not agree entirely among themselves. It is a fairly open secret that there was an almost complete split of opinion in COSLA and a casting vote was involved to decide whether it accepted our proposals. We are not talking about every council in Scotland expressing the same view; we are talking about deep divisions between councils for understandable reasons. We had to try to strike a balance so that we could move towards a fair distribution, but also slow down the process a bit and try to top up transitional funding as far as we could. That is the best deal that we can achieve.

The decisions regarding where the extra funding will be directed are for local authorities to make in consultation with Communities Scotland, and with reference to their local housing strategy.

The housing associations will be the providers of the new housing, but the local authorities will make the decisions about where investment can take place. The local authorities can choose either to give the money, in general terms, to Communities Scotland or to enter into an arrangement with a specific registered social landlord to build new houses.

I am glad to have the opportunity to debate domestic abuse today and I make no apology for the fact that this is not the first time that we are having such a debate. I believe that there is agreement across parties in the chamber that the scale, impact and nature of domestic abuse in Scotland demands the continuing attention of the Parliament and the sustained action of the Executive. Unfortunately, the facts speak for themselves. For example, in 2002, 36,010 cases of domestic abuse were reported in Scotland and 11 women died as a result of domestic abuse. More generally, one in five women will experience domestic abuse from a male partner in her lifetime and, on average, women experience abuse 35 times before making the first call for help, an issue to which Margaret Mitchell's amendment refers. Underneath the horrific statistics are the real-life stories of the women and children who experience domestic abuse, which reveal the associated pain, fear, isolation, shame, loss of self-esteem and identity and, sometimes, the ultimate loss: death. The situation is appalling and it is an indictment of our society that such abuse should still be the experience of thousands in Scotland today. Domestic abuse has its foundation in the inequalities between men and women and in the abuse of power within a relationship. As long as there is wider acceptance of gender inequality, the task will be harder. It is shocking to think that, not so long ago, people regarded the physical and mental abuse of women as "just a domestic", and even as a patriarchal right. The fundamentally gender-based nature of the problem must be named and confronted and I pay tribute to the work of the zero tolerance campaign in doing precisely that. The campaign also reminded us that domestic abuse is but one aspect of violence against women, albeit a significant one. In recognition of that, last year, we extended the remit of the national group to address domestic abuse to reflect the wider context of violence against women. The group's work is at an early stage, but it has undertaken a literature review that is to be published shortly and it is setting up an expert  advisory group. We will listen to the experts on all types of violence against women, including rape and sexual assault, prostitution, pornography and trafficking—sadly the list is long. Those issues are important and complex and I will speak to my colleague the Minister for Parliamentary Business to ask for a debate before Christmas on the wider agenda of violence against women. In the limited time available today, I will focus on the specific issue of domestic abuse, particularly its impact on women and children. As members will know, the strategy that we have pursued has been based around three key themes: prevention, protection and provision. The approach that we have adopted to implement the strategy has been one of partnership. We have ensured that the focus, the decisions and the delivery have been shaped by people who know and understand the issue.

Of course we must acknowledge that some people who are in same-sex relationships and some men in heterosexual relationships may experience abuse from their partners. However, we must also recognise that the nature and scale of those issues are different and that they do not take away from the fundamentally gender-based nature of domestic abuse. The national group, which comprises experts in the field, guides our strategy and framework for delivery. It has been particularly effective in developing detailed proposals on prevention, training, legislation, refuge provision and children's services. We also deliver through a network of multi-agency partnerships and in collaboration with Scottish Women's Aid and other key women's and children's organisations. I am immensely grateful to the members of the national group for their work, and to the others throughout Scotland who strive daily to make a difference to the lives of the women and children who are affected. A difference is being made with the £32 million that will be invested in the period 2000-06. We are continuing one of the most successful awareness-raising campaigns that a Government department has conducted, which challenges perceptions of domestic abuse and aims to change the climate. There is no excuse for domestic abuse. We fund a 24-hour telephone helpline that provides support for women when they most need it. We have launched and implemented a national training strategy that should result in the establishment of training consortia throughout Scotland that will  grow the expertise of front-line professionals in the services. We fund a number of domestic violence probation programmes for offenders and we have piloted the first domestic abuse court, which I was pleased to launch in Glasgow three weeks ago. I was also pleased to read the comments of women who have used the court.

I agree with Christine Grahame that the campaign has been very effective. I do not know about a detailed, formal audit, but I will write to the member on the matter. I will mention two other major investments. There is, of course, the investment of £9 million through the domestic abuse service development fund. It funds the Tayside domestic abuse service, which is mentioned in Christine Grahame's amendment. I emphasise that the domestic abuse service development fund will continue beyond 2006, albeit not in its current form. We will work with the national group to decide precisely how the funding will be spent. A sum of £12 million has been invested to improve refuge provision via the refuge development programme. I would like to give more detail about that programme, but I am slightly alarmed to note that I have very little time left. I must move on to talk about children. We feel that they have been overlooked in the past, and the statistics are chilling. An estimated 100,000 children and young people in Scotland live with domestic abuse. In 90 per cent of cases, children are in the same or next room when the abuse takes place. A third of children try to intervene during attacks on their mothers, and many will be injured during such attempts. Last week, I attended Scottish Women's Aid's listen louder event, where I heard at first hand the experiences of children and young people who have lived with abuse in their homes. Like everyone else there, I was extremely moved by their courage as they described in various ways what they had been through. It is imperative that we consider what we can do to support these children and to address their needs. I was pleased to announce £6 million of investment last week. That money will enable us to implement the recommendations of the children's services working group. It will provide more children's workers in Women's Aid groups across Scotland, and it will develop the outreach  work that is so sorely needed. I emphasise that that £6 million is over and above the existing budgets that fund the domestic abuse service development fund, for example. I am aware that I am out of time, but I mention briefly the fact that, last week, we also launched a guidance note for planners, which has been sent to all the people who plan children's services throughout Scotland, asking them to plan services with children and young people who have experienced domestic abuse in mind. We have made substantial progress in winning people over to the belief that there is no excuse for domestic abuse, but we have a considerable way to go. I hope that we continue to work in partnership for change and that we can secure the support of all parties in the Parliament to that end. I move, That the Parliament recognises the very serious and totally unacceptable problem of domestic abuse in Scottish society; notes in particular the traumatic effect of domestic abuse on children and young people as well as on women; acknowledges the range of initiatives in this area that have been funded by the Scottish Executive in the last few years, and welcomes the Scottish Executive's partnership working and its investment and work to support those experiencing domestic abuse.

We are investing £9.45 million this year through the communities Scotland programme to fund the provision of 250 new affordable homes in Argyll and Bute. That investment represents an increase of over 27 per cent on expenditure in 2003-04 and is the highest level of funding in Argyll and Bute for a decade.

George Lyon draws attention to another important way of boosting spending on affordable housing. That money can certainly stay in Argyll and Bute, although the decision on the precise bits of the region that will receive the money will be a local one. However, the fact that there are second homes there and that the discount has been reduced will benefit Argyll and Bute. If all councils did what Argyll and Bute has done, there would be £20 million extra a year for affordable housing. That is one of three ways in which Argyll and Bute Council is doing well in affordable housing. I made the general point in my substantive answer about the increased investment in Argyll and Bute. However, £80 million is being spent this year in rural areas across Scotland on new, affordable housing, and that compares favourably with the fact that only £41 million was being spent on that at the start of this Parliament. The third point, as George Lyon knows, concerns the potential in Argyll and Bute for a community ownership programme. Again, that is a decision that tenants would take. If they decided to go ahead, it would mean £55 million extra investment in social housing. The early action programme figure of £15 million can potentially be spent on new, affordable homes.

The issue of water infrastructure came up, I think, at question time two weeks ago and I said that I would discuss the issue with Ross Finnie. Indeed, officials have been doing that for some time and I am also doing that. To be fair to Scottish Water, I am told that £200 million of its planned investment will help to release development constraints. Something is being done, but we know that more must be done. Therefore, further discussions will take place, including discussions on the particular issue that Jamie McGrigor raised.

First, the member will hear that I am preserving my voice for this afternoon's debate. Secondly, she will note that all the amendments are party amendments, so there is no Executive position in this debate.

rose—

A quality home for everyone has long been a central aim of the Executive, not just because a quality home should be a right rather than an aspiration, but because the aim goes straight to the heart of quality-of-life issues. Good-quality housing is central to supporting families in all their diversity and is vital for health, regeneration and economic growth. We have come a long way since I last took up the reins as minister responsible for housing in May 1997. Then, public rented housing was in decline, fuel poverty was extensive and rough sleeping was widespread. There were high mortgage rates, repossessions and increasing child and family poverty. That has all been turned around and we are now in the middle of a bold and exciting period of housing progress. We have introduced the Scottish housing quality standard, which is a very ambitious target to ensure that warm, dry and decent homes become the norm in Scotland in the 21 st century. Alongside that, we have put in place a new framework of options for councils to raise the funding that is required to deliver the new quality standard by 2015, be it through prudential borrowing, the use of receipts or transfer to community ownership. Transfer to community ownership is one of the most effective means of achieving the standard. We have already transferred nearly 100,000 houses to community ownership. That alone is expected to deliver nearly £2 billion of housing investment over the next 10 years. I remain firmly committed to supporting further stock transfers under the new community ownership programme and we aim to transfer a further 70,000 houses by 2006.

Obviously, we have diversified the funding options through the prudential borrowing regime, but it is clear that what Elaine Smith proposes, irrespective of the other benefits of community ownership through tenant participation, would cost a great deal more in public expenditure terms. That would obviously have an effect on housing and other budgets. To tackle fuel poverty, we introduced the warm deal home insulation programme and the central heating programme. Through those programmes, more than 200,000 homes have been insulated and more than 40,000 heating systems have been installed. By 2006, all pensioners and social tenants will have central heating. Recent research on the first year of the central heating programme showed that of the people who were fuel poor, nearly nine out of 10 were lifted out of fuel poverty after benefiting from the programme. In addition, the central heating programme and the warm deal are saving people money on their fuel bills and helping to reduce carbon emissions.

The rises in fuel prices are entirely regrettable and we shall certainly look at the action that we can take, particularly to protect those people who are most affected by the rises. We legislated through the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 for a strong single regulatory framework and established Communities Scotland, whose role includes driving up standards in housing quality and housing and homelessness services. Registered social landlords and local authorities are now working to a common set of performance standards so that tenants can expect the same high standards of service, regardless of who their landlord is. The 2001 act is a landmark act in other ways, too. Through it, we introduced a modernised single tenancy in the social rented sector and gave tenants greater rights in respect of succession, joint tenancies and exchanges. We also introduced a statutory framework for effective tenant participation and backed that with a team of tenant participation development officers and £4 million to support landlords throughout the country to put tenant participation strategies in place.  As I said to Elaine Smith a moment ago, tenant participation also goes hand in hand with transfer of housing stock to community ownership by giving tenants a greater say in the management of their homes. For councils that are looking to transfer, tenant involvement will be a key criterion for registration. I was keen to emphasise that when I spoke at the Tenant Participation Advisory Service conference in Dundee on Sunday. For home owners, we have introduced the mortgage-to-rent scheme and supported the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Act 2001 to give families that are at risk of repossession a breathing space to sort out their affairs. We have also introduced the private sector housing grant to support investment in private sector housing. As a result, investment now is 30 per cent higher.

I must make progress, as I have already taken two interventions. I will take the member's intervention in a few minutes. Measures such as the better regulation of shared houses, the registration of private landlords, the provisions of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 and tenant participation have aimed not to middle-manage our housing system, but to get us closer to our vision. We want to ensure good-quality, warm, sustainable and affordable housing for all. Before I take John Swinney's intervention, I want to make progress on the issue of affordable housing. This year, we carried out a wide-ranging review of affordable housing. We analysed the Scottish housing market, considered its impact on affordability and assessed requirements throughout the country for affordable housing. We also consulted widely and listened carefully. We concluded that the long-term house price trend in Scotland does not point to a chronic problem with overall housing supply, but the review has provided strong intelligence on the very real affordability and supply problems in particular localities and the problems of housing market failure and surplus houses in other localities. Those problems range across private housing, subsidised low-cost ownership and social rented homes. The review has informed our investment plans to 2008 and the wider measures that we will take in future. Over the next three years, we will spend a massive £1.2 billion on affordable homes for those who need them most. By 2008, our investment in new housing will be 46 per cent above this year's level, which is an annual increase in real terms of more than 10 per cent. That will tackle the acute demands for affordable housing in pressured  areas and replace and refurbish housing in poor-quality neighbourhoods. We have raised our sights to a new three-year target for the supply of affordable homes—up from 18,000 to 21,500—to ensure that people have the choices that meet their needs and to support economic growth. We will fund more than 16,500 social rented homes over the next three years—the biggest social rented programme for many years. It will take hundreds of homeless people out of temporary accommodation into a permanent home, move us towards giving all homeless people the entitlement to a permanent home by 2012 and give people on housing waiting lists a far better chance of getting the house that they want.

In my first three weeks, I have certainly become aware of the issue that the member raises. Last week, I had a meeting with Shelter Scotland and the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, which raised that point. Of course I am taking up the issue with Ross Finnie. Our plans include nearly 5,000 homes for low-cost home ownership by 2008 to help to meet the aspirations of hard-working families and essential workers who aspire to own a home of their own. Traditionally, those people would have been first-time buyers, but they currently find themselves priced out of particular areas of the market and cannot pursue their ideal job because of a lack of affordable housing. The expansion of affordable homes will see the introduction of an innovative new programme and a range of initiatives to help people to get started on the property ladder, all based round the idea of shared equity, which will help people to enter the property market by buying a part share in a property that would otherwise be unaffordable. Communities Scotland will launch shortly proposals on the detailed application of the shared equity programme.

We have to be guided by the needs and aspirations of the communities that we serve. I do not have an ideal figure in the way that Patrick Harvie suggests. How long do I have left, Presiding Officer?

Thank you. Our partners are crucial to realising our plans and our investment sets challenges for them. We will be looking to lenders in the private sector to boost public funds for affordable housing with more than £500 million of private finance, and private finance generated by the community ownership programme will further raise that sum. We expect local authorities to complement our investment with additional income raised by local authorities from reduced council tax discounts on second homes.

I will say something about housing market areas in the next section of my speech, but certainly Bramley was fundamental to the conclusions that we came to in our affordable housing review. The investment of £1.2 billion in affordable housing is a massive programme. It is vital that we allocate those resources in the optimum way across pressured markets and regeneration areas in both urban and rural contexts. It is also vital that we manage and deliver the programme in ways that secure maximum impact and efficiency. We are therefore consulting the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and housing providers on improved arrangements for making investment decisions and managing our funding programmes. We are looking at possible options that include a re-examination of the current policy on the transfer of the management of development funding and the potential of housing market area boards as a vehicle for giving local authorities greater influence in strategic decisions on investment priorities across housing market areas. We aim to complete that consultation for the new year.  The measures that we have taken and the huge boost in housing investment to 2008 demonstrate that we are serious about improving the quality and supply of affordable housing in Scotland. Looking ahead, delivery of our homelessness agenda and the supporting people programme remain key priorities. We have already put in place the most progressive homelessness legislation in Europe to ensure that every homeless person is entitled to temporary accommodation at least. That explains the increasing figures that the Scottish National Party highlights in its amendment—we want the hidden homeless to come forward and to have rights.

I have already taken five interventions. I will take the member's intervention if I have time, but I will probably test the Presiding Officer's patience if I take any more. It is our aim that, by 2012, every homeless person will have the right to a permanent home. We have invested in tackling the most extreme forms of homelessness. We are working to tackle rough sleeping and to close the large, outdated hostels in Glasgow. Every local authority has a homelessness strategy and every national health service board has a health and homelessness action plan in place. I was pleased to be able to drive forward those strategies over the past two years. We will continue to deliver the full range of homelessness task force recommendations and implement the legislation at a steady but manageable pace. This year, we have been working with local authorities, COSLA, the homelessness monitoring group and organisations such as Shelter to ensure that families with children are provided with suitable temporary accommodation. We are now in a position to legislate with an order that will come into force in December. That is an important development and, although it affects small numbers of people, it is essential that, where families are housed in temporary accommodation, the accommodation meets appropriate standards for the care and security of children. Many members want to hear about the supporting people programme, which is a key programme for vulnerable people. It enables frail, older people or those with physical or learning difficulties to live independently in their own homes and communities. It helps people to deal with a range of difficult personal problems from domestic abuse to homelessness to drug and alcohol rehabilitation and it supports them through crucial transition periods in their lives to help them to achieve a better quality of life.  The Scottish Executive is investing significant resources in that vital programme—£1.2 billion over three years to help at least 80,000 people a year. Funding per capita will be double that in England and we should also remember that the new funding is double what it was two years ago. Funding needs to be better tied to need throughout Scotland. The old funding arrangements, based on transitional housing benefit, created huge anomalies with funding that varied from £235 per capita in one local authority area to only £19 per capita in another. The allocations announced by Margaret Curran on 1 October reflected the need to get better value for money for the taxpayer and to provide a fairer distribution of those crucial resources throughout Scotland. The funding package announced included £16 million of transitional support for those most affected by the redistribution process. The desire to improve value for money and to provide a fairer distribution of resources over time stands. However, I am in discussions with COSLA and others about the pace of change to ensure that it is more manageable locally. Several different options are on the table and I hope shortly to make an announcement on the matter that will satisfy most parties. My time is up now so I will draw to a conclusion. Today I have outlined our progress since devolution and set out the direction for housing policy in Scotland: a continuing drive to improve the quality of the housing stock across all tenures; a major boost for investment in social housing with a clear focus on the needs of homeless people, those on housing waiting lists and the support required for those who are most in need; a step change in support to help essential workers, families and other first-time buyers to own their own homes; and wider measures to enable the housing system as a whole to respond to Scotland's needs. Taken together, those measures are a major step towards the aim of having a housing system that delivers an adequate supply of good-quality, affordable housing for all. They are another major example of devolution working for Scotland. I move, That the Parliament endorses the Scottish Executive's commitment to a 30% increase in affordable housing provision by 2007-08 in order to increase the availability of social rented accommodation for homeless people, reduce pressure on waiting lists and help first-time buyers on to the housing ladder; welcomes the introduction of the Housing Quality Standard and the improvements in housing quality that are resulting from substantial community ownership and fuel poverty programmes; recognises the major achievements flowing from devolution for housing in Scotland, such as a modernised and single tenancy in the social rented sector, progressive homelessness legislation and the development of tenant participation and rights, and looks forward to the forthcoming Housing Bill which will  raise standards in the private housing sector and strengthen the rights of private sector tenants.

The domestic abuse service development fund has been running since 2000 and will end on 31 March 2006. The Scottish Executive has allocated £9 million through the fund over that period. We are currently considering funding arrangements for that area of work post-2006.

It was made clear when the latest guidance went out that the current period is to be the final one for the funding, in the present form. However, the Scottish Executive is  massively committed to such work and has expanded the areas that are covered. In the past year, the domestic abuse service development fund has been supplemented by a wider violence against women fund and a fund for rape crisis groups. I am pleased that the first official engagement in my new ministerial post will be the annual general meeting of the Central Scotland Rape Crisis and Sexual Abuse Centre in Stirling tonight. The Executive is massively committed to the issue—it has put £32 million into such work since 1999. Because I was involved in the issue as a minister in 1997, I know what massive progress has been made since the establishment of the Scottish Parliament.

One significant development in the past few years has been the expansion in the number of refuges. Part of the £32 million to which I referred was the £10 million refuge development fund. An expansion in the availability of places was badly needed. I am sure that people will take into account Sandra White's comments about the needs of older women who are in that terrible situation.

On Friday 1 October, we announced that future funding for supporting people would be allocated on a new formula basis that more fairly reflects relative need across Scotland. A £1.2 billion investment over three years in housing support services was announced.

There are variations in how different local authorities are affected. That is because of the new distribution formula that I mentioned in my substantive answer. Nobody can quarrel with the general principles of the new distribution formula, which is based on the number of older people and people receiving disability living allowance, and on homelessness and deprivation. In principle, it is a good formula. However, we should also remember some of the headline facts about the overall amounts. The amount is double the figure for supporting people in 2002 and it is double what it would be if it was being allocated according to the Barnett formula. I am meeting the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities later in the week, and there are serious issues and concerns about which I want to have a dialogue with COSLA. However, we should remember the general facts as well.

Transitional funding has been built in so that there is not too major a drop in any one year. COSLA will want to raise the details of the transitional funding with me on Friday. There was a review of all the funding, which, as I have said, has doubled in the past two years. No one can deny that there is scope for efficiency savings. However, that will not satisfy everyone or meet all of people's problems and concerns. Again, we should consider the wider context. I am keen to discuss some of the details with COSLA.

I am reflecting very carefully on that and I shall reflect further before and, no doubt, after my meeting with COSLA on Friday. Some councils are having bigger changes than others because of the new distribution formula. I accept that there is an inherent problem in that, which is why transitional funding is very important. I will discuss that with COSLA on Friday.

I am aware of the situation in West Dunbartonshire in general terms and I am sure that I shall have discussions with the relevant local people about that. As I have said, the Executive considers transitional funding to be essential as part of the changes—that will be further discussed on Friday.

NHS boards are accountable through ministers to the Parliament. We have strengthened accountability locally by appointing a much broader range of members to NHS boards, including local authority members, and we have legislated in the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Act 2004 to lay on boards new duties of public involvement and regional co-operation.

That was a complex situation. The selection panel was run a second time, but I am told that that time, patient representatives were involved. It is true that there is no statutory requirement for patient representation, but it happened in that case. There is the general duty of public involvement, and we all talk regularly about the need to have better public involvement at a very early stage in issues to do with service changes. Alex Neil is talking about a specific case, which I can look into further, but my impression is that, in that case, the patients were represented in the final selection of a new GP.

I am the first person to agree that we need to get better at public involvement, and we are taking a series of actions to ensure that we do so. I have already referred to the 2004 act. Tomorrow, I will be speaking at the annual general meeting of the Scottish Association  of Health Councils. The main topic will of course be the creation of the Scottish health council next April. The health council will be a major new force in ensuring that boards engage far more effectively with their local communities, and we will also issue new guidance. We require a radical improvement on the traditional methods of end-stage consultation that existed under the Conservative Government. We want boards to engage at the earliest possible stage and to have a continuing dialogue with communities on the challenging issues that we discussed in the debate this morning. I am the first to agree that there is a lot of room for improvement.

I understand that NHS Lothian has recently recruited an additional accident and emergency consultant to the service at St John's and that it is planning to invest £500,000 in an observation ward to support the accident and emergency department. It will continue to be an effective accident and emergency service.

Surgery at St John's certainly has an excellent record. That is why I am pleased that there is to be increased elective surgery there. During this morning's debate, I noticed that the Conservatives were saying that a lot of the challenges faced by local services would not exist under trusts. In reality, for the first time ever, surgeons from the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh, including the regius professor, are going to perform surgery at St John's, thanks to the fact that we have a single system working in the whole of Lothian. Many of the problems with training have been addressed. The issue that Bristow Muldoon is not happy  about is that emergency surgery—which concerns about four people a day—is not going to be carried out at St John's. However, the service provided is a model of care. During the debate this morning, the document on better local care in England, "Keeping the NHS Local", was discussed. That document—which is so much admired by the MP for Livingston—says that one model that should be considered is the model to which I referred earlier, where there is an accident and emergency department but where emergency surgery is not actually required.

I will be receiving the conclusions of the better acute care in Lothian review. Part of the consultation for that relates to emergency surgery. The consultation document contains a proposal to have only one centre for emergency surgery in the whole of Lothian. I will consider the general question of emergency surgery when the document produced as a result of the review comes to me, and I will of course consider the whole issue, including emergency surgery at St John's.

I thank the Conservatives for giving me the opportunity to expose the omissions, contradictions and distortions that characterise their position on health. However, what can we expect from a party whose spokesman has convinced himself that he heard me on the radio this morning? The Conservatives' omissions relate to the fact that they are silent about their real intentions, which are about ending national health service provision based on need and giving preferential treatment to those who can afford to pay. Their contradictions relate to the fact that they reject all clinical arguments for service change while, in their election manifesto, they trumpet more say for  doctors in how the NHS is run. Their distortions relate to the fact that they have invented a position for us, particularly on centralisation, that bears absolutely no relationship to anything that we have ever said or done. In the interest of the avoidance of distortion, I repeat the following statements. The maximum amount of care that can safely be kept local will be kept local. Some services, but not of course all services, can be most safely and effectively delivered by clinical teams in specialist settings. Up to 90 per cent of all patient care is provided by doctors, nurses and allied health professionals in the community and, increasingly, the management of chronic disease and some acute care is happening there. The regional and national dimensions are crucial and we are therefore requiring boards to plan services more effectively across board boundaries that are of no interest to patients. Several months ago I set up an expert group to develop a national framework for service change, since we believe in a national health service, not a centralised one, nor the privatised and fragmented one that the Conservatives believe in, which would make the maintenance of local services far more difficult. I will not make decisions on new proposals that come before me until the group has reported, unless there are genuine issues of clinical safety. In response to the proposals of NHS boards, I can say no as well as yes. Finally, I have a great deal of control over those issues, but do not and should not have control over what is the proper training supervision for junior doctors. There is, of course, no strategy to centralise services in a handful of elite hospitals, as the motion states. However, who would believe a word that the Conservatives say about health, in a parliamentary motion or anywhere else?

The point that I made a few moments ago about the fact that, rightly, I do not have control over what is the proper training supervision for junior doctors answers the point about St John's hospital.

I have no time at the moment. The list of hospitals in the motion is also a simplistic distortion. Of course, there are controversial proposals for service change in some of the hospitals listed, but most of them have not yet come to me for consideration and many are still under discussion. For example, the solutions group chaired by Baroness Michie is working constructively across board boundaries to keep as many services as possible in Fort William and Oban. I support that objective. Two Forth valley hospitals are mentioned in the list, but there is silence about the splendid new hospital that is planned—referred to by Sylvia Jackson—and which could not come too quickly for Dennis Canavan at question time last week. Further, while Perth is mentioned in the motion, having lost its consultant-led maternity unit, nothing is said about the wide range of new services that Perth is to receive, including an oncology and haematology centre, a kidney dialysis unit and an acute stroke unit, or about the repatriation of 3,000 in-patient and 10,000 out-patient episodes from Ninewells to Perth. That is the two-way movement that we want, with some services moving appropriately into more specialist settings, in accordance with clinical safety and quality care, while others move in the opposite direction to local hospitals and community settings.

If I have time at the end, I will. The Queen Mother's hospital is also on the list. As I have said repeatedly, I have been giving a great deal of consideration over the summer to maternity services in Glasgow and have had a series of visits and meetings with doctors, nurses and midwives. I have been listening with great care to the various clinical arguments and to the large body of public opinion that has been expressed on this matter. As a result, I am persuaded of the clinical case for having a maternity unit alongside specialist paediatric services. I recognise that the Queen Mother's hospital and Yorkhill provide an important national service for the whole of Scotland and I am determined that such a service should and will continue. At the same time, I recognise the clinical arguments for having a maternity unit on the same site as adult clinical services, which were recognised by Greater Glasgow NHS Board.

I do not have time at the moment. I have therefore concluded, as did many who responded to the consultation, that the gold-standard solution is a triple co-location of paediatric, maternity and adult clinical services. Following the spending review announcement yesterday, I am able to make £100 million available to enable Glasgow to hasten the development of such a service, hopefully within five years. I am also appointing an advisory group that will have strong clinical representation from Glasgow and further afield as well as public and user involvement. It will monitor plans for the co-location of paediatric, maternity and adult clinical services, carry out an option appraisal of possible sites and ensure that there is no diminution in the quality of care available to mothers and children up to the time that the new gold-standard service is up and running.

I have no time. I must finish making these points. I am confident that Greater Glasgow NHS Board will co-operate wholeheartedly with the advisory group. If there is any doubt that that is happening, as minister, I have powers to direct the board. I am also confident that clinicians will co-operate across the different maternity sites.

I agree, and pay tribute to Pauline McNeill, who has led the campaign for the Queen Mother's hospital in the Parliament.

I am in my last minute. If there are difficulties with staffing three units in the intervening period, or if there are other developments that are relevant to the continuing viability of three units, the group will advise on how those issues should be resolved without diminution of the quality of care. I hope that members will welcome that announcement and recognise that it injects a dose of reality into the simplistic distortions of the Conservative motion. While the Conservatives strive to make political capital out of difficult health issues, we listen to clinicians and the public and act in the interests of  patients. While they conceal their plans to end universal health care for all, we act on our principles of fairness for all and quality health care based on need. While they forget the rock bottom level of hospital investment in the 1980s and 1990s, we carry on with the largest hospital building and development programme in the history of the NHS. The people of Scotland know what the dividing lines are and they will reject the Conservatives as surely as we reject this ridiculous and ignorant motion. I move amendment S2M-1784.3, to leave out from "is opposed" to end and insert: "acknowledges public concern about the extent of proposed centralisation of health services across Scotland; believes that improvement is essential to ensure that all patients have access to both high-quality specialist services and appropriate medical care delivered locally; recognises that NHS boards must pursue clinical strategies which demonstrate regional planning; notes that boundaries are irrelevant to patients; welcomes the determination of the Scottish Executive to develop the planning of healthcare services across NHS board boundaries, within the context of a national strategy; notes the work of the Parliament's Health Committee on this issue; welcomes the decision of the Minister for Health and Community Care to make no decision on new proposals for service change that come before him until such times as the Expert Advisory Group chaired by Professor David Kerr has reported; notes that this provides an opportunity to debate what services are best provided locally, regionally and nationally and that the presumption in the interim is that services will be maintained unless there are genuine issues of clinical safety, agreed by the Minister; affirms the Executive policy outlined in Partnership for Care that the patient must be at the centre of the process, and supports a patient-centred policy that acknowledges safety and quality and that also ensures that as many services as possible are provided locally."

I am pleased to respond for the Executive today, as I did as deputy minister all those years ago in Elaine Smith's previous debate on the subject. This is a welcome opportunity to discuss a subject that the Executive has supported, promoted and resourced since the establishment of the Scottish Parliament in 1999. I pay tribute to my predecessor Susan Deacon for all that she did in that regard. Perhaps we will hear from her in a moment. We all want our children to be healthy and to grow up to be healthy adults, so we should do all that we can to ensure that children are well nourished from the minute that they are born. The bill will make it an offence to prevent or stop a child under the age of two years, who is permitted to be in a public or licensed premises, being fed milk in that place. It also seeks to impose on Scottish ministers a specific duty to support and encourage the breastfeeding of children by their mothers. Elaine Smith's preparatory work in introducing the bill and the Health Committee's stage 1 deliberations have enabled us to explore some of the wider issues that affect a child's right, and a woman's ability and desire, to breastfeed. Although the bill centres on the child's right to be fed any form of milk in its formative years, it is fair to say that one of the bill's aims is to create a socially tolerant and safe environment in which a woman can breastfeed where and when it is most appropriate for her child, regardless of whether she is at home or in her local cafe. For that reason, I thank Elaine Smith for introducing the bill. The reasons why the current Executive has supported breastfeeding throughout its time in power should be obvious, given that the health benefits of breastfeeding for both mother and baby  are well-accepted. The antibodies in breast milk protect against a wide range of infections and stimulate a baby's immature immune system. Moreover, breastfeeding is known to provide the best nutrition for a baby, with advantages over formula feeding. As breastfed babies grow up, they have less chance of developing respiratory tract problems, gastroenteritis, ear infections, asthma, eczema, diabetes and obesity. Mothers who breastfeed are less likely to develop ovarian or breast cancer. The Executive wants a Scotland in which all mothers who can and want to breastfeed do so and are given the information, support and encouragement that they need. To achieve that, we have implemented a wide programme of work that is delivered in four key ways. First, the national breastfeeding adviser—Jenny Warren—encourages, supports and audits national health service boards in developing breastfeeding strategies. Secondly, the Scottish breastfeeding group works across professional interests to share information on and to raise the profile of breastfeeding. It also takes forward pieces of work on breastfeeding. Thirdly, the breastfeeding website gives parents and practitioners news, statistics and information about good practice and research. Fourthly, the work of NHS Health Scotland includes the development of promotional materials and resources for parents, training materials for health professionals and support for evidence-based policy making through networking and research. The good news in Scotland is that those strategies are producing positive results. Across NHS Scotland, most NHS boards are now implementing breastfeeding strategies. Of our maternity units, 11 have qualified for the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund—UNICEF—UK baby-friendly initiative. The remainder are at various stages of working towards that award and 10 have received a certificate of commitment to acknowledge their progress in doing so. To put that in context, it means that 38 per cent of our maternity units are fully compliant with the baby-friendly initiative. As a result, 48 per cent of Scottish babies will be born in a unit that provides the highest level of available support for breastfeeding. By comparison, the equivalent figure for England is only 10 per cent and for Northern Ireland and Wales only 34 per cent. We should all be proud of that and encouraged by it. Progress is also being made within our communities. For example, Anniesland, Bearsden and Milngavie local health care co-operative received Scotland's first UNICEF community award, which others are also working towards. Across the country, there are 150 breastfeeding support groups and a number of peer support  initiatives and training strategies to ensure that health staff provide evidence-based and consistent advice and support to mothers. Although there has been a steady upward trend in both the initiation and duration of breastfeeding in Scotland, the rates remain lower than we would like. In 1994, a national target was set with the aim that, by 2005, 50 per cent of mothers would still be breastfeeding their babies at six weeks of life. Our most recent data for 2003 show a rate of 36.5 per cent, so we have some way to go to reach that target. I have asked officials in the Executive to develop a breastfeeding action plan to identify key areas for action for the next five years and to provide guidance on how the NHS can work with a range of key bodies and stakeholders to support delivery. It is fair to say that, so far, work to promote breastfeeding has been largely concentrated within the health sector, but we appreciate that we need to involve other partners in early-years services if we are to give every child the best start in life. That is why breastfeeding will be a key, joint outcome measure in the Executive's integrated early-years strategy. The stage 1 consideration of the bill flagged up concerns that the Health Committee was able to explore in depth. I myself had raised concerns on behalf of the Executive about the bill's enforceability. However, the Executive is content with the Health Committee's conclusions on enforcement and for the bill to proceed. While the Health Committee accepted that there are likely to be few prosecutions under the bill once enacted, it also concluded that the legislation may have a deterrent effect. The act will set out clearly the circumstances in which it will be an offence to prevent or stop a child being fed milk and it may empower women to make key decisions about their feeding choices. The Health Committee accepted that legislation can assist a shift in attitude and behaviour and that the bill could thus support the uptake and duration of breastfeeding. Although there may not be universal acceptance of the bill, consultation has proven that there is an extremely high level of support for it both in organisations and among the public across Scotland, with many people greatly saddened that such a bill is needed in the first place. The committee concluded that, although much of the evidence is anecdotal, adverse reaction to breastfeeding in public, or fear of such reaction, may impact negatively on the take-up and duration rates of breastfeeding. Regardless of the excellent promotional work by NHS Health Scotland and health boards across Scotland, there are still those who feel embarrassed or offended by breastfeeding. Those views are based, of course,  on ignorance and prejudice and must be challenged. What many people do not appreciate is the physiological impact that asking a mother to stop breastfeeding can have and the distress that that can cause. The debate and discussion around Elaine Smith's bill have done much to address that. The bill could also mean that more women will choose to breastfeed in public. That itself would bolster the image of breastfeeding as a normal, natural and socially acceptable life event, which we hope would encourage even more mothers in the future. We do not want mothers to be put off breastfeeding by feeling that it could constrain them in where they can take their baby. Breastfeeding is, after all, the ultimate convenience food. The bill places Scottish ministers under a specific duty to support and encourage the breastfeeding of children by their mothers. However, I should point out that the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Act 2004 has already introduced a general duty on Scottish ministers, health boards, special health boards and the Common Services Agency to promote health improvement. The relevant provision will come into force on 1 January 2005. As I have indicated, I am content with the conclusions that the Health Committee reached on the bill and for the bill to proceed, but very much in the context of our overall policy and strategies to promote the best possible start in life for the children of Scotland. [ Applause. ]

The Scottish Executive Health Department and I maintain regular contact with NHS boards on a wide range of issues, including the reorganisation of services. For example, officials have had recent meetings with Argyll and Clyde NHS Board and Greater Glasgow NHS Board in relation to cross-boundary planning of services, and I met NHS Lothian last week in relation to service changes in West Lothian.

I give Dennis Canavan that guarantee. It illustrates the general point that I made to the Health Committee that we want developments to progress as quickly as possible. Nothing that I have said will in any way delay the important decisions that have been made, whether those concern a new hospital in Forth valley or the Stobhill and Victoria hospitals in Glasgow. I commend the Forth Valley NHS Board for the way in which it has planned the changes and for the way in which it has consulted the population.

As I indicated in my substantive answer, we have been in discussions not just with NHS Argyll and Clyde, but with NHS Greater Glasgow in order that the boards take more account of that issue. We should acknowledge that they have taken some account of that, but we realise that more needs to be done. We have been discussing the matter with the  boards. It is being explored and it will continue to be explored over the next few weeks.

As I said to Jamie Stone at this week's meeting of the Health Committee, a broad view has to be taken in relation to clinical safety. We have to have an exemption over the winter. We cannot stop changes that are genuinely about clinical safety. However, as I said at the committee, we will consider the matter very carefully, and we will not just accept the word of health boards.

I have discussed out-of-hours services on several occasions in the course of discussions with health boards. Formally, out-of-hours services do not come into the centre for my approval, but that does not mean that I do not take a great interest in what is happening in various parts of Scotland in that regard. A big national effort is being made around out-of-hours changes, and there is major national support for that. All the plans are considered in a national context, and we now have national standards, which were developed by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, and which all boards in Scotland must meet.

As the First Minister said a couple of hours ago, major additional resources have been allocated to the Scottish Ambulance Service. As I indicated at a previous question time, I take a close interest in how that is working out on the ground. I wrote recently to the chair of the Scottish Ambulance Service in relation to single-crewed ambulances and the need to ensure that their use is diminished, and that they are used only in emergencies. I am keeping a careful eye on the operational aspects of the Ambulance Service as well as on its financial aspects.

I will write to the Health Committee about the effect of the changes, as I have already undertaken to do. In general terms, we have made it absolutely clear to health boards that they must monitor the effect of any changes. They will obviously wish to highlight improvements that have sprung from them, but they ought also to be aware of, and to point out, any problems that have been thrown up as a result.

Members will remember that we passed the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Act 2004 before the summer recess. That act set up the Scottish Health Council, whose central role will be to examine how boards deal with public involvement, and it will be up to that body to tell me if a board has not consulted properly. That new body has been set up to do that, and other things relating to public involvement and patient-focused care. It will report to ministers if consultation has not been carried out properly, and ministers will then instruct boards to start again, if necessary, or to carry out further consultation.

All patients have a responsibility to ensure that they keep their appointments and should make every reasonable effort to inform their practice or clinic if they are not able to do so. The Executive has taken action to improve access to national health service primary care services. Offering patients a choice in how they access services, together with action to reduce waiting times, will help to reduce the number of missed appointments.

I am sure that Margaret Jamieson will agree that we need to concentrate both on out-patient appointment DNAs and on GP and nurse practice DNAs. I would certainly be keen to find out more about the reasons why patients do not attend, but I think that it should, in the interests of balance, be noted that the same United Kingdom survey from which Margaret Jamieson quoted—the "Developing Patient Partnerships" survey—actually showed a 46 per cent drop between last year and this year in the number of DNAs for appointments with GPs. Of course, that was only a survey, so we do not want to take too much comfort from it. It is safe to say that the number of DNAs is dropping, but it must drop a lot more. The main reason why it has dropped is the significant advances that have been made on access to GPs, partly through the work of the primary care collaborative. That has meant that a large number of GP practices are using new methods to organise their appointments. We have a target of 48 hours to gain access to the appropriate member of a primary health care team, which is being met widely across Scotland.

The conduct of negotiations in relation to international obligations is a matter for Westminster under the terms of the Scotland Act 1998. The Scottish Executive is fully involved in the development of the UK position in devolved areas.

I make it absolutely clear that we strongly support children's entitlement to clean and safe surroundings. My answer to Shiona Baird's first question concerned the question of whether that is a right in international law, which is a matter for the Westminster Government. At the end of the day, the fundamental issue is not whether it is a right, but whether we will act on the basis that it is an entitlement. That is precisely what we will do. We are actively engaged at UK level in taking forward the key international initiatives that relate to environment and health, which are the World Health Organisation's children's environmental health plan for Europe and the European environment and health strategy, which also has a child focus. The strategy is to be implemented in successive cycles. The first cycle aims to establish good understanding of the link between environmental factors and a range of illnesses, such as childhood respiratory diseases, asthma, childhood cancer and neuro-developmental disorders.

I am not sure whether I totally follow Phil Gallie's thinking on that. Obviously, a safe environment in the wider sense includes the people who surround the child. There are many issues there. I can give the undertaking to Parliament that the Executive has certainly been taking increased and more vigorous action on child protection across its work and has been insisting that local agencies also work far more effectively together.

I am told by NHS Argyll and Clyde that it has set aside £100,000 to cover the costs of consultation on the proposed clinical strategy.

I think that we all agree that good public consultation is important. When considering proposals from boards, I obviously look in great detail at the precise nature of the consultation. One aspect of NHS Argyll and Clyde's approach that we can welcome is the fact that it has commissioned an independent evaluation of the consultation procedure from Dr Andrew Walker, a highly regarded health economist who has helped the Health Committee in various ways. He will examine among other issues the extent to which NHS Argyll and Clyde has listened to and taken on board the public concerns that have emerged as a result of the consultation. I will examine that key issue very closely when the proposals come to me in due course.

I certainly welcome Professor Kerr's comments and the interest that he is showing in Duncan McNeil's area and throughout Scotland. I echo his general approach to these matters. Of course we must listen to the public. Indeed, that is as critical in NHS Argyll and Clyde as it is everywhere else in Scotland. I should point out that Professor Kerr made the same point that I have made in different ways over the past couple of weeks—and indeed long before now—that we must also ensure that we deliver clinically safe and high-quality services. We should follow those two key principles.

I know that Jackie Baillie and Duncan McNeil have highlighted the issue of boundaries as a key feature and I am sure that  many of the public responses are picking that up. I repeat the point that I made last week and have made many times before that NHS boards must consider these issues across board boundaries, because such boundaries are of no interest to patients. I believe that NHS Argyll and Clyde is getting that message and that it is carrying out further work with NHS Greater Glasgow in particular to examine these matters in a patient-centred way, which means examining them across board boundaries.

NHS boards seek to respond to short-term shortages in consultants in a way that has a minimal impact on communities,  for example through the deployment of locum staff. NHS consultant numbers increased by 307 between 2000 and 2003 and continue to rise in line with the partnership agreement commitment to expand the number of consultants in Scotland.

There are problems in particular hospitals in particular specialties, some of which are to do with past defects of work-force planning. In the past, in certain specialties—radiology is one example—not enough people were put into the training process, which obviously should have started several years ago. However, the overall picture is of an increasing number of consultants and the commitment in the partnership agreement to provide 600 extra consultants represents an unprecedented growth in the consultant work force. That is the general picture, although of course I accept that there are difficulties in particular hospitals for particular specialties. Sometimes a reconfiguration of services is required to deal with the issue.

We must, of course, comply with the working time directive, and everybody knows that it has had a major impact on the delivery of health services. That has been particularly true in the United Kingdom because, traditionally, all the countries within the United Kingdom have relied more on junior doctors than have other European countries. We must address the issue, which has implications for training, as Nanette Milne points out. We have a whole project called modernising medical careers, which is addressing the issue of doctors' training in the new age and in the new circumstances. Scotland is very much ahead of the field in its preparations. The guardians of standards in the training of doctors are confident that the requisite amount of training can be given within the new arrangements.

My first point is a detail but, for the sake of clarity, I should point out that the figures are not the numbers on a waiting list, because one of the difficulties is that there are no waiting lists, although we are dealing with that problem. The issue is the number of people treated who have been waiting longer than that, which is clearly different. I have been open about the problem of out-patient waiting. I identified it as the biggest single problem in the health service in my first year in office, which is why the key work of the centre for change and innovation is the most comprehensive redesign programme ever for out-patient clinics in Scotland, as I said in my speech. That process is now under way, which is why we saw a little progress last year, and it is because of that radical programme that we will meet our target by the end of next year.

Christine Grahame and many members know that long written answers routinely go to SPICe. The situation is nothing to do with the particular question.

I concentrate today on the main concerns about the Scottish health service, namely service reconfiguration and waiting times, as well as on our proposed legislative measures. However, I begin by emphasising that health improvement will be intensified in the coming months, including action on smoking in public places, and that the quality improvements that we have made in health care—through national standards, new treatments and managed clinical networks—will be built upon and extended. Those developments have already meant significant reductions in premature mortality from the big killer diseases. Since 1999 there has been a 6 per cent reduction in the deaths of people aged under 75 from cancer, a 14 per cent reduction in deaths from stroke and a 23 per cent reduction in deaths from coronary heart disease. One of the consequences of those and other changes is that many more people are now living with chronic illness and require support from primary and community care. That is where the new community health partnerships are so important, as they will ensure that front-line staff plan and provide an increasing amount of care in community settings. However, people do not just want more care in community settings; they want local hospitals to have a continuing role as well. I understand and support that desire, but it has to be satisfied in a way that is consistent with safe, high-quality care and with the new working time regulations.

In a minute—I want to say a little bit more first. We need to recognise that health care is a complex process that requires the highest standards of risk management and safety and that, in some cases, there will be more specialisation to maintain quality and to ensure that professionals can practice safely with the right blend of skills and teamwork. That said, I will look at the proposals of all the health boards that come to me to ensure that the maximum amount of care that can safely be kept local is kept local.

I agree entirely with Jackie Baillie on regional planning, on which the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Act 2004 contains provisions. On several occasions, I have made it clear that, in planning changes, boards will be required to co-operate with each other. I showed that to be the case earlier this year, in my response to the maternity proposals of NHS Argyll and Clyde—I returned its proposals and told it to do some more work with Greater Glasgow NHS Board. Patients do not recognise health board boundaries; boards must work across those boundaries. A few weeks ago, I had a meeting with the chief executives of NHS Argyll and Clyde and Greater Glasgow NHS Board to make that clear and another meeting between those two chief executives and officials in my department is being held tomorrow.

In a minute—I want to make a bit more progress, because I think that I have only six minutes for my speech, more than half of which has gone and I have still to deal with waiting. I believe that we need a strong national context for such work and that is why I set up an expert group to work on a national framework for service change and improvement. A key part of the framework exercise will be to engage the public in what is a crucial debate. I understand why calls are being made for a complete moratorium on change while that group does its work, but that would overlook some issues of clinical safety that cannot be postponed in such a way. Yesterday, David McLetchie said that we had given up on the health service, but I assure him and his colleagues that we will never give up on the health service, which they did a long time ago. We are determined to drive through the change and reforms that are needed to give Scotland a modern, 21 st century health service; to offer choice that will allow patients to access the high-quality services that suit their needs when they need them; and to ensure that services are truly patient centred—both in the relationship between  professionals and patients and in ensuring that patient experience drives the process of change and modernisation.

I have one minute and 30 seconds left and I must deal with waiting and legislation, so I am going to have difficulties. Waiting matters to patients and that is why it matters to me. I have been the first to recognise that there is a great deal more to do, especially in relation to out-patient waiting. That is why we have embarked on the most systematic redesign programme that there has ever been in Scotland to deal with that problem. It will lead to a maximum six-month wait for out-patient clinics by the end of next year alongside a maximum six-month wait for in-patients. We are making steady progress on our commitment on that and, this year, the lowest numbers ever are waiting more than six months for in-patient treatment. I am determined to achieve further reductions in waiting times once we have reached the six-month targets and I will set out our plans in more detail in the next few weeks. This session, we will also be introducing further legislation in support of our efforts to modernise and reform health services in Scotland and to strengthen the role of patients and the public. A key purpose of the legislation will be to enable the introduction of free eye and dental checks for all before 2007. That is a significant preventative health and access measure, which will ensure that any problems that require attention are detected and treated early. The legislation will also modernise our arrangements for the authorisation of post-mortems to ensure that the wishes of individuals, parents and families are fully respected and that they have a greater sense of control.

I am sorry, but I am in my last minute. We will also update the arrangements for organ and tissue donation and transplantation to ensure that the views of individuals and those closest to them are respected. The update is designed to increase confidence in those arrangements and increase the availability of organs for transplant. We will also introduce provisions to support the modernisation of dental and pharmacy services. Time constraints prevent my going into more detail on those provisions.  Our policy is designed to support the promotion of health and the modernisation and improvement of health services in Scotland. It is based on the needs and experience of patients. It will be driven forward and coordinated from the centre so that there is a national context for change. The real leaders of change, however, are the thousands of front-line staff who work in the health service. I want to end by thanking them and pledging to support them in every way I can.

The Scottish Executive Health Department continually monitors and reviews the performance of the Scottish Ambulance Service. Following discussions at the service's accountability review in May, the department is expecting to receive a report from the Ambulance Service later this year on progress in implementing priority-based dispatch across Scotland. I have written today to the chairman to make it clear that I expect to see service improvement delivered to urban and rural areas of Scotland in equal measure.

As far as I am aware, there are no proposals from the Ambulance Service to reduce provision in Highland Perthshire, which is the area that John Swinney is concerned about. He raises two issues. In relation to the out-of-hours service, it was part of the good out-of-hours consultation and agreement in Tayside that an extra ambulance should be provided at Aberfeldy. Having checked that, I can say that that is still going to be in position. There is another exercise involved in terms of the redistribution of the ambulance service in Highland Perthshire. Again, my understanding is that the service will still be maintained in that part of Scotland. If John Swinney has further information and concerns, I am prepared to look into the matter in more detail.

The Ambulance Service is central to out-of-hours care and to emergency care more generally, as is NHS 24. No doubt, there are certain glitches, but all the patient surveys indicate that NHS 24 is being very positively received by patients, which is what matters. The Ambulance Service will be critical not  only in Dumfries and Galloway but throughout Scotland. I am sure that we were all pleased to see the television report earlier this week about paramedics in an ambulance in Lothian who administered clot-busting drugs on the scene of a collapse. The man involved is now alive and well to tell the tale. Let us commend all the new things that are being done by paramedics and the massive contribution that they are making to emergency care.

When I visited hospitals and other health services in the Highland region recently, the issue was raised with me of what seems to be an increasing use of single-crewed ambulances in the region. I have looked into that and I have written the chairman of the Ambulance Service—as I said in my first answer—saying that the use of single-crewed ambulances must be reduced in the Highlands. Some unavoidable instances of that may occur if somebody calls off at the last minute, but that practice should not be used. I have asked about that and will receive regular reports to ensure that the use of single-crewed ambulances in the Highlands is reduced.

The Ambulance Service was fully involved in changes that have taken place and was given extra resources in Argyll and Clyde because of the changes. However, Duncan McNeil is right. When any changes have taken place, it is important to monitor their effects, including the effect on the Ambulance Service. I can certainly look into that and give him further information about the effects so far.

We intend to publish a document for consultation at the conference entitled "Diabetes in Scotland 2004: Strengths and Challenges" in November. The final report will be published in May 2005.

Mike Pringle is right to emphasise the connection between obesity and diabetes type II but, of course, obesity has much wider health implications. Prevention will be given an enhanced emphasis in the review. It is clear that obesity is central, but the strategies to deal with obesity are wider than the diabetes strategy—they are central to the whole health improvement strategy. Dealing with obesity is one of the major challenges that we face as a nation, but the problem's scope is much wider than Scotland. We are making much progress on many fronts on health improvement—I will touch on some of that in the next debate—but we know that we are moving in the wrong direction on obesity. It is important to state the seriousness of the situation and devise appropriate policies to challenge it. The Scottish diet action plan and all the food policies that we have, in conjunction with the physical activity strategy, are central. I am pleased that the World Health Organisation commended our approach of putting those two central strands together, but the challenge for us is to deliver results that are based on those good policies.

I confess that I have not managed to read the Finnish diabetes prevention study. I will be happy to receive a copy from Christine Grahame. We certainly know that many good examples of health improvement successes come from Finland. They usually concern Finland's progress on coronary heart disease, but diabetes relates to that in many ways.  Without in any way being complacent, we should also remember the progress that we have made on coronary heart disease. For example, I was pleased to hear just this week that the progress in Forth valley that was being highlighted to me has been greater than that in North Karelia, which was the great demonstration site in Europe for progress on heart disease.

Some of the difficulties in podiatry services that Mary Scanlon highlighted before the recess arise because of the priority that we are giving to diabetes patients. Some of the changes that have taken place are the result of reprioritisation. Certainly, people with diabetes are being given priority as part of that.

I congratulate Frances Curran on securing this important debate and I welcome the opportunity to participate. I recognise the passionate speeches that have been made and endorse the emphasis on the importance of meaningful public involvement. All views—not just comments on the proposals in the consultation document—can and should be expressed as part of that involvement. Members will be fully aware that the Executive has strict guidelines on how consultations should be undertaken. In formulating final proposals on any major service provision, we expect NHS boards to listen to and take account of the views that all stakeholders express. I welcome the news that NHS Argyll and Clyde has commissioned Dr Andrew Walker from the University of Glasgow to undertake an independent review of how those views have been taken into account. Members will know that the time for me to express a view is when any proposals come to me following consultation. I will consider carefully the supporting evidence and the report of the independent review, as well as all representations that I receive on the matter. As I have said repeatedly, I will not simply rubber-stamp NHS boards' proposals. I will want to be assured that all views have been taken into account in drafting the proposals and that the consultation process has been fully consistent with Executive guidance. I also guarantee that I will not be prepared to endorse any solution that does not ensure high-quality, safe and sustainable services for Argyll and Clyde. Members will remember that a few months ago I did not rubber-stamp the maternity service proposals from Argyll and Clyde. I said that I was unconvinced by the planning assumptions about the number of women who would choose to have their babies in Paisley rather than Glasgow, and I asked Argyll and Clyde and Glasgow to undertake more detailed work on the pattern of patient choice between the two services. As a result, women are now being given genuine choice between consultant-led delivery in Paisley or Glasgow with local antenatal care.  I cannot comment in detail on Argyll and Clyde's proposals at this stage, but I can mention some of the key drivers for change to which boards throughout Scotland must respond. They include—crucially—clinical safety, meeting quality standards, sustainability, work-force regulations and training requirements. More generally, we should be mindful of the geographic and population density issues that make the organisation of services in Scotland significantly different from that in England. "Partnership for Care: Scotland's Health White Paper" emphasised the importance of providing services as close as possible to people's homes. The NHS is making progress in bringing many services closer to local communities. For example, it is becoming standard practice for services such as chemotherapy and haemodialysis to be provided locally. More chronic disease is being managed in primary care. However, we cannot ensure high-quality, clinically safe local services in every case. In 2002, the Temple report recognised that. More recently, the British Medical Association has spoken about the need to consider seriously the risks that are sometimes associated with providing local services and the alternatives that might be available. As John Garner, the chair of BMA Scotland, said this week, as politicians we must be careful not to rush to defend buildings and services that may be out of date when the real issues are quality of service and patient safety. Likewise, those issues of safety and quality, rather than the desire to cut costs, must be the drivers of any changes that health boards propose. In particular, I expect every NHS board to demonstrate a two-way flow in service change. Some specialisms may best be provided from one more central location. At the same time, other services must go local wherever possible.

That is certainly one of many challenges that the board faces. I recognise that in Argyll and Clyde there is a background of many years of mismanagement, especially of finances, which makes life more difficult for Argyll and Clyde than for other NHS boards. I will give a good example from Argyll and Clyde of new local services: the new mid-Argyll project. This innovative new service model, redesigned from a patient's point of view, is an entirely appropriate response to local needs and will  secure high-quality, sustainable health and social care services for the local community for the next 30 years and beyond. I am very much looking forward to travelling to Lochgilphead later this month to cut the sod for the new mid-Argyll hospital, which will be at the centre of the new development. Frances Curran went beyond the situation in Argyll and Clyde and talked about a crisis and a lack of action in the health service more generally. However, no serious commentator would dispute the fact either that record investment is being made in our health service or that that has produced many improvements. The question is how to spend this record amount of money to best effect and to accelerate the dissemination of good practice that is undoubtedly to be found in abundance. That means making world-class specialist facilities available to all, alongside community facilities at local level. There should be extra bed capacity, when it is needed, but there should also be recognition that modern medicine will see an increasing amount of community and day treatment.

In general terms, I do not think that the balance is right. Certain services must move to more specialist centres because of the overriding need to ensure clinical safety and quality of care, but many services should be moving in the opposite direction. This is a dynamic process. As I said at question time, we must ensure that we get the balance right. The objective must be a patient-centred NHS that improves the experience of patients, takes account of modern clinical practice and puts clinical safety and the quality of care first. There should be local access wherever that is consistent with those objectives. More generally, the approach means having complex solutions for complex situations, in which the objective is always better outcomes for patients.

I am deliberately avoiding commenting on the details of Argyll and Clyde NHS Board's proposals, because they must come to me at the end of the day. However, it is a fact that there are far more in-patient mental health beds in Argyll and Clyde than elsewhere in  Scotland. Some of the thinking behind the proposals relates to developing care in the community, as has happened in other parts of Scotland. I cannot comment more finally than that. The extent of the change required in Argyll and Clyde and elsewhere has highlighted the need for further work to provide a national policy context for the detailed planning and service redesign efforts at local and regional level. That is why I have responded by developing work on a national framework for service change, which will explore and advise on strategies to secure a sustainable configuration of health services in Scotland and it will recommend how sustainability might be supported and enhanced through improved integration of care. The national framework for service change will identify those services that need to be delivered at national, regional and local levels in a way that will help ensure that patients get the treatment they require when and where they need it, delivered to nationally agreed standards in an equitable and cost-effective manner throughout Scotland. Although my time has more than passed, I assure members that no health issue is more important to me than the reconfiguration and redesign of services, which I recognise as the most controversial of all health issues in Scotland at present. I make it clear at the very end of my speech that that does not mean that every decision that is taken by every NHS board in Scotland will be the right one. Ministers will listen to clinicians, to other staff, to communities and to politicians to determine the right outcome.

I understand that, at its meeting on 23 June 2004, Lothian NHS Board approved the move to public consultation on its three strategy areas: the mental health review; the pan-Lothian review of older people's services; and the better acute care in Lothian project. The outcome of the consultation process will set a clear direction for the new hospitals planned in Lothian, including the provision of hospital services in Haddington.

I am assured by NHS Lothian that that is exactly what it is doing. There were particular reasons for the delay in Musselburgh, which were to do with the site. As I indicated in my previous answer, in Haddington the issue is now very much dependent on the outcomes of the consultation. NHS Lothian should be congratulated in general on the extent to which it has developed so many new hospitals and health facilities over the past five years or so—perhaps I can say at this point that I will open the new community treatment centre in Leith next Friday. I think that NHS Lothian has achieved an excellent balance between centralising specialist services in specialist hospitals and delivering as many local services in local hospitals and community treatment centres as possible. It has been very successful in achieving that balance.

Consultations often take place over the summer and I am sure that the length of the consultation will take that into account. It would be premature of me to make any detailed comment on NHS Lothian's current proposals, although obviously I have a local as well as a national interest in the Western general. As I indicated in my previous answer, NHS Lothian  is in general striking a good balance between services that need to be centralised and those that can be delivered locally.

I know that plans are well advanced for that. The fact that there are proposals for East Lothian and Midlothian, as well as the development in my constituency, shows that NHS Lothian wants to have as many local facilities as it can to balance the superb centres of excellence that it already has at the Royal infirmary, the Western general and St John's.

I have spoken to the lead consultant, Professor Douglas, on more than one occasion and I am aware of issues around the service. I recently spoke to someone who is involved and I know that action is being taken to address the problem. I agree that the situation is unacceptable, but I am reassured that NHS Lothian is taking action to address it.

NHS Highland will consider the options on 2 August and ministers will give a view at the end of the process.

As is well known, ministers have a formal role in these matters, as I described in my answer. I will be saying the same thing at the end of today's members' business debate on Argyll and Clyde. I spoke recently to the chair of NHS Highland, who assured me that he and the board are committed to looking at any options that people put forward. He specifically said that any option that Jamie Stone wished to propose would be considered. Options have to be sustainable and in particular they have to be consistent with the working time directive in relation to the hours  that consultants or any other health care staff work. There are constraints but, within those, the board has reassured me that it will look at all the options.

The Scottish Advisory Committee on Distinction Awards allocates awards on the basis of an individual's record of achievement on a range of factors, including clinical excellence, outstanding contribution to the achievement of service goals and research, innovation and improvement in the service. We are committed to a fundamental review of the awards scheme, which will ensure its effectiveness as a means of encouraging and rewarding outstanding contributions to the national health service.

In the recent past, improvements have been made in the way in which awards are made. Clearly, we believe that there can be further improvements, which is why we will undertake a wide-ranging review, during which the issues that Scott Barrie raises will be considered.

Colonoscopy is not a procedure for routine population screening. It is used for diagnostic purposes, but national evidence-based clinical guidelines for the management of colorectal cancer state that there is currently no clear consensus as to the investigation of choice for the diagnosis of colorectal cancer. We shall build capacity in colonoscopy as part of our planning for the future roll-out of national screening for colorectal cancer.

We should not confuse the issue of screening with the issue of diagnosis. As I have indicated, colonoscopy is a diagnostic tool; it is faecal occult blood testing that is used in the screening programme. It is a great credit to Scotland that the bigger of the two pilot sites in the United Kingdom is in Scotland. We will still be in the second stage of the screening pilot until 2005, so obviously there are more results to come. However, we are not simply waiting for the end of the pilot. We have said that, in principle, we want to roll it out. Clearly, however, capacity has to be built up. Colonoscopy services will be part of that. We should acknowledge the enormous progress that has been made over the past three years in the diagnosis and treatment of colorectal cancer. Recently, I launched the framework for bowel cancer. At that event, I was told of the great advances that have been made through the managed clinical networks for colorectal cancer. In fact, £4 million of recent cancer money has been spent on developing endoscopy services. That has included money for new colonoscopy equipment and extra sessions in Edinburgh.

Many issues arise relating to the diagnosis of stomach and other cancers. Politicians should be careful when they go into that particular territory. That is why, in my answer to Christine Grahame, I referred to national evidence-based clinical guidelines. Politicians have to accept those guidelines. In Scotland, we have guidelines from the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network that are internationally famous. We have to respect them. I cannot comment on the individual case that Tommy Sheridan raises, or indeed on the case that was highlighted in a recent newspaper article on colorectal cancer. Although I cannot comment on those particular cases, it may well be that particular mistakes have been made but that the guidelines are not wrong.

The new general medical services contract recognises the importance of both the recruitment and the retention of general practitioners and contains a number of measures that support that, including the continuation of the "golden hello" scheme for GPs with a standard £5,000 payment. Funding has been agreed for additional GP vocational training, ensuring that 280 places are available in 2004-05. New work-force planning arrangements across NHS Scotland will take into account the changing needs of primary care service teams.

We already offer particular inducements to GPs in rural areas. The new contract should be beneficial in helping both to recruit and to retain GPs in rural areas. I know that out-of-hours services have been causing concern, but the new options for GPs in the new GMS contract will make general practice more attractive, as will the other positive features of the contract.

I congratulate Keith Raffan on securing the debate. Hepatitis C, which is sometimes called "the silent epidemic", is one of the most serious and significant public health risks of our generation. As Keith Raffan said, there are 18,109 reported cases, but the latest estimate from the Scottish Centre for Infection and Environmental Health suggests that a total of between 40,000 and 50,000 people in Scotland have hepatitis C. The reality is that, however we describe the present situation—whether as a crisis, an epidemic or a threat—we are faced with a public health risk of significant and increasing proportions. In recognition of that emerging threat, the Scottish needs assessment programme was commissioned in 1999 to carry out a needs assessment of hepatitis C in Scotland. The resultant report, which was published in August 2000, set the framework for the Executive's response to addressing the key challenges that are posed by hepatitis C. I emphasise this point because it may not be widely appreciated that the Executive has been active on this front for a number of years, has already set in train a spectrum of measures and has committed substantial resources to tackling the threat from the disease. I will give some flavour of what we have already done, although I realise, of course, that more must be done. In order to bring further coherence and impetus to the programme of activity in Scotland, we have in hand the preparation of an updated action plan that will set out the action that is in progress and the additional measures that we propose to take. Some key issues have been raised by members today. Eleanor Scott talked about the importance of following up former drug users. We entirely agree that former drug users must be a targeted  group and a focus for screening and wider attention. Christine Grahame talked about the need for more needle exchanges. That matter will certainly be dealt with in the action plan, of which I will say more in the context of current activity. Keith Raffan and Bill Aitken mentioned more research, which is also important. I point to two studies that are being done—an examination of the injecting practices of injecting drug users and an evaluation of the impact of changes in the Lord Advocate's guidance on needle exchange, which several members called for. Therefore, some work that has been called for is in hand. Obviously, we will have to make decisions about other work in the light of the debate.

The issue of screening will be dealt with and the plan should be ready later in the year. We will be able to say something about resources when it is published. I will talk about resources in a moment, although I am alarmed to see that three minutes of my time have gone already. In the light of the recommendation from the HIV health promotion strategy review group in 2001, we extended the earmarked HIV-prevention funding that is given annually to NHS boards to cover other blood-borne viruses, including hepatitis C. To enhance the scope for such prevention activity, we increased the available funds from £6.1 million to £8.1 million per annum. Boards use those resources in a variety of ways, including the funding of awareness-raising initiatives and needle exchange schemes. I stress that resources are already earmarked specifically for the prevention of blood-borne viruses such as hepatitis C. Also in 2002, the Executive issued new information materials that aimed to give health professionals and patients as much information as possible about hepatitis C. As members have said, the predominant source of transmission is through injecting drug misuse and a range of information materials have been issued to drug services and prisons throughout Scotland to highlight the risks from injecting, including the risk of contracting hepatitis C. Over the past three years, we have invested an additional £34 million to expand and improve treatment and rehabilitation services for drug misusers. The money that goes to NHS boards for that is ring fenced. We also issued revised guidance on increasing the limits on the  number of needles and syringes to be made available. That has already been discussed, so I will say no more about it. Good treatment and care are of the essence, and decisions about the suitability of patients for treatment are essentially for individual clinicians to make.

I have only two minutes left. The guidelines that were issued earlier this year by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence and NHS Quality Improvement Scotland give advice on the use of combination therapy with pegylated interferon alpha and ribavirin. We are also giving a grant for the United Kingdom hepatitis resource centre in Scotland, which offers support and advice on testing and treatment to those who are affected by hepatitis C. On the treatment side, we are funding the establishment of a national clinical database of patients who have been diagnosed with hepatitis C, with the aim of identifying treatments that patients have received and evaluating how effective those have been against the disease as it affects them. That will help in planning the organisation and resourcing of treatment services and will inform funding decisions. The Executive has also been discussing with clinicians the potential for setting up a managed clinical network—or networks—for hepatitis C, and funding has been earmarked for the appointment of a network manager. Networks of that sort will help to ensure that the considerable expertise that is available in Scotland can be accessed and utilised for the benefit of all patients. In addition, a Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline is being developed that will address all aspects of the management of hepatitis C and will be a useful and practical tool for clinicians and others.

I do not have time. I have only one minute. If a motion is passed to extend the debate, I can take an intervention—otherwise, I cannot.

I agree entirely with Jean Turner and thank her for making that point. The £8.1 million to which I have referred is for that, along with other things. The issue of ring fencing funding for treatment has been at the heart of the debate. Dedicated funds are not given now for the treatment of HIV/AIDS. Such an approach was discontinued some years ago on the ground that boards were best placed to allocate resources for treatment on the basis of local assessment of need. Such decisions are always hard and I am called on to ring fence money for a great many things in the health service. I will reflect on what members have said, but there is always a tension between local decision making and national determination on such matters. It is not the norm to allocate resources for the treatment of specific illnesses. That said, I acknowledge the pressure on services, perhaps particularly in Lothian. I am pleased that Lothian NHS Board has identified recurrent funding this year to support further capacity for the treatment of patients with hepatitis C. We shall certainly be monitoring that through the chief medical officer's group. The CMO is already working with Lothian NHS Board on that matter. In my final minute, I will talk about the future. Resources for prevention, treatment and care will continue to be paramount, but we have to be sure that we focus on the right issues and that our planning and initiatives are soundly based. To that end, we have commissioned SCIEH to carry out work to provide robust estimates of the total number of persons who are living with hepatitis C, diagnosed and undiagnosed, including estimates of the distribution of cases by region and disease stage. In addition, SCIEH is undertaking work to estimate the future burden, including cost, of hepatitis C during the next two decades. Preliminary results from that work should be available shortly and will inform the development of prevention initiatives and the development of the assessment of care and treatment needs. The Executive's effective interventions unit is also currently funding a substantial programme of research, totalling some £300,000 since 2002, to find better and more creative ways of changing the behaviour of injecting drugs misusers. Members will understand that I have been struggling to get across all the initiatives that are under way. That is not to say that more does not have to be done. Hepatitis C is a priority that we have acknowledged during the past two or three years and we will reflect on all the points that were  made in the debate as we finalise our updated action plan.   Meeting closed at 17:41.

In this important debate, we have heard passionate and important speeches from all sides of the argument, such as those who  favour legislation and those who want to see a more voluntary or market-based approach. The debate has reinforced my conviction that we were right to commit ourselves to a policy that stimulates and welcomes an open and informed discussion on passive smoking, right to look at the evidence through the fog of claim and counter-claim, right to look at international experience and right to look at the facts. Those facts, which were outlined so passionately by Tom McCabe and others during the debate, make us begin to appreciate the importance of action to reduce exposure to second-hand smoke and the role that such action can play in improving Scotland's health and tackling the health inequalities that continue to scar our nation. We must acknowledge the fact that second-hand smoke contains more than 4,000 chemicals, many of which are known to cause cancer; that exposure to second-hand smoke can be a cause of asthma and respiratory disease in children; and that exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of heart disease as well as the risk of cancer. Faced with those facts, I assure Nicola Sturgeon that I entirely agree with her that doing nothing is not an option. Smoke-free workplaces and public places are the direction of travel, but the process of getting there and ensuring that action that we take is effective are important. Action on Smoking and Health—ASH—is the leading campaigning charity in the field. It passionately believes in action to tackle passive smoking and it has clearly said: "The process of reaching entirely smoke-free workplaces requires broad-based public support and increased awareness of the dangers of passive smoking. Resources must be allocated to building awareness of the risks and showing that the economic consequences would be minimal". That is what ASH has said and that is what we are doing. It is therefore wrong for Stewart Maxwell to complain about delay and prevarication. We will make our proposals before the end of the year and they will be better and more effective proposals as a result of the consultation.

I have already said that we will come forward with proposals before the end of the year. Tom McCabe outlined the process of consultation that will take place over the next few months. I hope that that process will prove to be the most successful and engaging public debate in  the history of the Parliament. As we have heard, there were 950 responses in one day. With all due respect to Stewart Maxwell, his bill's policy memorandum mentions 39 responses.

I was referring to the policy memorandum for Stewart Maxwell's bill. I understand that the second point that he made can be debated. I imagine that the reason for the image was the prevalence of smoking among young women, but I understand the point that he is making. We will encourage responses to our consultation through our website and hard copies of consultation documents will be distributed through surgeries, libraries and other places throughout Scotland. We will encourage employers from the public, private and voluntary sectors to raise awareness of the consultation process among their staff and we will welcome action by pubs and other businesses to encourage their customers to send us their views. We are also putting a strong emphasis on research. We will consider public opinion in Scotland and conduct research among Scottish businesses in a variety of sectors. We have commissioned an expert look at the impact of passive smoking on mortality and morbidity in Scotland and we are taking time to have an in-depth look at the experience of other countries. We will consider the emerging evidence from Ireland. Johann Lamont's speech was one of the most interesting speeches in the debate. As she said, she is a converted sceptic as a result of visiting Ireland. We will also consider the experience of Canada, in which 11 out of 13 provinces now have byelaws that deal in some way with passive smoking. We will consider the experience of New York city, where smoke-free-air legislation was introduced in a blaze of publicity in March 2003.

No—I think that it will concentrate on public places. The process of gathering international evidence will culminate in a conference that will be held in Edinburgh on 9 September. Murdo Fraser simplified and distorted the issue of freedom. By contrast, Nora Radcliffe said that there were issues relating to individual rights, but that those rights should not be at someone else's expense. We are not going to force people to stop smoking, but we want them to recognise the potential impact that their decision has on others. We want them to think about how they can modify their behaviour to reduce the harm that is caused to those around them; to recognise the importance of good citizenship; and to play their part in promoting the cause of health improvement in Scotland. Good citizenship involves respect for the right of smokers to smoke and the right of everyone to have their health protected from second-hand smoke. It is about recognising the health risks from passive smoking and taking action to ensure that we minimise those risks. This is a genuine and open debate in which nothing is ruled out. Ted Brocklebank focused on that and suggested that there was a conflict between health and business interests in this matter. However, we also heard several remarks about the positive business opportunities that flow from smoke-free environments. There may not be the conflict that Ted Brocklebank identified. There are a number of options. We have the ability to legislate to protect public health and we will consider all the options. We will look at the potential for a total, Scotland-wide ban and whether we should consider exemptions for places such as residential care homes. We will consider the option of a more targeted ban, as is proposed in Stewart Maxwell's bill. Several interesting comments were made about that bill. Nicola Sturgeon said that it did not go far enough. Helen Eadie also felt that it was partial and did not deal with the whole issue. There were also issues of timing to which Ted Brocklebank referred. We need to wait until the end of the consultation process before we take a view on the issue as a whole and on Stewart Maxwell's bill in particular. I hope that that is widely accepted in the Parliament. Another option is to put the onus on local action and local decision making by local authorities. Whether that can be achieved without the kind of confusion and market distortion that many in the licensed trade seem to fear is very much an open question. Mention has also been made of the voluntary charter on smoking in public places. Progress on that has been disappointing, but we are prepared to listen to ideas for reinvigorating the voluntary approach.  The Executive's action plan on tobacco control signalled a new determination to tackle smoking throughout Scotland. Since its launch in January, we have made new money available to support services for those who want to give up smoking. David Davidson emphasised the importance of that, but he should have acknowledged the considerable resources that are already being invested and the big increases in resources for that effort that will come on stream soon. We fully support helping individuals to give up smoking. That is a key part of our strategy. No one is saying that smoke-free environments in themselves will solve the problem; nevertheless, moving towards smoke-free environments has an important contribution to make. We have worked with NHS Health Scotland to launch new and powerful advertising to raise awareness of the dangers of second-hand smoke and we have put together the comprehensive programme of public consultation that we have heard about today. Back in January, we committed ourselves to providing a breath of fresh air for Scotland and we now have our best-ever opportunity to demonstrate that commitment. I know that there are different opinions in Parliament and in the country; that is right and understandable. However, I ask everybody—whatever their opinion—to commit themselves to taking part in the national discussion on smoking in public places. This is not about delay or prevarication. I was disappointed that Stewart Maxwell and several of his colleagues made that charge. This is about taking more effective action to move towards smoke-free places. The conclusions of the consultation will be announced before the end of the year—nobody can seriously call that delay or prevarication. This is about ensuring that the action that we take is effective and that we make progress on this important issue.

The commitment on the nine months national maximum waiting time for in-patient and day-case treatment is being met and good progress is being made towards achieving the other partnership agreement commitments on waiting.

I can guarantee not only that the targets will be sustained but that they will be improved. Indeed, the single most significant statistic in the plethora of statistics that came out last Thursday was the reduction of almost 3,000 in  the number of people waiting more than six months for in-patient and day-case treatment—a reduction of almost one third over the quarter. The firmer target on in-patient and day-case treatment is six months maximum by the end of next year. That was the biggest single change in all the statistics that came out last week. In welcoming that last week, I indicated that a lot more had to be done, particularly in relation to out-patient waiting. Several important initiatives have been launched recently, such as an orthopaedics initiative that was launched last Friday, which will help to achieve the targets in that area.

The Golden Jubilee national hospital was a major factor in the improvements in the waiting time figures that were announced last week. More than 13,000 procedures were performed there last year and that will increase this year. I welcome the fact that Des McNulty has highlighted the important contribution of that hospital.

A range of measures is in place or under development to improve the management of asthma. They include the new general practitioner contract, which identifies asthma as a condition that will attract extra remuneration for doctors if they meet standards of care, and GP practice accreditation procedures for the management of chronic diseases, including asthma.

I agree with Nanette Milne that the SIGN guideline is extremely important. The recommendation on asthma action plans is a key part of the guideline. NHS Quality Improvement Scotland is working with Asthma UK in Scotland to develop support for the implementation of the guideline. We are keen to aid that process and we are discussing with both those bodies how the Executive can help implementation, in particular through the training of health care professionals in the use of asthma action plans. That is one further important development in addition to those that I mentioned in my first answer. The children's steering group of NHS Quality Improvement Scotland is developing  a quality-based approach to the delivery of asthma services for children. That is another important initiative that will improve the services that are on offer.

The chief scientist office is funding nine asthma-related research projects and the aspect that Patrick Harvie highlights is one of those on which more detailed research is required. In general, people are aware of the importance of the environment with regard to exacerbating asthma. The other important part of the issue is that of smoke-filled environments. As members know, the consultation document on smoking in public places will be launched on Monday. Those who suffer from asthma are keen for there to be further restrictions on smoke-filled places.

The quality and outcomes framework of the new general medical services contract will, for the first time, directly reward general practices for providing a higher volume and better quality of outcomes for patients. Payments will be made for achievement against a series of clinical, practice management and patient experience indicators.

The money that is going into the new GMS contract is separate from the general allocations to boards. As most members will know, there is an increase of one third in the resources that are going into primary care over a three-year period. Enhanced services must meet a guaranteed minimum level. Over and above that, boards have the freedom to develop local  enhanced services. One of the strong features of the new contract—and of community health partnerships more generally—is that it will encourage the development of a wider range of services in primary care settings.

I will have to write to the member about that issue.

There has been a lot of discussion about the out-of-hours service. In general terms, we think that it will be helpful to rural areas, as it will aid the recruitment and retention of GPs in those areas. The approach will be based on team-based care. The GPs who are available will be concentrating on those patients who need to see a GP, as distinct from those who need to see another health care professional. Those general points should help to reassure people about the out-of-hours service. I know that there are concerns about the cost of the service, particularly in rural areas such as Highland. There has been a lot of discussion about board finances. As Maureen Macmillan knows, some extra money was distributed at the end of the last financial year and I hope that we will be able to distribute some more money in the near future to help with some of the modernisation processes that boards are undertaking.

That is an issue for Greater Glasgow NHS Board in the first instance. If the board proposes a significant restructuring of services at the Glasgow homeopathic hospital, it would have to consult fully on the issue and submit its proposals to me for approval.

I described my role in my answer to Mr Brown's first question. However, I will say that everything that I have heard about the hospital suggests that it provides an excellent model of patient-centred and holistic care. Moreover, as Mr Brown has reminded us, it takes patients from many boards throughout Scotland. I am sure that Greater Glasgow NHS Board will want to bear those two points in mind when it considers its position on the matter.

I repeat my position on this matter. However, I am keen to take up Bill Butler's  offer to visit the hospital and to see at first hand what I have heard about. I mentioned that I had heard good reports about the hospital and I should point out that Mr Butler was one of several people who talked to me about it—I know that he held a meeting on the matter last week.

I am certain that Greater Glasgow NHS Board will want to bear the member's point in mind and that, as Bill Butler said, it will consider the fundamental clinical issues. However, if it intends to save costs through the proposal, it should also bear in mind that the patients who would have received treatment in the hospital will have to be treated elsewhere.

I have made some fairly positive remarks about the homeopathic hospital in my answers this afternoon and I have willingly agreed to Bill Butler's suggestion that I visit the hospital, but I outlined my formal position on the matter in my first answer.

The point is that we are talking about new activity. The figures are being counted for the first time. I was making a simple point on an issue that the Conservative motion missed.

Once again, David Davidson is saying the exact opposite of the truth.  It is obvious that he is distorting what I said about staff. I praised staff for what they are doing. We want to give more decision-making powers to front-line staff. Part of my answer to Christine Grahame should have been that the £25 million that she complained I did not have control of is controlled by the front-line cancer clinicians. They decide their priorities. That is the approach that we support.

Christine Grahame is completely wrong, as I explained at the Health Committee meeting. We receive reports every six months that detail how all the extra cancer care money—£25 million per year—is spent by each regional cancer network. The spending is itemised every six months.

I begin by paying tribute to the dedicated and hard-working staff of the NHS and to the whole health care team—nurses, allied health professionals, support staff and medical staff—whose productivity has been cruelly criticised by the Conservative party this morning. I would be the first to admit that continuing improvements in health services are required and I am the first to work for those, but to state—as the motion states—that services "have not improved" is a total travesty that is based on party-political dogma. There are at least five problems with the motion. First, it is totally silent on quality; secondly, it totally ignores much of the new activity in the NHS, which has not yet been reflected in official figures; thirdly, it disregards the progress that has been made on waiting times; fourthly, it distorts and caricatures our reform agenda; and fifthly, it conceals the Conservatives' real health agenda. On the first problem, I say frequently that the starting point for improving quality is the experience of every patient who passes through the health care system. That is why we emphasise the involvement of patients in the development of services and learning from the experience of patients over and above patient choice for all—which we support—rather than patient choice for the few, which the Conservatives advocate through patient passports. There is much more to do, but we should acknowledge the considerable progress that has been made through patient involvement; for example, in the cancer strategy, in the coronary heart disease strategy, in the stroke strategy and in the diabetes strategy. The reduction of unacceptably long working hours is also part of the quality agenda. The days of exhausted junior doctors being expected to care for patients are over; 80 hours a week, as the figure was five years ago, has been reduced to 56 hours a week. In addition, doctors in training are now focusing more on developing their skills and experience, which means that junior doctors rightly spend less time providing a service, with more patient care being provided by trained practitioners. That, of course, has implications for activity, but it is positive in respect of quality. To help to support quality and safety, we established the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland in 1999, and in 2003 we merged and  strengthened the board to reinforce its independence by forming NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. NHS Quality Improvement Scotland is pursuing a vigorous programme of standard setting, and of reviewing and reporting publicly on performance against those standards. Representatives of patients and the public are involved in all that work. There is considerable evidence that that programme of work is leading to improvements in patient care. For example, two weeks ago, I attended a conference of all the managed clinical networks for colon cancer in Scotland. They reported significant progress in meeting the NHS quality improvement standard for colon cancer. That could be replicated across the board in respect of many other diseases. More generally, what has happened to surgical mortality rates? They have fallen to ever-lower levels. What has happened to rates of premature mortality from heart disease, stroke and cancer? They have fallen and continue to fall. Of course much remains to be done. Quality and safety standards do not stand still, but it is important to acknowledge the progress that is being made. Quality improvements and a reduction in working hours to acceptable levels form the background to an apparent fall in hospital activity. I am certainly not complacent about that, so we are promoting benchmarking to help to improve efficiency. The centre for change and innovation and the national waiting times unit are sharing good practice, as are health boards. There is more to the matter than meets the eye. The new activities that the Conservative motion ignores are performed in different locations and by different people from those who performed them in the past. Faced with the choice between spending time as an in-patient and being treated as a day case or out-patient, most people choose the day case or out-patient option. Following an illness, older people would much rather be cared for at home than in hospital. It makes good clinical sense to concentrate complex treatment in hospitals and to move rehabilitation, management of chronic disease, therapy, diagnostic testing and monitoring procedures to primary and community care and to people's homes as far as possible. It also makes sense to ensure that care is provided by the most appropriate staff in the most appropriate way. For example, a community nurse or therapist spends more time with a patient than a hospital consultant or general practitioner can afford to. People can consult a community pharmacist about the most effective treatment for a minor ailment.

That relates precisely to the point that I am describing. Of course the official figures have reduced, but my point—David McLetchie would have heard it if he had been listening to my speech—is that much activity in out-patients departments and elsewhere is not reflected in the official figures. In February, the website of the information and statistics division of the NHS included for the first time figures for patients who were seen in nurse-led clinics. The number of patients who attended such clinics in January this year was more than 22,000 for acute specialties and another 32,000 attendances were made for non-acute specialties. The early estimate is that nurse-led clinics account for about 10 per cent of activity at consultant out-patient clinics. A significant amount of NHS activity has not previously been recorded, so the activity figures that the Conservatives quote omit those numbers. The Conservatives' figures also do not reflect the increasing amount of treatment that used to be given in hospitals but which is now provided in primary care settings by a wide range of health care professionals. The Conservatives quoted only general practitioner consultations, but 2.6 million patients were seen by allied health professionals such as speech therapists, occupational therapists and physiotherapists in the first six months of 2003-04, which represents about 5 million patient interactions a year. New figures that were published at the end of last year provide an estimate of 10 million face-to-face contacts each year in primary care between patients and practice teams of nurses, district nurses and health visitors. Patients who have conditions including asthma, diabetes and mental health issues can expect practice team members other than GPs to see them.

Audit Scotland will publish the report of such an inquiry on 3 June, so the proposal in the SNP's amendment is redundant.

I will not give way. I ask the Presiding Officer how long I have taken for my speech, because I do not have a sense of that.

I will miss out some of the examples that I had intended to give of new activity.

Obviously, I can accept no more interventions, given how long I have taken. The many innovative ways of working are certainly not hallmarks of the monolithic, centrally run health care service that the motion describes. We are encouraging and supporting new ways of working that place patients at the centre of care and which devolve responsibility to suitably trained staff who work in wards, clinics, health centres and the community. The new community health partnerships will help to devolve resources and decision making to the front line and will help the public and patients to become more closely involved in local NHS decisions that affect them. Community health partnerships will reinforce the joint working between the NHS and local authorities that already benefits patients. Far from operating a centrally run model, we are working with patients and the NHS to support integrated systems whereby the patient's pathway is streamlined through managed clinical networks that link primary and hospital care and which cross NHS board boundaries. Under such systems, decisions are made and resources are committed as near as possible to the front line. I am surprised that the Conservatives have the brass neck even to mention waiting figures. Unfortunately for them, I was the Opposition health spokesperson in 1996 and I remember full well complaining about waits of more than a year for heart surgery. Next month, that figure will drop to 18 weeks in Scotland. I also remember that in the 1990s, the maximum waiting time for in-patient treatment was 18 months; it is now nine months and will fall steadily towards six months by the end of 2005. The Conservatives should at least acknowledge the progress that has been made on in-patient waiting. They quote bogus figures on waiting lists. As they know, we have adopted a single list, so the figures do not compare like with like. I also remind them that 50 per cent of in-patients do not wait at all. My amendment acknowledges that more needs to be done on out-patient waiting, which is why I have been pleased recently to launch several initiatives. The centre for change and innovation has led those initiatives as part of its out-patient programme. The unacceptably long out-patient waits that my amendment highlights will fall in the next year. I find the motion to be disappointing because it deals with means rather than ends. It talks about  activity rather than about achievements such as reduced premature mortality from cancer and heart disease, and it talks about structures rather than about outcomes such as reduced waiting times. In the real world, structures are not the top priority for the people of Scotland. What matters is safe, high-quality health care, care and treatment as near to home as possible and shorter waiting times. All that is based on the fundamental NHS principle of care that is funded from general taxation and given according to need. The Conservatives would fundamentally challenge all that through their patient's passport and in other ways. They would provide money to supplement people's private health care payments, which would create an inequitable system that would undermine clinical priority and need, and they would give choice to those who can afford to pay, rather than provide choice for all, which we support. I move amendment S2M-1326.4, to leave out from first "notes" to end and insert: "commends staff across the NHS for the quality improvements achieved over the last five years, the new forms of activity such as nurse-led clinics and the progress being made towards a six-month maximum wait for in-patient treatment by the end of 2005; notes that progress has been made at the same time as the working hours of medical and other staff have been brought into line with accepted norms; commends recent initiatives to tackle long out-patient waiting times, and supports further reform of NHSScotland through the development of community health partnerships and managed clinical networks, an increasing emphasis on involving patients and learning from their experiences and a sustained drive on health improvement and the prevention of ill-health in partnership with other agencies."

There have already been significant advances such as infrastructure development, more practice nurses and reduced waiting times to see the appropriate health care professional. There will be new resources and expanded services in primary care over the next few years, particularly through the development of community health partnerships and the introduction of the new general medical services contract, which will improve the quality of care and the management of chronic disease in primary care.

Paul Martin emphasised the importance of premises and infrastructure. For  the past three years or so, there has been a primary care modernisation fund. In fact, a few weeks ago, we announced streams of money for joint initiatives between health and social care in primary care, such as the excellent Dalmellington centre in the constituency of the Minister for Justice. Further, we announced a new stream of money for community health service centres, which were flagged up in the partnership agreement, and combined diagnosis and treatment. A lot of money is being invested in infrastructure. Paul Martin mentioned wider issues with particular reference to Glasgow. An appropriate response to the second part of his question would be to repeat what we said a week or two ago about unmet need pilots, which are concentrated in Glasgow, where the poorest section of society is concentrated to a greater extent than elsewhere. A lot of the money that we have devoted to addressing unmet need in Glasgow will be targeted at primary care.

The passage through Parliament of the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill has been assisted by a great many people and I would like to thank those who have been involved in its progress. That includes the broad range of groups that have taken the time to give evidence to the committees and have represented the views of the national health service, staff, local authorities and the public. I am grateful to the members of the Health Committee, the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee who have debated and scrutinised the bill. Finally, I thank the clerks of those committees and my officials. The National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill contains an important series of measures that will accelerate the development of NHS Scotland into a modern service that responds to and involves patients, that cares for its staff, is free to innovate and is not hindered by bureaucracy. Having a patient-centred NHS means giving patients and the wider public a voice and an ability to express their views directly to the NHS rather than through a handful of individuals. That is why the bill will make it a legal requirement for health boards to take action to ensure that the public are directly involved in the planning and development of health services, as well as in significant decisions that affect those services. That is not a meaningless duty, but one that will be backed up by a robust public involvement structure that is able to act independently and ensure that health boards perform their duty of public involvement properly. The key objectives of the bill are to make the planning and delivery of health care more responsive to the needs of local populations; to develop more services in primary care settings; and to break down the traditional barriers between social care, primary care and specialist health services. That is why we are establishing community health partnerships as a key part of our distinctive Scottish health reform agenda. Those partnerships will enable local health care professionals, local authorities, the voluntary sector and communities to work together to  improve the health of their local area. They will deliver services to the community in the community where it is safe and sustainable to do so. The NHS needs to respond to the needs of a diverse Scottish society. That is why the bill also places a duty on the NHS to encourage equal opportunities and I am pleased that the Parliament has agreed to extend that duty to all functions, not just those that are contained in the principal National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978. Staff are the core of the NHS and must be properly managed. The bill imposes a duty in relation to the governance of staff that will require boards to have in place arrangements for improving the management of staff and for work force planning. The bill will provide boards with the freedom to innovate through the duty to co-operate. While we will try to deliver as many services as close to the patient as possible, there are some services that can be delivered safely and sustainably only from highly skilled and specially resourced centres. I want boards to look beyond their boundaries more and to work together to ensure that there is greater and more effective regional planning. The NHS needs to be able to operate free from unnecessary bureaucracy and barriers. That is why I have dissolved the trusts and will remove the power to create trusts. Primary and secondary care need to be more joined up and that is best achieved through single-system working. Single-system working will allow front-line staff to work together more effectively and, through the schemes of delegation, will empower staff to take decisions on the provision of health care. When things go wrong, it is important to have effective means of intervening to correct service failure. The health service is a massive and diverse organisation. It would be impossible to prescribe every scenario in which an intervention might take place. However, it is important that intervention takes place only as a last resort and the measure that is contained in the bill will achieve that. For too long, the NHS has been seen as a reactive health organisation that responds when people are suffering or injured. The NHS, with its partners, needs to be more proactive in promoting health and the new duty of health improvement will achieve that. It will also give boards the powers that they need to do that. Tom McCabe will cover the details of Shona Robison's amendment to the motion in his speech and, while I look forward to hearing what Shona will say, I fear that I have heard it all before. The NHS is receiving unprecedented levels of funding and the costs of the bill can and will be absorbed  by that. It is certainly not right that more of the finite resources that are available should be spent on administrative costs rather than front-line services. The costs associated with the bill are not significant. The bill is about reforming and redesigning existing methods and practice to make them more appropriate for the national health service of the new century. I am pleased that the Parliament supported the general principles of the bill at stage 1. The bill was improved at stage 2 to include some important new features and I hope that the Scottish Parliament will now approve the bill, which will allow the NHS to develop and continue to be a source of national pride. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Amendment 4 is a minor amendment to schedule 1. It removes the existing requirement under the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978 that the formal names of health boards should contain the words "Health Board". Under the 1978 act, ministers have a power to name health boards and special health boards by order but, by stipulating that the words "Health Board" appear in all health boards' formal titles, the act limits ministers' discretion on names. The order that names the various health boards does so according to their geographical location, followed by the words "Health Board"; for example, we have Grampian Health Board and Lothian Health Board. Since 1999, the NHS brand has been developed across the health service in Scotland. Following representations from health boards, I agree that their official names should reflect their names under the NHS brand and their responsibilities for delivering the full range of NHS services, following the dissolution of the trusts. Amendment 4 allows for the updating of health boards' names to reflect that branding, as has already been done for the special health boards with national coverage. The obligation to use the formulation, "Health Board", will be removed. Members will know from their own areas that boards might already be using their new names; for example, NHS Highland and NHS Lothian are doing so. We want to make that possible as far as the legal use of such titles is concerned. I hope that members will support the proposal. I move amendment 4.  Amendment 4 agreed to.

I will explain why amendment 13 and amendments 14 to 20 should be rejected, just as they were rejected by the Health Committee. Amendment 13 seeks to establish the Scottish health council as a separate, independent body—or, should I say, a supposedly independent body; as Dennis Canavan rightly pointed out, the amendment would ensure that a Scottish health council would be composed of local health council representatives. The key point is that local health councils are appointed by local health boards. David Davidson, Shona Robison and Carolyn Leckie should all remember that point when they applaud the independence of local health councils. The Executive has proposed that the Scottish health council should be established as a body with its own distinct role and status within NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. That is because the Executive regards patient focus and public involvement as an essential part of securing quality in the NHS. As I say repeatedly, the experience of every patient is the starting point for improving quality in health. In the Executive's view, improving quality should be about developing services that are more focused on patient experience and meeting what patients want through service redesign, managed clinical networks and other initiatives. The review and monitoring functions of NHS QIS will be strengthened by that body being able to draw directly on the expertise and patient networks of the Scottish health council. NHS QIS is at the heart of improving quality in the NHS. It operates separately from ministers and other boards. I am sure that anyone who knows the chair, Naren Patel, will understand what I mean when I say that. I have written to the Health Committee setting out the Executive's proposals for ensuring the independence of the Scottish health council within NHS QIS, and I reiterate those proposals now. The council will be created through regulations as a committee of the board of NHS QIS. The chair will be appointed through the public appointments process. Members will be appointed through an open process by NHS QIS, and up to three members will be appointed from the local advisory councils to ensure strong local links. Establishment of the Scottish health council through regulations will mean that there is parliamentary involvement in the process. The Scottish health council cannot be created by primary legislation, because NHS QIS was not created by primary legislation. Establishment through regulations will also mean that there will be a clear, legislative basis for the Scottish health council's work. It will ensure that the council's continuing existence is not just a matter for ministers and the Health Department, and that the  council cannot be changed or abolished without parliamentary approval. The council's local advisory structure will mean that it is not a remote or centralising body. By creating a Scottish health council, we will be able to bring more professionalism and expertise to patient focus and public involvement in Scotland. At the same time, the existence of the local advisory councils will mean that there is local input from patients and the public, thus ensuring that the health boards communicate with and listen to patients and local people. On community health partnerships, there will be the new public partnership forums, which will be important in ensuring that there is strong communication and engagement with the public and, crucially, feedback on key issues and policies.

Christine Grahame may not agree with the argument, but the Scottish health council will be set up as a part of NHS QIS and it is not possible to have a part of a body in primary legislation when the body itself is not in primary legislation. Shona Robison's amendments 14 to 20, which are almost identical to those that the Health Committee rejected at stage 2, seek to preserve the status quo. A lot of good work has come out of local health councils—I pay tribute to all the people who have been involved in that—but everybody accepts that that work has been uneven. It is time to build on that good work and to move on. Preserving the status quo would be inadequate for the better public involvement that we want. Mike Rumbles got straight to the heart of the debate when he said that the new structure is all about ensuring better public involvement and better patient focus. The bill's provisions for a new duty of public involvement and for dissolving local health councils are designed to support and underpin patient focus and public involvement. The Executive wishes to put greater responsibility on NHS boards to communicate with and involve patients and the public, and to encourage patients and community and voluntary organisations to represent their views directly to boards, rather than to have local health councils substituting, as it were, for the public and for those groups. I want to involve the public directly in the planning and design of health services, and not to have their views filtered through an outside body. The  Scottish health council will monitor and quality assure that process, and that will do more to help to achieve a more responsive and patient-focused NHS than would be the case if we kept the current system. I know of the dissatisfaction among members about the way in which public involvement has been facilitated in the past. The Scottish health council's new role will be crucial to guaranteeing better public involvement. For example, all the service change proposals that come to me for approval at present, partly on the grounds that there has been good public involvement, will all be considered by the Scottish health council. The council will report on that, and it will give annual reports on the extent to which boards are improving their work on public involvement. That is crucial to an objective that all members share. From listening to Shona Robison today, and at stage 2, I know that she wants to maintain local health councils' discrete role in relation to advocacy. The Executive sees local advisory councils as having an important role in ensuring that health boards hear, understand and act upon the views, concerns and experiences of patients, carers, patients organisations and communities. That is a wider role than advocacy in the traditional sense, which is about supporting individuals and helping them to speak for themselves in their relationship with health services. When a local advisory council feels that the patient's viewpoint is not being adequately considered, or when there is not an appropriate patient support group, the local advisory councils will be able to put forward the views of patients and ensure that appropriate action is taken. I made that point at stage 2, and I have written directly to Greater Glasgow Health Council on the matter. We want to encourage health boards to engage much more directly with patients and with local opinion; at the same time, we will ensure that strong feedback arrangements are in place where the patient's voice, for whatever reason, is not being properly expressed or heard. We are not disregarding existing interests and expertise. Those people who are currently on local health councils will have an opportunity to be represented on the local advisory councils. They will be the local presence of the Scottish health council; in many cases, those who are currently on local health councils will be the ideal people to fulfil that role and I hope that many of them will choose to do so. They have played a valuable role so far, and they can do more in their new roles in the future. That would have far more value than staying where we are. Accordingly, I encourage members to follow the example of the Health  Committee and reject the amendments in this group.

I will take an intervention after I make my three points. First, creating legal duties in relation to services that are subject to a waiting time guarantee—including elective surgery such as hernia repairs and cataract removal—would give rise to a perverse situation in which those services could become a priority over other more clinically urgent services—such as emergency services—that are not enshrined in legislation in such a way. Indeed, I think that Carolyn Leckie made the same point. It would mean that boards would be under express legal duties in relation to services covered by the waiting times guarantee, but not under similar duties for other services such as emergency care. Secondly, as waiting times are integral to the quality of the services provided, I do not think that it is appropriate to single out in legislation the particular issue of waiting times from other crucial aspects of quality. Thirdly, our firm guarantees already go beyond  what applies in the rest of the UK. Turning those guarantees into a legal duty could be counterproductive in creating pressure to soften targets and guarantees as a result of the potential for expensive legal challenges against boards. Even if Duncan McNeil does not accept that that might be a possibility, I hope that he thinks it reasonable to give the guarantees some time to prove themselves. After all, as I have said, they were introduced only in January.

That is a statement of fact. However, I have already assured members that the guarantees will be met and there are many ways of ensuring that that happens short of putting them in primary legislation. I certainly think that many staff members and patients would be horrified at the idea that someone in such a situation should be taken to court. My point is that, if we push this provision beyond a guarantee, we will create a perverse situation in which minor elective procedures, which would then be legally binding, would have to be put before emergency care, which would not be. Such a situation would be neither clinically acceptable nor in patients' interests. The other duties set out in amendments 9 and 10 do not add anything to the current arrangements. As the duty in section 12H of the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978 currently requires arrangements for monitoring and improving the quality of health care to be in place, it already applies to waiting times because that aspect of a service is an integral part of the service's quality. As a result, systems already exist for monitoring and reducing waiting times. For example, boards make regular submissions to the department's waiting times unit on how they are performing against the waiting time targets. Given that the 1978 act contains such an equivalent duty, amendment 9 is therefore unnecessary. Amendment 10 seeks to affect the duty of co-operation. However, as currently drafted, the bill already requires boards to "co-operate ... with a view to securing and advancing the health of the people of Scotland". That wording already covers co-operation to reduce waiting times as that itself would advance "the health of the people of Scotland". Boards will continue to co-operate with the Golden Jubilee hospital on reducing waiting times and will also work with other health boards in a national effort to reduce them.  On amendment 11, I agree that if a board is systematically failing to meet waiting times targets it might be necessary as a last resort to use the new power of intervention. That is partly a response to Christine Grahame's earlier point. Such boards would clearly be failing to provide the service to a standard that Scottish ministers find acceptable. That does not mean that I support amendment 11. It is unnecessary because, as drafted, the power of intervention already allows ministers to intervene when an adequate service is not being provided. I have said before that we will not be able to prescribe every circumstance in which Scottish ministers should intervene and waiting times should not be singled out over and above other issues such as quality. That issue will no doubt arise when we discuss the next group of amendments. Moving on to David Davidson's amendments, I have to say that amendment 21 is quite unusual in how it takes the good aspects of the current service and makes them worse. At present, a patient has a consultation with a medical practitioner, who then decides on the treatment that the patient needs. Taking into account the seriousness or urgency of the patient's condition and the availability of services, the medical practitioner will then consider where the patient can receive that treatment and make a referral for specialist services on that basis. The national waiting times database has been available to all GPs since December 2002 and to the public since October 2003. It is designed to help and support patient choice and to inform decision making for the patient, the primary care practitioner and hospital services. If the patient and general practitioner want a referral to a clinic in another board area, that can already happen.

The reality is that, under the arrangements that I have just described, that constituent could have been referred to another board if the waiting time had been shorter there. The problem with amendment 21 is that it would seriously distort priorities at health board level because decisions on the timing of treatment would rest solely with individual medical practitioners, as stated in the proposed new subsection (2C). If anyone is thinking of supporting amendment 21, I ask them to read the proposed subsection (2C) within it, which makes it clear that a letter from a GP would supersede not only the targets and the waiting times guarantee but clinical priority as well. Amendment 21 says that a medical practitioner could insist on the precise time of treatment. That could lead to a scenario in which a GP demanded that a minor surgical procedure be performed quickly, with the result that a far more serious operation had to wait longer. Different practitioners would make different professional judgments in situations that might seem similar to us. However, amendment 21 would place a legal duty on a health board to do whatever an individual doctor said that it must do. The board would have to ensure that a service was provided to the individual patient by a date dictated by the doctor. The health board would not be able to consider the disruption to other treatment, to consider wider priorities, or to consider other strategic matters. I fail to see how that would be good for patients or the NHS. I turn now to amendment 22. The tariff idea is interesting. David Davidson has lifted it from Labour in England—albeit with a deadly Tory twist. The idea of having a uniform cost for a particular treatment is one in which I am interested. I have asked my department to give it detailed consideration. However, it would be quite wrong to agree to amendment 22 on the hoof without such detailed consideration and without consultation. For example, one of the down sides to the idea may be that treatments cost different amounts in different hospitals for quite legitimate reasons. It may well be that small hospitals would lose out under such a system. The Tories support this idea as a Trojan horse for their unfair and divisive patient passport, whereby each patient would automatically receive a tariff—or "part of the tariff", to use the very words of the proposed section 17J(c)(ii) in amendment 22—in order that those who can afford it can supplement their own private payment and access health care on the basis of income rather than on the basis of clinical priority.

That is utterly unacceptable and is—[ Laughter. ] I mean, David Davidson's amendment 22 is utterly unacceptable. [ Laughter. ] No, actually, I meant that the Tory twist was utterly unacceptable. [ Laughter. ] In itself, that twist is sufficient reason to reject amendment 22.

I appreciate the intention behind amendments 9, 10 and 11 and assure Duncan McNeil and Karen Gillon that the patient guarantees will be met. That said, I am not  convinced that those three amendments will achieve the desired outcome or be in patients' interests. To date, we have made some good progress in working with health boards to reduce waiting times and to ensure that the guarantee is delivered. I should remind members that the guarantee itself kicked in only this year. I accept Dr Jean Turner's comments about out-patient waiting times, which were left for too long in Scotland. However, we are very much making up for that now by introducing a major programme of work on reducing out-patient waits. Indeed, I am speaking tomorrow at a major out-patient event for one of the areas affected—ear, nose and throat—and will announce some money and ensure that action is taken to reduce those waits. Progress has been helped by the work of the centre for change and innovation and the waiting times unit and by making available the resources of the Golden Jubilee national hospital to NHS patients across Scotland. I believe that that collaborative approach has achieved results and is more constructive than the legal approach that is proposed in amendments 9, 10 and 11. As I pointed out in relation to amendment 6, steps are being taken to ensure that patients are well aware of the waiting time guarantees; what the waiting times are; and what they should do if they feel that the guarantee has not been met in their case. I have three general objections to the idea of enshrining maximum waiting times in primary legislation.

Amendment 1 is a minor technical amendment, or perhaps I should say a very minor technical amendment, as the words that it deletes are reinserted, albeit in a different place. The error that amendment 1 corrects occurred in the printing of the marshalled list of amendments at stage 2. The amendment affects subsection (2)(a) of proposed new section 4A of the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978. That paragraph provides for the general community health partnership function of co-ordinating the planning, development and provision of certain services. In turn, the relevant services are set out in subparagraphs. The effect of the error is that the words "with a view to improving those services" are currently attached to subsection (2)(a)(ii), although the intention is that they should apply to all the functions that subsection (2)(a) covers. Amendment 1 ensures that the bill reflects the original policy intention. I can appreciate what Duncan McNeil is trying to do with amendment 6, and I pay tribute to all the work that he has done on patient information. It is clearly very important that patients and the public should know about the services that they can expect the national health service to deliver and the targets that we have set for the provision of those services. We are committed to ensuring that that information is made available at national and local levels so that patients are comprehensively informed.  We consulted last year on the document "Patient Rights and Responsibilities: A draft for consultation", which sets out what patients can expect from the NHS, and we are currently working with the Scottish Consumer Council to finalise the document. It will be produced as a national document that states what the NHS is committed to deliver to the people of Scotland. We will require each health board to publish a local version of the document, which will show how those rights and responsibilities will be delivered locally. We are already working on, and are committed to, ensuring that patients have information on the services that they can expect to receive. When that local information is issued, we will ensure that it gives the full information that is necessary to inform the public of their rights as well as specific local services and provision that are available. We will also ensure that NHS boards disseminate that information widely in different forms so that it is available to the largest possible number of people locally. Amendment 6 is not the best way to achieve what we are determined to do, and there are a number of reasons for that. For example, it covers all health services, whereas CHPs' remit will not extend to all health services. If any such duty were to be placed on a body, it would need to be placed on NHS boards, and, as I have already stated, we shall require boards to provide information. We are committed to reducing waiting times in general and specific waiting times in some key areas of treatment, such as heart surgery. We fully agree that the public need to know which services are subject to waiting times guarantees and how they can ensure that their health board can fulfil those guarantees. The purpose of having a guarantee is to impose a requirement on NHS boards to ensure that the guarantee is fulfilled. If a board cannot itself offer treatment to fulfil a guarantee, it is required to arrange and fund treatment through another health board or through an alternative public or private provider in the United Kingdom or elsewhere. That reflects our absolute commitment to ensuring that guarantees are fulfilled. If patients have any difficulty in obtaining access to treatment that should be available under a waiting times guarantee, that will be followed up in the first instance with their local health boards and then with the national waiting times unit in the Health Department, which is working with the NHS in Scotland to reduce delays for patients through more efficient use of capacity within and outwith the NHS and to help to ensure that waiting times guarantee commitments are fulfilled. The national waiting times unit will then ensure that a provider that is able to offer treatment is identified and that the necessary arrangements for treatment are completed through the local health board.  I am happy to provide the assurance that the commitments to waiting times guarantees will be set out in the patient information documents that we will issue nationally and locally and that that will include information on what patients should do if they feel that they are not receiving treatment within the guaranteed waiting times. Duncan McNeil might say that that has not happened yet, but I remind members that the guarantees started only this January, and I give another guarantee that the information that I have described will be disseminated nationally and locally in the near future. That is the most effective way to ensure that patients know which treatments are subject to targets and the rights that they have to ensure that those targets are hit. I move amendment 1.

I agree with almost everything that has been said, but I do not draw the conclusion that it is therefore appropriate to put in the bill a duty on community health partnerships, which are new bodies that will already have massive responsibilities and challenges. My fundamental point is the same as that which Jean Turner made. She said that she supported Duncan McNeil's amendment 6 but that providing information was the health boards' responsibility, which is the fundamental point that I made. Community health partnerships are committees of boards, so they will obviously have a key role to play, but the fundamental duty is on health boards. As I described in detail, we shall ensure that boards fulfil that responsibility.  I agree entirely with Duncan McNeil that people cannot exercise rights if they do not know that those rights exist. That is precisely why we are working with the Scottish Consumer Council on finalising a statement of patient rights and responsibilities. I assure him that that will be available in a range of formats. Of course I agree with David Davidson that patients should be at the centre of the health service, but I am again astounded that he should imply that we think otherwise. As he thinks in stereotypes about the Executive's health policy and does not pay attention to what we are doing, he talked about national distribution and blotted out all my remarks about the information that would be available locally. The thrust of what I said was that information would be in local formats. I agree with Karen Gillon that it is essential that patients should know their rights. She asked how we would ensure that the target was hit. To do that, we will not only produce the new document to which I referred, but ensure that boards disseminate that information, as I outlined. The reality is that the way in which we will ensure that that happens will not be fundamentally different from the way in which Duncan McNeil's amendment would be enforced. If his amendment were agreed to, we would have to ensure that community health partnerships provided information, just as we will ensure that boards fulfil that responsibility. In many cases, boards will act through community health partnerships to do that. I dealt with Jean Turner's comments and I thank her for saying that providing information is the health boards' responsibility. I do not disagree with Shona Robison that all reasonable steps should be taken to provide information. I certainly agree that that should be done—I might even want to state it more strongly than that. I implore members to accept that the primary responsibility must be on the health boards. Community health partnerships could be the most exciting part of the bill. They have enormous challenges. To place on them alone the duty to provide information, which would have quite a lot of ramifications, and to do so without consultation—although a massive consultation document on the partnerships was issued—would be received extremely negatively by those who are involved in the partnerships. It is not that they do not want to be part of fulfilling the responsibility, but I repeat that the primary responsibility rests with health boards. We shall ensure that they discharge it.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  [Amendment 6 moved—[Mr Duncan McNeil].]

In March 2003 I announced funding for the Scottish primary care collaborative. Waiting times have fallen by 36 per cent in the 100 practices taking part in the scheme. A second wave starts this month. All the practices involved are committed to spreading the learning and good practice that ensue.

The member raises two issues. Clearly, we believe that the new contract will be entirely helpful in respect of the recruitment and retention of GPs. The member's main point was about waiting. The team-based approach in the contract will help to address that issue. I am interested to hear from Elaine Murray about waiting problems that remain in her constituency, because travelling around Scotland I have been impressed by the major advances that have been made on waiting for appointments at GP practices. Over the past year, there have been amazing falls in waiting times for such appointments, not just in practices in the primary care collaborative but more widely. I commend to members the primary care collaborative, which I visited and spoke to recently. The collaborative is a team-based approach to care and is looking to redesign the patient service, with the involvement of patients. It is analysing demand, so that it is very patient focused. An amazing amount has already been achieved and more is to come this year.

The project to which the member refers is a good one. As I said, waiting times are falling dramatically even without such initiatives. Clearly, this is a matter for local funding. I know that there are examples of similar projects throughout Scotland. I am pleased that very soon I will launch such an initiative in the north-east Edinburgh local health care co-operative in my constituency. I commend the efforts of the Haddington CAB, but Christine Grahame will agree that initiatives of that kind are matters for local funding.

I have discussed the issue of out-of-hours care in Dumfries and Galloway with the chair of the Dumfries and Galloway NHS Board. I have not seen the most up-to-date version of the board's plans, but I will examine it in the light of the member's comments. A new model of care is being developed throughout Scotland, and I know that the subject of out-of-hours care gives rise to concern. Nearly every other aspect of the new GP contract was applauded by the Parliament when the Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill was passed. There is a new model for out-of-hours care that is based on using the whole health care team. There is a guarantee about the service that that will deliver and any alternative services will have to be accredited.

NHS services should be provided close to people's homes wherever it is practical and clinically safe to do so. Local chemotherapy clinics and renal dialysis units are examples of a wide range of services that NHS boards are moving from larger acute hospitals to local communities. The new general medical services contract and the development of community health partnerships will also drive forward service developments in primary care.

An X-ray facility is a good example of the kind of service that can be delivered more locally. I have seen in other parts of Scotland, rather than in Lanarkshire in particular, scanning that was previously done in a hospital centre being done in local communities. There are also examples from Karen Gillon's area, which I have seen, of consultant-led clinics in health centres and anti-coagulation services in GP practices instead of in hospitals. Moreover, Clydesdale LHCC has invested in more rehabilitation of older people in local GP hospitals. There are many such examples throughout Scotland and everyone should remember those when discussing what is sometimes the opposite movement for more specialist services to go to specialist centres.

The fact is that, as members will know, we already have a national framework for maternity services, which is called the expert group on acute maternity services—EGAMS. Other work has been done on a national framework—for example, through the white paper last year. We believe that that is a continuing  process. That is why we have initiated a further piece of work through a high-level expert group that involves clinicians and patients. The group will report in due course, but that does not mean that the service changes that are being discussed throughout Scotland can be frozen in the meantime. That would not be possible in many cases and it certainly would not be desirable. On maternity services, there is already a framework and that is, of course, one of the documents that I will look at when assessing plans for services that local boards bring.

We are making good progress in implementing the Scottish diabetes framework through a programme of initiatives to improve services. That will help us to meet the recommendations from NHS Quality Improvement Scotland's review of its diabetes standards.

There is certainly a great deal of consultation with patients who have diabetes on updating the framework. That continues a process of patient involvement that has been central to the diabetes framework since it was launched. I was pleased to attend a conference in Edinburgh recently involving the local managed clinical network at which one of the patient representatives spoke. Indeed, I spoke to him beforehand about how he and others are involved in the development of diabetes services in Edinburgh. Such development is also happening elsewhere in Scotland, in particular through the managed clinical networks. I assure Karen Whitefield that the process will continue and intensify over the next few months.

I agree entirely with Nanette Milne. Her comments connect with the subject matter of the previous question, because one of the ways in which more services are being delivered in primary care is through the enhanced role of nurses, in particular specialist nurses. For example, in some cases nurses initiate insulin therapy for diabetic patients in primary care, where that was previously done in hospitals. Nurses lead a range of clinics for various chronic diseases. That is an extremely positive development. I agree with Nanette Milne's second point, too. We are doing a lot in relation to the recruitment and retention of nurses, but the development of specialist nurses and nurse consultants represents another important way of providing more opportunities for nurses and, even more important, better care for patients.

Although that is primarily a matter for Argyll and Clyde NHS Board, I understand that no decisions have been made. Argyll and Bute local health care co-operative is working with all stakeholders to sustain and further develop high-quality local maternity services, and I would encourage all local people to get involved in that important work.

I have been aware of the issue since I visited the Lorne and Islands district general hospital in August. However, I understand that discussions are still continuing. As I indicated in my earlier response, the local health care co-operative is heading those discussions. Indeed, I  believe that Jamie McGrigor attended a meeting recently at which these matters were discussed. The intention is that the issue should be a matter for local decision making involving midwives and service users. The excellent community midwife-led maternity unit in Oban, which has been operating for some time, will continue, but any precise details are for further local consideration.

From what I have seen, local people are fully involved in the matter. However, I would certainly convey any concerns that such involvement is not happening to NHS Argyll and Clyde. Although any decision on the matter will be fundamentally local and will not be referred to the centre for approval, I will take a keen interest to ensure that there is full public involvement.

Yes. I do not think that the issues that Duncan McNeil raises apply to the service at the Lorne and Islands district general hospital. No one is saying that the service there will not continue. In more general terms, I referred earlier to the fundamental matter of delivering services more locally while moving others to a more specialist centre. That raises very live issues for NHS Argyll and Clyde. In fact, last Friday, I received a presentation from the board on the current state of its clinical services strategy. A full consultation on the strategy will take place later this year and all  the issues that Duncan McNeil raised will be able to be discussed at that time.

The relationship between the provision of maternity services and attracting or retaining people in a particular area has been raised in various contexts. In that respect, I should say that there is no question but that the community midwife-led unit will remain in Oban for as long as anyone can foresee. After all, such a service has been provided in the town as far as anyone can look back. People should remember that Oban has never had a consultant-led maternity service, and that has not resulted in the kind of economic consequences that some people have suggested have arisen in other situations.

I will simply repeat the fact that we are very conscious of work-force issues in maternity services; indeed, I have set up a work-force group to look into those issues, as I mentioned in the recent debate on maternity services. The number of midwives is increasing, although I accept that the number declined for a  while as the birth rate declined. We are doing all we can in relation to obstetricians. The posts are there and the training posts are there, but it is not proving to be the most popular specialty at the moment.

The Executive and its many partners have a strong commitment to mental health in Scotland. I am confident that that commitment is shared by all of us. This morning, I want to share with members some of the work that we are taking forward across the Executive and with our partners. It is appropriate that we have this debate in national depression week. Estimates show that depression will directly affect one in five of us at some point in our lives. It is a common illness but one that need not devastate lives. The aim of national depression week is to raise awareness about the realities of depression and to reduce the stigma associated with it. If we achieve those aims together, we can play a significant part in encouraging people to seek help at an early stage and improve their chances of recovery. Getting our policies right on mental health provides us with a great opportunity in Scotland. Mental health is far more than the absence of mental health problems and mental illness. It is about how we think and how we feel about ourselves, how we interpret the world around us and how we relate to others. Good and positive mental health is an essential component of our overall health and well-being; if we improve our mental health, our overall health and well-being are significantly enhanced. We therefore gain huge benefits from working together to create a more mentally healthy Scotland. At the same time, we need to be aware of the impact and the potentially devastating effects of mental health problems. We know that people with mental health problems die younger, live poorer-quality lives, are more likely to live in poverty and are far less likely to be in work. The economic impact in Scotland is estimated to be nearly £8 billion per annum. It can be no surprise, then, that since the birth of the Parliament we have made mental health a priority and introduced the most progressive mental health legislation in Europe. We have made a start on developing and implementing a range of policies, programmes and initiatives that will make a significant and practical difference to people's lives. I would like to take this opportunity to highlight some of that work.  In October 2001, I launched the national programme for improving mental health and well-being in Scotland, which was the first public policy programme on mental health improvement and public mental health in the United Kingdom. Some £24 million of new money is being invested in a number of practical measures, including work by NHS Health Scotland, which is implementing a programme of mental health first-aid training. That programme is based on work that was undertaken in Australia and it aims to raise public awareness of mental well-being and mental health problems. The programme is being tested throughout Scotland in a range of settings, including colleges, police forces, general hospitals and local communities. We have funded see me Scotland, the national anti-stigma campaign, since 2002 and we have committed further resources to continue the campaign's work. The campaign has achieved a level of recognition and impact that exceeds our expectations, and I pay tribute not just to the campaign team but to the alliance of five organisations that continue to work together to support the campaign. In December 2002, I launched choose life, a 10-year suicide prevention strategy and action plan. Our goal is to reduce Scotland's suicide rate by 20 per cent by 2013. The strategy is backed up with £12 million of funding for the first phase of national and local implementation. To date, there are 32 choose life co-ordinating groups working in local authority areas to address suicide prevention as part of the local community planning process. Linked to the suicide prevention work is the breathing space telephone advice line, which aims to help people who are at risk of suicide. The line will be extended to cover the whole of Scotland by spring 2005. People with mental health problems can and do recover; international estimates suggest that 60 to 70 per cent of people achieve recovery. There are many things that help to promote and support recovery, and good care and treatment services are a key component. The national programme is funding the Scottish recovery network to promote a wider understanding of what helps people to recover and to support local agencies to help people to recover.

I do not personally know what it is. The helpline is operating in greater Glasgow and Argyll and Clyde but, as I indicated, it will be extended to cover the whole of Scotland by spring 2005. As Bruce Crawford points out, the issue is not just a matter of helplines, important as those are, and I will move on to talk about other services, including crisis services. As I have only five and a half minutes, I will have to do so without taking interventions. I will have to be selective, but I want to give an outline of the vast range of initiatives that are under way. I take this opportunity to focus on some key elements of the efforts that are in hand to improve mental health services. When I spoke to the Parliament last year, I committed the Executive to undertake a national assessment of mental health services throughout Scotland to help us to identify the issues that we need to address in implementing the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. That work was completed and published last month, and I am grateful to Dr Sandra Grant and her team for their excellent work. Their findings were much as we and others expected—although there is much that we can be proud of, there are significant areas for development. Using the results of the national assessment, each area has been asked to complete a joint local implementation plan to set out how the statutory agencies, with their voluntary sector partners and working with service users and their carers, will deliver on the act's requirements. To help with the implementation of the act, additional new resources have been allocated between 2003 and 2006. Some £27 million is being provided to local authorities, and partnership agreement funding of £15 million is being invested in national health service boards to support a range of work including the development of crisis response services. I will pick up on a number of other areas for action that are mentioned in Dr Grant's assessment. The first area is work force issues. We established the national mental health work force group, which is chaired by the head of the mental health division, and it is considering work force planning for the new act, including recruitment, retention, development and retraining issues. It uses a partnership approach and it is supporting NHS employers and partner organisations to develop local implementation plans. The group is modelling future work force requirements in the light of the act, and it is gathering baseline intelligence on the current mental health work force. In the future, the group  will focus on work force redesign, training and development issues. Specific work is in hand with the Royal College of Psychiatrists on those issues. On the SNP amendment, redesign is important but I point out that we have created more training posts and specialist registrars for psychiatrists. There is a recruitment problem throughout the United Kingdom—indeed, it is far worse in England than in Scotland. We have increased the number of training positions for clinical psychologists, so important action is being taken. The second aspect to highlight is service redesign. An appropriate example of that, given that we are in national depression week, is the work that is being done by the Health Department's centre for change and innovation. As I mentioned, depression is a common mental health problem in Scotland. It is costly, but it is also treatable. Access to local and timely responses and the full range of interventions and supports for depression are not yet universally available. The national doing well by people with depression project aims to address those issues. It is a three-year national programme with an initial budget of £4.5 million for 2003 to 2006. Work is being done in a number of areas throughout Scotland to improve the way in which depression is managed. In practice, that means improving access to services and extending the range, quality and availability of treatments and interventions. The results of that work will be shared throughout Scotland to help to ensure the uptake of those new and improved ways of working to support people with depression. A third area that we are progressing is improvement to care, treatment and support for perinatal mental illness. That work aims to provide services that are specifically targeted at the needs of mothers and their babies. The act places a particular responsibility on health boards to progress that important area of specialist care. In advance of implementation of the act, we have developed guidance for the organisation of admission services for mothers and babies. Greater Glasgow NHS Board is well advanced in that work, and I am delighted that it has invited me to open a dedicated unit later this year. Other boards are developing their plans. I have deliberately left until last the most important element of Dr Grant's report: the experiences, views and wishes of people with mental health problems and their carers. Although a lot of good progress is being made, it is clear that we need to do more to truly involve, listen to and be influenced by the views of people who have direct experience of services. I want to see not just involvement but evidence of practical action that has been taken on their views and a sense of engagement from those who provide  care, treatment and support. That is essential to achieve the person-centred focus that I want all our services to have. An example of that is the way in which we are responding to the views that are expressed by people about the need for crisis services. In the partnership agreement, we committed ourselves to the development of mental health services, particularly crisis services. We have provided funds in response to the "Bid 79" report by the remote and rural areas resource initiative to help systems to develop psychiatric emergency plans. I have also been particularly encouraged to learn about plans to develop a crisis service that is led by people with experience of mental health problems, and we are considering how best to support that in partnership with the Scottish Association for Mental Health. I pay tribute to the work that that body has done on psychiatric drugs, including its most recent report, which again illustrates the importance of involving users as partners in their care. An important aspect of supporting user involvement is the development of individual and collective advocacy services, and we are committed to ensuring access to independent advocacy for those who need support. There is a duty under the act to provide that, and substantial extra funds have been allocated. Finally, we are funding a major national service user conference, which will take place on 22 and 23 June. My time is up so let me conclude. Mental health must be a priority for the Executive and for the Parliament and it will continue to be so. I am as conscious as anyone that more must be done to improve Scotland's mental health and well-being, but I believe that we are making progress. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges, in National Depression Week, the Scottish Executive's commitment, reflected in the Partnership Agreement, to maintain the mental well-being of the people of Scotland and to improve the situation of those with mental health problems; notes that National Depression Week aims to raise awareness of the realities of depression and to reduce the stigma associated with it; commends the work of the National Programme for Improving Mental Health and Well-Being and progress towards implementation of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003; welcomes specific initiatives in relation to workforce development and service re-design, such as the Doing Well by People with Depression projects, but also urges the Executive to continue to support efforts to reduce suicides through the "Choose Life" strategy, to remove stigma and to increase the range and quality of services available to those with mental health problems.

The Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service has stepped up its new donor recruitment campaign and is asking existing donors to make special efforts at this time.

The Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service has put a great deal of effort this year into preparing for 5 April, when the change will take place. It already has a new advertising campaign and is conducting research for more targeted campaigns later in the year. Donald Gorrie's suggestion about the use of celebrities is a good one. As I said in my statement two weeks ago, a range of activities is taking place. For example, the better blood transfusion programme has made good progress and is now being supported by 18 transfusion practitioners.

I am not sure that it is appropriate for me to encourage members to sign parliamentary motions. As I said in my statement two weeks ago, Nanette Milne has headed up a highly commendable initiative, which I am sure will be heeded by the parliamentary authorities. She will understand that the motion is properly for the Parliament rather than the Executive, but I commend her proposal in general terms.

Discussions on the matter are under way, but it is too soon to give a definitive answer on the proposed way forward.

As Ken Macintosh has reminded us, the national services advisory group came to the view that the service should be developed at a regional level. I do not think that any hard-and-fast rules apply to the criteria, although I outlined some general criteria in my previous response. The important point is that the service should be developed as quickly as possible. There are strong arguments for that to be done on a regional basis, not least of which is that we do not want a single centre for this particular form of surgery. Although a national service is often concentrated in one place in Scotland, it is more appropriate to develop the service on a regional basis in three centres. Progress is being made on the matter. Although people might have concerns about the money, the funding basis is the same for national and regional services. The money is top-sliced from the general allocation to NHS boards. The money will be in place and I am confident that that is the right way of making progress.

Continuing action to improve health and reduce inequalities is at the heart of the partnership agreement. With our partners in local authorities, the voluntary sector and the national health service, we are determined to make a difference to the unacceptable health gap between the most and least affluent in our country. That is why I am delighted to announce that we will be investing £1 million a year to develop the Glasgow centre for population health. That partnership agreement commitment will bring new insights and focus to work on tackling social and health inequalities.

The health inequalities agenda has a service dimension and a health improvement dimension. My initial answer focused on the latter dimension, on which I am sure there will be further questions for Tom McCabe and me in a moment. Maureen Macmillan raises a specific service issue about NHS Highland. I was pleased to see the dialysis unit at Wick hospital last year. NHS Highland has tried to get more such facilities into local communities, although I am not aware of the decision that may have been made today. NHS Highland has received an increase in funding of almost 9 per cent this year and will receive an  increase of between 8 per cent and 9 per cent next year. The board is receiving major new resources, although it clearly still has to make difficult decisions within that.

We expect to introduce legislation on human tissue when a suitable opportunity becomes available.

The Human Tissue Bill at Westminster covers two areas: organ retention and organ donation. We issued a consultation paper on organ donation recently, and we issued a consultation paper on hospital post mortem examinations some months ago. The fact that we have issued those consultation documents indicates that we take seriously the matter of legislation on the subject. David Davidson asked specifically about organ donation. The Scottish transplant group did a major report on the subject that involved a large number of clinicians and other stakeholders. It came to the view that the expressed wishes of the deceased should be the key issue. That is why, when I launched a major national publicity campaign on organ donation a few weeks ago, I  mentioned three messages that we must get across to people. If people want to donate their organs in the event of their death, they should carry a donor card, they should put their name on the register and—crucially—they should tell their nearest and dearest so that they know their wishes, should the moment arise.

The consultant contract job-planning process allows managers, for the first time, to examine critically and to timetable transparently all a consultant's activities, and to agree with consultants how their working commitments and practices should be managed in a way that best contributes to improved patient care. The new general medical services contract has a quality and outcomes framework that will incentivise GPs and their staff to maximise the volume and quality of services to patients. Payments will be made for achievement against a series of clinical, practice-management and patient-experience indicators.

The contracts, particularly the GMS contract, will be helpful in that because one of their major effects will be delivery of more services within primary care. A series of other initiatives will contribute to the objectives that Christine May supports in her question. We recently announced a significant sum of money—£4 million—for pilots for well-man clinics, which is an important way of improving access to the client group to which Christine May referred. I was pleased to see an excellent example of that in Camelon a few months ago. We also have the changing children's services fund and the walk the talk initiative, which focuses specifically on teenage health. Those initiatives will complement the boost that the new GMS contract will give.

Greater Glasgow NHS board has had a generous uplift. We distributed over £5 million extra to Glasgow and an equivalent amount, in accordance with the Arbuthnott formula, to other NHS boards yesterday. I was pleased to speak to some people from Stobhill this morning. The issue for the casualty ward at Stobhill is not finances. When I spoke recently to the chief executive of North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust, he told me of his determination to keep that casualty ward open for longer than had been intended and that the Royal College of Surgeons and the Royal College of General Practitioners will visit there next week. Accreditation is the key issue. There is obviously a problem with recruitment of consultants; the chief executive is hopeful that consultants will we recruited soon. However, there is in the meantime consultant cover from other hospitals in Glasgow. The key issue is to do with the training of junior doctors, on which the views of the royal colleges will be crucial next week.

A great deal of work is being done on out-of-hours services and the other aspects of the GMS contract through various national working groups. I know that out-of-hours cover is the aspect that gives concern to various people, but a lot of money is going into it and a lot of initiatives are under way to redesign services and to ensure that the whole health care team has a role. I spoke recently to the chairman of Highland NHS Board about that; I know that that board has plans to provide GPs appropriately in all parts of the Highlands. I understand Jamie McGrigor's concerns, but I believe that Highland NHS Board is addressing them adequately.

I have been advised by South Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust that its report on the recruitment of nurses from Bankvale Associates Ltd will be finalised within the next few days. Pending completion of the report, the trust has suspended its arrangement with Bankvale. It will consider future arrangements with Bankvale in light of the conclusions of the report. It has written to the individual nurses to advise them that the trust will no longer be making the deduction from salary for the payment of rent. I expect all national health service employers to treat all staff fairly and to ensure that all recruitment activity meets the highest standards of probity.

The report will be available at the beginning of next week so the proper thing to do would be to wait for that and consider the details of the situation. The Bankvale agency is involved, there is an issue to do with the landlord and how much rent was being charged, and an agency in the Philippines is also involved. I certainly take the situation seriously, and I look forward to considering the report in great detail. Before I respond in detail, the right thing to do is to read the report. I will send Dennis Canavan a copy of the report as soon as it is available and I will put a copy in the Scottish Parliament information centre.

Members will recall that on 18 December I drew their attention to a single incident in England in which it appeared that, for the first time anywhere in the world, variant CJD might have been transmitted by blood transfusion. At the time, I said that the advisory committee on the microbiological safety of blood and tissues—MSBT—had been asked to consider comprehensively whether, in the light of that incident, any further precautionary measures needed to be taken. That request was made with the proviso that such measures should not have an unmanageable adverse impact on the safety or availability of essential blood supplies. The dangers of a shortage of blood will be obvious to all, so we expected the committee's recommendation to take account of the balance of risk involved. The committee met on 22 January and discussed a number of options for further strengthening protection of the blood supply. On the basis of the evidence available, and taking a precautionary approach, the committee has recommended that UK blood services should cease to accept blood donations from people who can confirm that they have definitely received a blood transfusion in the UK since 1 January 1980—the date after which it is believed people might first have been exposed to variant CJD via the food chain. As I indicated on 18 December, at that time I asked the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service to anticipate such a recommendation by preparing as a matter of urgency an implementation plan. That has been done and the plan will be put into effect on Monday 5 April—the date recommended by MSBT as being the earliest date that would allow blood services to put in hand all the necessary work. Preparatory to implementing the plan it has been necessary to undertake a considerable amount of work to ensure its smooth and safe introduction. To reassure members that we have been addressing the issue vigorously, I will outline the most important elements of that work. Our primary concern has been to take measures to secure the blood supply, so that operations and  essential treatment are not jeopardised by the loss of blood donations from the group of donors who will no longer be able to give blood as a result of our adopting the committee's recommendation. We expect that the new policy will result in the loss of around 4 per cent of current donations, but secondary effects could increase the figure to as high as 10 per cent. To take account of the loss, the SNBTS will need a large number of extra donors to come forward over the next 12 months. There will be a doubling of its normal requirement for new donors. The SNBTS has already stepped up its existing donor recruitment campaign. In addition, it has conducted new research into the issues that motivate people to become blood donors. Based on that research, it will launch a completely new high-profile media campaign later this year. The SNBTS will write to existing donors who are unaffected by the new policy and will ask them to make a special effort at this time, with particular emphasis on the importance of maintaining the supplies of O negative blood that are so important in emergency situations. Arrangements are in hand to introduce a screening test that will allow an estimated 2,500 donors who are currently prevented from giving blood because travel abroad to certain countries can involve a risk of contracting malaria to resume giving blood. In addition to the essential work that I have described, it has been necessary to put in place arrangements to explain the new policy to donors and to other people who may be worried about its implications. Those include the provision of counselling where it is appropriate. The SNBTS has prepared three new information leaflets specifically for that purpose and has drafted comprehensive briefing for use in call centres where calls from donors will be handled. It has also set in motion the recruitment process for the additional nurses and donor care staff who are required. In the interim, existing staff will work additional hours to meet the need. It has been necessary to provide comprehensive training for front-line SNBTS staff in both the implementation of the policy and how to inform and support donors who have concerns arising from it. In outlining the policy and its implications, I emphasise that we are taking this approach on the basis of scientific advice and as a precaution against an uncertain but slight risk. We believe that the risk of any individual having been infected with variant CJD as a result of blood transfusion is extremely small. Nevertheless, I realise that individuals may have concerns about how the new policy affects them and may wish to seek advice. Any patient in that situation can contact the dedicated team on the national helpline number. Any donor who is deferred under the new arrangements should speak to a SNBTS member  of staff at a donor centre or session or should call the SNBTS's 24-hour donor helpline. I urge people to continue to have a blood transfusion when it is really necessary. Any slight risk associated with receiving blood must be balanced against the significant risk of not receiving that blood when it is most needed. As I explained in January, we already have in place a range of precautionary measures to reduce the possible risk of transmitting variant CJD through blood. Since 1999, those have included the leucodepletion of blood intended for transfusion and the importation from the United States and Germany of all plasma used in the manufacture of blood products. More recently, since September 2003, all the clinical fresh frozen plasma needed for the treatment in Scotland of newborns and of children who were born after 31 December 1995—the date when exposure to BSE via the food chain ceased—has also been imported from the United States and virally inactivated. That latest measure merely augments the existing measures to provide an even greater degree of safety. In addition, we have a responsibility to donors and patients to ensure that blood is used as effectively as possible and is used only in circumstances in which the essential benefits to the patient outweigh any adverse effects. To that end the SNBTS is collaborating with health professionals in NHS Scotland to implement the better blood transfusion programme, a key initiative endorsed by the chief medical officers of all four United Kingdom Administrations. Three key areas of transfusion practice are being reviewed: blood ordering and administration; efficient management of blood components; and, crucially, clinical effectiveness and the use of the best evidence-based practice in prescribing blood so that it is used only where there is a real need. In April 2003, we recruited a full-time programme director to implement the programme in Scotland over the next three years. Eighteen transfusion practitioners have also been recruited from various nursing and hospital backgrounds and they are being supported by a designated senior manager in each NHS board. I believe that the programme is important and every effort will be made to ensure its success. Obviously, we are sad to be losing some of our most loyal blood donors and I thank them for their commitment to saving lives over the years. It is essential that the potential shortfall that arises from the decision is made good and that essential blood supplies are maintained. As I have already mentioned, the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service has embarked on a new initiative to recruit additional donors and, based on new research about potential donors, the initiative  will be accelerated over the coming months. The effectiveness of the new approach will be kept under close review and, if necessary, consideration will be given to other approaches, such as enhanced blood collection arrangements, more donor sessions and the use of automated blood collection equipment that allows the equivalent of more than one donation to be taken from each patient without their being exposed to any adverse health effect. It is important not to lose sight of the key role that blood donations play in providing essential treatment and in saving lives. The statistics are compelling. Approximately 80,000 patients in Scotland receive a blood transfusion every year. At present, less than 6 per cent of the Scottish population who could give blood do so. It has never been more important for people to come forward to donate blood regularly and I urge them to do so.

I thank Stewart Stevenson for his opening remarks. He has asked three specific questions, the first of which covered quite a few areas. I think that he was referring to some of the things that I mentioned in my statement, such as automated collection, which would enable more blood to be used from one individual in one session. That is certainly being considered. The other issue that he referred to was the more efficient use of blood, and Scotland certainly leads the way in that regard, although there is still further to go, so that blood is used only where appropriate during operations. Stewart Stevenson's second point was about blood substitutes. The National Institute for Clinical Excellence is doing some work on that, and we obviously listen carefully to the views of NICE and comment on them through NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, as he knows. However, I do not think that we should hold out too much hope for that being a major alternative source of supply. On Stewart Stevenson's third point, the figure that he quoted would, of course, be a worst-case scenario, but the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service is clearly preparing for that. Basically, we are losing about 6,000 donors a year, so the immediate task is to replace those, but there are all sorts of uncertainties around the situation, so we are obviously aiming for a whole lot more extra donors than that. We should bear it in mind that we currently attract an extra 50,000 new donors each year, so we must have a very big increase on that. As I indicated, we are aiming to attract far in excess of 50,000. Clearly, we must have contingency arrangements. I know that the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service has been speaking to the Netherlands, for example, and if the worst comes to the worst, we can import blood, although that is certainly not the plan. What we want to do is to ensure that we attract more people to donate blood. In a sense, the key message from today's announcement and over the next few weeks is that we want people who have not donated before to come forward and donate blood. There will be a new advertising campaign, which will try to target some of the messages more effectively.

I thank David Davidson for his opening remarks and his three questions. In answer to his first question, malaria is certainly the only disease for which I am aware that there is a new screening test, but if there are others I shall write to him about them. His second question raises an important general point for the health service more widely, with regard to its being more patient focused, user friendly, customer friendly or whatever phrase we wish to use. Obviously that is an important area that the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service should consider as part of its wider work. Since December, its attention has been focused mainly on assessing the situation and developing research and new advertising campaigns, but it needs also to address the area to which David Davidson refers. I have already answered Mr Davidson's third question in my previous response, in which I highlighted the provisional arrangement with the Netherlands. He mentioned the US and Germany; however, those arrangements relate to the importation of plasma, which will continue.

I am certainly confident that the blood is as safe as possible. As far as HIV and hepatitis C are concerned, those problems are  very much in the past and reliable tests are now available for those diseases. The problem with vCJD is that no such test exists, which is why we have to take this series of other actions. As I have indicated, some actions such as leucodepletion, the importation of plasma and this new measure are already in train. Although it is very unlikely that anyone would contract vCJD in this way, we must follow the precautionary principle and the scientific advice that we have recently received. In other words, in the absence of a test for vCJD in blood, we are taking a series of actions to minimise the risk.

Margaret Jamieson's suggestion that people who are uncertain should check whether that information is available is a good one. The advisory committee on the microbiological safety of blood and tissues has taken the view that most donors who are unsure whether they have had a transfusion are unlikely to have received one. However, it will review the situation in six months' time. Obviously, we are following the expert committee's current advice in that respect.

Phil Gallie raised Eleanor Scott's final point in December and I wrote to him about it. The age limit was raised relatively recently and people can now donate until they are 70. Looking around, I think that that probably includes everyone in the chamber.  The risk posed by plasma derivatives is lower than that posed by transfusions. The CJD incidence panel is calculating the potential risk from individual batches of each plasma product manufactured from suspect plasma pools. It will then be possible to judge whether individuals have received a sufficient dose of that product for the increased risk of exposure to vCJD to be of significance. As a result, the situation is rather more complex and there is no blanket ban on people who have received plasma derivatives.

I have had no personal chats with European counterparts on that issue, although obviously, as I indicated, the SNBTS has been in contact with other countries.

I join Ken Macintosh in praising the Western general hospital in Edinburgh for its work in that area and, indeed, in many others. Research into the area is on-going, as I indicated in my previous statement on variant CJD, but there is no new progress to report. It is clear that, in particular because of the uncertainties around the diagnosis, there is a great need for further research.

We should not try to roll the issues of hepatitis C and variant CJD into one, as the two issues are quite separate. Obviously, we have not favoured the wider inquiry into hepatitis C to which the member refers, for reasons with which she is familiar—the matter has been considered through various reports and inquiries and fault has not been found. It is not helpful to roll the two issues together.

That is an entirely positive and helpful suggestion and no doubt those who have responsibility for such matters in the Parliament heard it.

It is important to emphasise that side of the issue. In the middle of my statement, I said: "We believe that the risk of any individual having been  infected with variant CJD as a result of blood transfusion is extremely small. Nevertheless, I realise that individuals may have concerns about how the new policy affects them and may wish to seek advice. Any patient in that situation can contact the dedicated team on the national helpline number." That number is the first point of contact for anyone who has received a blood transfusion and who has any concerns. Obviously, they can talk to their doctor as well.

I certainly understand the concerns of the people of Caithness and I was pleased to meet a delegation from Wick when I was in Inverness recently. In reconfiguring and redesigning services, the guiding principle is that there should be the maximum access to local services that is compatible with clinical safety and quality of care. Across Scotland, many services are being moved into local communities from a more central location, as I pointed out at question time. Sometimes, however, change may mean centralising some services where there are good clinical reasons related to safety or service quality. It would be premature, and procedurally impossible, for me to come to conclusions at this stage on the specific circumstances of Caithness, but I would like to set out some general issues surrounding maternity care and the need for service redesign. The birth rate in Scotland is falling, women are having their first babies at a later age and family size is decreasing. Moreover,  women's lives have changed, with many women working throughout their pregnancies and returning to work relatively quickly. There is therefore more demand for flexible, local antenatal and postnatal care and for less medicalisation of pregnancy and childbirth. That is what the NHS aims to provide. Some women who have been assessed as high risk, will require specialised care during childbirth. In a country such as Scotland, that cannot be delivered locally in every area, and women may have to travel for delivery or for some specialised aspects of their antenatal care. However, most of a pregnant woman's care can be delivered in her local community, regardless of where she will actually deliver. In 2002, I set up the expert group on acute maternity services. Membership consisted of people from a wide range of professional backgrounds and geographic interests. The group concluded that the current configuration of acute maternity services needed to change. Women at risk of complications in pregnancy should have consultant-led care, but the falling birth rate means that some maternity units will not care for sufficient numbers of women and babies to ensure safety and quality. Some consultant-led units may therefore close and, where that happens, the group advocates the establishment of midwife-led community maternity units, a large number of which are already operating successfully throughout the United Kingdom. In those units, the midwife's role will be maximised and midwives will lead the management of pregnancy and childbirth for low-risk women. Overall, our aim is to ensure that services are maintained at the local level rather than lost. That approach is already reflected on the ground—in Orkney and Fort William, for example. The crux of modernising maternity services is to ensure a quality service that is woman centred, provided as locally as possible and provided by the most appropriate professional. Remote and rural areas present specific challenges for the provision of maternity care. Professor Calder's report spells out the impact on hospital consultants of dealing with only a small number of pregnancies each year. That affects the quality and safety of the service as well as the ability to attract and retain consultants. It is difficult for consultants to maintain clinical competence in the absence of regular and appropriate clinical practice. Rob Gibson began his speech by quoting the first point made in the executive summary of Professor Calder's report. I will repeat it: "The provision of specialist obstetric care at Caithness  General Hospital is unsatisfactory to the extent of being unsafe in the view of obstetricians currently working in the Highland Region." I do not think that that can be easily discounted. As politicians, we have to listen to the views of clinicians. There may be a range of ways of addressing the problem, but we cannot simply dismiss it out of hand.

I absolutely agree with that—when I use the word "clinicians", I mean doctors, nurses, midwives and other health professionals. As we know, there are a range of views among midwives. As Carolyn Leckie knows, the Royal College of Midwives is very positive and supportive about the development of midwife-led units, but I accept the fact that Carolyn has concerns about that, which reflect the view of some midwives. I reiterate, however, that a large number of midwives are very positive about midwife-led units. A large number of those units are operating successfully throughout the United Kingdom. The various challenges to existing services need to be met with innovative ways of working to support pregnant women before, during and after childbirth. Innovative solutions to local problems might require professionals to develop a different range of skills. They certainly require professionals to involve the community in devising different arrangements and patterns of provision. Moreover, as Professor Calder points out on page 19 of his report, there is a possibility of consultants working across sites, as Maureen Macmillan and others have highlighted. That is something that NHS Highland should certainly explore, although I agree with Eleanor Scott that Rob Gibson's specific suggestion in that regard is naive.

The job planning for that is being undertaken now. Those issues should certainly be addressed in the context of the consultant contract, which is a great lever for service redesign. Part of service redesign involves the possibility of working across sites. At question time today, I mentioned my visit to Stracathro on Friday. I was enormously impressed by the number of clinicians from Ninewells who are prepared to go and work at Stracathro on the  basis of doing elective sessions there. That is a model that should certainly be pursued. As I was saying before that intervention, it is something that NHS Highland should explore. Clearly, there are difficulties. Under the current arrangements, consultants cannot be compelled to work across sites. Indeed, if they could be, who knows whether they would want to stay in post? While recognising the difficulties, I think that such options should certainly be explored. The other dimension that is mentioned in Professor Calder's report is the suggestion that "pluripotential practitioners" should be developed. I do not know whether members are familiar with that phrase. Perhaps Jamie Stone's "multiskilling" of staff is a more straightforward way of putting it. That has already been taken on board. The remote and rural areas resource initiative has a joint project with the north of Scotland regional planning group to identify potential models of maternity care in rural and remote settings, and that involves multiskilling.

How am I doing for time, Presiding Officer?

Absolutely, which is why the matter is first on my agenda. There are many dimensions to it. In particular, we had a debate about the work force, and I noted what Rob Gibson said about consultants. The consultant work force is in fact growing more strongly than before. Indeed, there have also been 1,000 extra junior doctors over the past three years. However, there have been particular difficulties and challenges because of having to deal with the working time directive in that connection. More broadly, we have done the work through EGAMS, there is a national framework for maternity services and we are doing general work on providing a framework for the reconfiguration and redesign of services. There is a balance between national decision making and local decision making, and I do not think that members would want me to sit in St Andrew's House and decree the shape of maternity services throughout Scotland.

Jamie Stone makes an important point. There is obviously a balance between safety and quality on the one hand and access on the other. Notwithstanding the general comments that I made about midwife-led units, about which I am very positive, we all recognise that the distances that are involved are greater than in most other situations. That is an important material factor, but I do not think that Jamie Stone would expect me to give an instant risk assessment of it. However, it is obviously a crucial issue and it will be looked at by NHS Highland. I have further general points to make, but I suspect that I ran out of time a long time ago, so I will just mention them in summary. I mentioned work that is being done with the north of Scotland regional planning group. I note that the regional dimension is important; as colleagues will have heard me say, we have provided £150,000 for three regional maternity services co-ordinators—that is just part of the regional dimension. I want to mention the recent establishment of the national maternity services work force planning group and the establishment of the Scottish maternity development unit. The work force group will oversee the development of a strategic approach to integrated work force planning and service development for maternity services. It will consider a wide range of issues, including the specific needs of rural communities and tools such as birthrate plus—I know that Carolyn Leckie is keen on that, and indeed so am I. There will be a response from the Executive on the work load report on nursing and midwifery soon. The development unit will provide low-cost, multidisciplinary training in key areas of maternity service provision. In conclusion, I emphasise that the key criteria for reviewing maternity services have always been clinical safety and the quality of patient care. In the Highlands, distance and reliability of transport links overlay those considerations, as I acknowledged to Jamie Stone. I am confident that NHS Highland will thoroughly explore these difficult and complex issues with maximum public involvement— indeed, it will be required to do so. If proposals for change come forward, I will certainly scrutinise them with great care before coming to a final view.  Meeting closed at 18:08.

We are making good progress in addressing that through implementation of the Scottish diabetes framework.

Better diagnosis of diabetes is crucial. As the framework is being revised, that is certainly one issue that will be considered as part of the process. I accept fully that much has still to be done. The first reports on the national diabetes standards will be published in two weeks' time, so many deficiencies will be highlighted. While acknowledging those, we should recognise the enormous progress that has been made in the care and treatment of people with diabetes in the past two years since the framework was launched. I was pleased that a leading clinical body recently said that the Tayside managed clinical network for diabetes was the best in the United Kingdom. It has led the way, but others are following. Investment has been made in managed clinical networks and I spoke at the Lothian diabetes managed clinical network conference recently. Many developments have taken place in information technology and in integrating diabetes care throughout primary care services and the hospital sector. Without being complacent, we can say that Scotland is leading the way on the care of people with diabetes.

That is a key issue in relation to what I said to Mike Rumbles about diagnosis. Certainly, no such proposals have been made in Scotland. As Mike Rumbles said in his first question, the incidence of diabetes is increasing. That is one of our major challenges. Type 2 diabetes is related to many matters such as lifestyle and obesity. Major prevention and health improvement issues are involved, but we must make progress—as we are doing—on all the strands of the care and treatment of people with diabetes. I have mentioned only a selection of matters. The developments in the past couple of years to deal with diabetic retinopathy have also been a major advance in preventing people from going blind because of diabetes—that risk has affected many people in the past.

That is the case. I am glad to have several supplementary questions to answer, because I can add a new strand of the diabetes framework in each answer. Recently, I visited the Scottish primary care collaborative, which brings together many health care professionals from primary care to improve the management of diabetes in primary care. Diabetic specialist nurses are important to that. The group works with four change principles, the last of which is to "adopt a multi-skilled, multi-agency approach to ensure effective co-ordination of the care of people with diabetes". The new general medical services contract will be entirely helpful in achieving that because of the money that will go to practices, the emphasis on quality and the shift of resources into primary care. The management of chronic disease in primary care is one of the great opportunities of the new GMS contract and will be one of the great developments in health care in the next few years. We hear all the time about the centralisation of services—we will hear about it after 5 o'clock today—but contrary to that is the movement of many services that used to be in hospitals to community settings. Those might be general practitioners' practices or health centres, or they might be diagnostic and treatment centres such as the splendid one that I saw at Stracathro on Friday.

Rates of pay for all NHS Scotland staff, regardless of origin, are set nationally by the appropriate functional Whitley council.

There is an issue for the NHS, and in particular for South Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust, about which agency, if any, it uses for recruitment purposes overseas. That apart, however, all the other issues to which Dennis Canavan referred are not the responsibility of the health service. I know that there is an issue about how much rent was charged and I understand that a tribunal is forthcoming about that, but the rent levels were not set by the NHS. Equally, any loans that the nurses took out in the Philippines are nothing to do with the NHS. However, as I said, I accept that there is an issue for the NHS about which agency, if any, is used. I know that this afternoon South Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust is meeting the agency that Dennis Canavan referred to. I have asked the trust to present me with a report promptly after that meeting, so I will look further into the particular issues that are the concern of the NHS.

First, nurses from overseas get exactly the same terms and conditions as any other nurses, as I indicated in my first answer. Secondly, Shona Robison's arithmetic hardly reflects the record increase in the number of qualified nurses in the work force. As last week's statistics showed, there were more than 1,000 extra qualified nurses in the work force last year. I have looked back to 1984 and can tell the member that that was the biggest increase by far in all that time. There are issues, of course. Because we are expanding the work force and improving the health service, we want still more nurses. International recruitment is part of that, but it has to be done within an ethical framework, so that we attract people only from countries that can afford to lose nurses. We in Scotland have been observing that practice pretty strictly. However, within those parameters, I accept that it is legitimate and important to recruit from overseas.

David Davidson asked that question of Tom McCabe and my answer will be no different. We are looking at the whole issue in relation to the current consultation on the dental work force. David Davidson knows that there are no special packages at the moment, but the matter will be considered within the broader picture.

I am not surprised that, once again, the only substantive contribution that the SNP can make to a health debate is to call for more resources. That is the SNP's answer to all the issues in the health service. In response to the Conservatives, I point out that we acknowledged in the financial memorandum that there would be some additional costs. However, we also said that there would be some savings. We need a financial resolution in the Parliament to cover the former but, as Tom McCabe said in his winding-up speech, there have already been savings in NHS Borders and NHS Dumfries and Galloway, where trusts were abolished earlier than elsewhere. There have been savings of £500,000 in one year in NHS Dumfries and Galloway and the same kind of amount has been saved in NHS Borders, although  over a slightly longer period. It is a case of there being some costs and some savings. The key issue is the more effective use of existing resources: the £173 million extra that is already going into health improvement; the sum of more than £2 million that already supports the health council movement; and the £1 million that is supporting managed clinical networks, which will help to improve regional planning. Shona Robison started by talking about community health partnerships. One of the key issues in respect of CHPs is the delegation of existing resources to the front line; it is about using the resources that are in the system. Management costs are also in the system already in the local health care co-operatives and in the primary care trusts; it is a matter of using the resources more effectively. Let us not forget that although there are, of course, pressures in the health system, we have record resources in health. Those can be used more effectively and that is what the bill is all about.

I repeat to Brian Monteith that the decentralisers won, which is why we are setting up community health partnerships. That must be done within a framework of national standards and with a power to intervene as a last resort.

I assure David Davidson that primary care professionals, including those from his profession of pharmacy, will be represented. I have already spoken about the public partnership forums. The CHPs are an example of power being given to front-line staff and of the involvement of local communities. Of course, CHPs completely disprove the nonsense that Mr Davidson and Brian Monteith have spoken about centralisation under the bill.

The National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill contains the legislative changes that are necessary to realise the vision that is set out in the white paper "Partnership for Care" and in the partnership agreement. It is a vision of a health service with a culture of caring that is to be developed and fostered by a new partnership between patients, staff and Government. It is a vision of a health service fit for the 21 st century, in which patients are the key drivers of change and front-line staff are the leaders of the change process. The Scottish Executive is spending £7.2 billion on health this year and the figure is planned to rise to £8.7 billion by 2005-06. That investment must be matched by patient-centred reforms that deliver improved health and more integrated health services. The Health Committee took evidence from a wide range of interests and I thank it for its report. I very much welcome its endorsement of the bill's general principles, subject to the reservations that it has expressed. I will now deal with the bill's provisions. The first of the reforms that I have included in the bill is the final step in the dissolution of national health service trusts. Trusts were set up as a key feature of the internal market and, although they have lost much of their original purpose, they are still a hindrance to the single-system integrated working that we believe is best for Scotland. Patient-centred services of the highest quality cannot be delivered by a market-style NHS in which trusts compete with one another, but they can be delivered by NHS staff working together as part of the same organisation. That is why we are moving towards single-system working.

I agree with the second point, but the leap from a single system to centralisation is enormous. I have been trying to tell the Conservative party for months that we support a single system that is decentralised—that is exactly what I will go on to describe. In removing the powers to establish trusts, we wish to establish single-system working in a decentralised context with the delegation of decision making and responsibility to the point of patient care. That is where community health partnerships are so crucial. Community health partnerships will build on the achievements of the most innovative local health care co-operatives. They will help to make the planning and delivery of health care more responsive to the needs of local populations and to develop more services in community settings. They will also be a key vehicle for integration. On the one hand, CHPs will act as a focus for the integration of primary and specialist services. That will bring about a shift in the balance of care to enhance local community-based services with improved access for local people. On the other hand, CHPs will be able to progress the joint future agenda locally through substantive partnerships with local authorities. If CHP boundaries are coterminous with local authority administrative boundaries, the potential for further integration becomes greater. CHP committees will comprise representatives from front-line staff and key partners such as local authorities, the voluntary sector and the public. They will have greater responsibility and influence in the deployment of all resources by health boards and they will play a more influential role in service redesign locally. We will ensure that schemes of establishment are focused on health service and health improvement outcomes. We will also ensure that the health boards prepare robust development plans to support the evaluation of CHPs.

We do not have any such proposals at the moment. We want to ensure that, as CHPs are set up, they are coterminous as far as possible with local authority boundaries. It may be that one CHP will have representatives from two NHS boards but not from two local authorities. That is the best approach at present. It is vital that the CHPs involve their communities when planning and delivering  services, as they cannot provide effective services unless they know what their communities need. Each CHP will be required to support effective community involvement through public partnership forums that will ensure that the CHP engages effectively with its local community. That should build on good existing local approaches and on the work of local user and carer groups. The forums will be involved directly in the decisions that are taken by each CHP on the planning and delivery of services.

We have seen several excellent examples of good public involvement in the part of Scotland that John Swinney represents. I will visit NHS Tayside on Friday. The public partnership forums that have been set up in that area are a good example of better engagement with local communities. I will now deal with public involvement more generally. Underpinning the obligations of the CHPs to involve the public will be a statutory duty that requires all health boards and special health boards to involve and consult the public on the planning, development and delivery of health services. It is essential to our vision of a modern health service that patient focus and public involvement are fully integrated with day-to-day management and delivery.

I will give way to Bill Butler and then I think that I will have to get on.

I will report back to Bill Butler on the issue. Obviously, there would have to be a wide public consultation on his important bill. I will look into the matter in respect of any help that we can give. The new Scottish health council, which featured quite a bit in the Health Committee's report, will be a major step forward in supporting patient focus and public involvement in the NHS. We wish to see the Scottish health council created as part of NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, which reviews and reports on standards in the NHS independently of the Government. That is because we see achieving a real patient focus as inseparable from improving the quality of our health services, the starting point for improving quality being the experience of every patient who passes through the health care system. I know that there are concerns about the future structure of public involvement and the independence of the Scottish health council, but I say again that we are committed to creating a Scottish health council that acts independently, brings professionalism and expertise to the patient focus and public involvement agenda and builds on the strong local roots and commitment of the health council movement. Detailed arrangements to secure those objectives are being developed in partnership with the Scottish Association of Health Councils. I shall write to the Health Committee about that before stage 2. The duty that I have just mentioned requires boards to involve and consult the people to whom they provide services. A key role of the Scottish health council and its local advisory councils will be to ensure that the boards do that job properly. They will therefore be a key driver for the improved public involvement that we all want. If the public are not receiving services, or are receiving poor-quality services, it is important that Scottish ministers have appropriate powers to intervene to ensure that those services are brought back up to the required standards. That is why I have included a power in the bill that is flexible enough to cope with a wide range of issues, yet can be used only as a last resort by virtue of the necessity test. That legal test will ensure that the new power will be available only where intervention is more than just desirable, useful or expedient. The Scottish ministers can use many indicators to decide whether an intervention is necessary, including lengthening waiting times, information from the performance assessment framework, clinical standards not being met and persistent complaints from patients. I do not expect that  ministers will use the new powers often, but in the event of a serious failure, or where a serious failure is likely, patients would expect ministers to be able to step in quickly to ensure that the problems are addressed. The bill also includes a new duty on boards to co-operate to advance the health of the people of Scotland. If we are to maximise the level of service that we can provide to all communities throughout Scotland, we need NHS boards to work collaboratively with other boards to share skills and resources to provide a better service. To do otherwise is simply not sustainable. As some health services become more specialised and complex, we need more regional planning to ensure that the services are delivered successfully and to the highest possible level of care. Health board chief executives are working up a proposed regional planning framework that will allow for a co-ordinated approach to regional planning. I shall scrutinise that and ensure that we have much more effective arrangements than we had in the past. Health improvement also features in the bill, as the NHS should be a service about health, not just about illness. The duty in the bill makes it clear that it is a responsibility of Scottish ministers and health boards to promote health improvement; the bill provides them with powers to enable them to do just that. I recognise that boards alone cannot improve health, so the powers will enable them and Scottish ministers to work with, and give financial assistance to, other organisations, including local authorities, in promoting health improvement. In "Partnership for Care", we said that none of the reforms will happen without staff. A key role for the Government, as I said in the debate last week on the NHS work force, is to support, value and empower staff to lead the change process in partnership with patients. I have already set out how we propose to empower front-line staff by devolving decision making to them. We also wish to value and support them. That is why we have a staff governance standard, which reflects our fundamental belief that staff should be well informed, appropriately trained, involved in decisions that affect them, treated fairly and consistently, and provided with an improved and safe working environment. At stage 2, I will lodge an amendment to ensure that systems are in place to make a reality of staff governance. That will be achieved through compliance with the staff governance framework, which has been agreed by a partnership of the Executive, the NHS, trade unions and professional bodies.  Section 1 of the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978 requires Scottish ministers to promote a comprehensive and integrated health service designed to secure improvement in the health of the people of Scotland. It is important that the health service improves the health of all the people of Scotland, irrespective of gender, race, disability, age, sexuality, beliefs and opinions. That is why we will lodge an amendment at stage 2 to require boards to promote equal opportunities when undertaking their functions. I know that some members have questioned the statement in the financial memorandum that no additional expenditure will be associated with the bill. I remind members that there has been an uplift of 7.8 per cent in the resources provided to boards in 2003-04 to manage and provide services. Moreover, an additional £173 million will be spent on health improvement over the next three years under the "Building a Better Scotland" programme and money has been invested in supporting the delivery of the patient focus and public involvement programme. Boards have a great deal of capacity to manage change. Some boards have already dissolved trusts and demonstrated savings, for example. The change from LHCCs to CHPs is evolutionary. The move to regional planning will require a redistribution rather than an augmentation of resources. The reforms should result in more efficient use of resources and can be managed in the record sums that are being provided to boards to manage and provide services. I am determined, therefore, that no additional management costs will be associated with the bill. The bill has been broadly supported by a variety of organisations. It represents an important step towards the vision set out in "Partnership for Care" and the partnership agreement. I hope that members will give their support to the principles of the bill and reject the unnecessary amendment in the name of Shona Robison. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill.

I assure Mary Scanlon that we are promoting that model of care through community health partnerships, which we will discuss in relation to the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill next week.

That gives me an opportunity to say that, as part of the facing the future work, we have undertaken a very big work-load project. The report on that, which will come out soon, commends birth rate plus. We are very keen to address the disparities between different staffing levels.

If David Davidson had listened to my speech, he would know that every figure that I gave in my speech was a full-time equivalent figure.

The simple reason why that is the case is that the numbers that we and the trusts have decided to employ has increased considerably. The significant fact is that the overall numbers are increasing.

The theme of this afternoon is simple: health care staff matter because they make the difference in delivering dedicated care to the people of Scotland day in, day out. I start by thanking all of them and pledging my determination to value, to empower and to support them to an ever-increasing extent. Yesterday, the latest figures for the health care work force in Scotland showed a net growth in whole-time equivalent staff of 4,310 in the past year, with increases in every NHS board in Scotland. That growth includes 1,003 more qualified nursing and midwifery staff, 428 more allied health professionals and 246 more medical staff. As I said, all those staff are whole-time equivalents.

I accept Carolyn Leckie's point: the vast majority of those 1,003 are nurses. However, we plan to increase the number of midwives. Their number has to some extent been declining because of the declining birth rate. I want to make a more general point about the figure for nurses and midwives. Although I am never complacent, I have to say that I checked annual increases over the past 20 years and found that last year's increase was the largest during that period. Indeed, it might well be the largest increase since the period before 1984. We should acknowledge that. Growth will improve further by building on the 27 per cent rise in student nursing numbers since 1999, and through all the initiatives that have been spearheaded by the facing the future nursing and midwifery recruitment and retention group, which I chair as a matter of priority. As part of that approach, opportunities are also being offered to health care support workers to become fully qualified nurses. For example, on Monday, I will meet some health care support workers from Glasgow who have, while still in employment, successfully completed the higher national  certificate in health care at Cardonald College, and have now entered the second year of pre-registration nursing at the University of Paisley. That flexible route to registration, in which those people are front runners, has since commenced all over Scotland. Planning the work force is crucial. We need to deliver the right people with the right skills in the right place at the right time. That means planning the size and shape of Scotland's largest work force for five or 10 and more years hence. We do not have a good track record on work force planning; indeed, it seems to me that it never happened at all in the 1980s and 1990s. As a result, last year we established the national work force committee, supported by a newly established national work force unit in the Health Department, to bring coherence and leadership to work force planning for NHS Scotland. We have also been building work force planning capacity at local and regional levels, appointing regional work force champions and investing in regional work force networks.

That is nonsense. Is Shona Robison really attacking medical secretaries who support clinical staff, people who look after medical records—who are vital for patient care—and people who service and staff ambulance control rooms, who are certainly vital for patient care? I notice that both the Scottish National Party and the Conservative party are going down that route. I assure members that the number of senior managers in the health service has declined by hundreds since the days of the Conservative Government, when the bureaucracy of the internal market was at its height. By the end of March, we will have developed our first national work force plan to coincide with the establishment of the new boards throughout Scotland. The plan will provide a comprehensive position statement and scenarios for the future. The new boards, the regional service and the work force planning networks will be able to draw on the national picture—the first national plan—to inform their planning processes in the longer term and, in turn, they will inform further development of the national plan. In addition, we at the centre will be better able to ensure that the supply of staff matches the service's demand for them. We are also starting to do our work force planning on an integrated care-group basis. The report of the expert group on acute maternity  services highlighted the importance of work force planning in the delivery of a high-quality maternity service. To achieve that, a national maternity service work force planning group has been established. The group—chaired by Professor Andrew Calder—will, in line with the expert group's report, oversee the development of a strategic approach to integrated work force planning and service development for maternity services in the NHS in Scotland. I look forward to following the group's progress. Planning is important, but delivery matters even more.

I will do so in a moment, but I am behind just now. There is an immediate recruitment and retention challenge for NHS Scotland and we have already made progress in partnership with NHS employers. For example, we have done so under the banner of our facing the future programme for nurses and midwives and, with the input of the NHS centre for change and innovation, we have given new prominence to flexible working. Examples of that include: self-rostering teams in Forth Valley NHS Board; job-share extension of maternity leave in West Lothian; annualised hours in Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board; weekend-only working in Argyll and Clyde NHS Board; and career-break opportunities in Lothian NHS Board. In an increasingly competitive labour market, it is important that NHS employers are at the leading edge in terms of offering flexibility.

The next in line is Jamie Stone, but he will also have to wait. NHS employers also need to treat staff well. Our staff governance standard, which was launched two years ago, demonstrated our clear commitment that the NHS in Scotland should be an exemplar employer. The standard is unambiguous and reflects our fundamental belief that staff should be well informed, appropriately trained, treated fairly and consistently, involved in decisions that affect them and provided with an improved and safe working environment. Our programme to tackle violence and aggression towards staff is just one tangible expression of the standard. We have funded a range of practical projects, including personal-attack call systems, electronic lock-down areas and barriers in accident and emergency departments. We will not accept violent or aggressive behaviour and are working actively to make NHS Scotland a zero-tolerance zone for such behaviour.  The standard is already a key element of our formal performance assessment of all NHS organisations. We should never forget how significant is the contribution that that assessment makes to putting NHS Scotland employers at the leading edge of human resource practice, which adds practical value to recruitment and retention of staff. However, we do not believe that that is enough. We want to go further by giving staff governance the kind of legal underpinning that is enjoyed by financial and clinical governance. That is why we are including the standard's principles in legislation that will be brought before Parliament. It will be the first legislation of its kind and it will embed staff governance principles as the right way of doing things throughout NHS Scotland.

Professor Calder is doing a risk assessment in relation to maternity services in Wick. He will present his report to Highland NHS Board within the next two or three weeks and NHS Highland will come to a view on it. Ministers will make a ruling if proposals for change are brought before us. That is all that I can say about that at present. As I have mentioned, there is much that we can build on, but the challenges in the future are formidable. The improvements that we are bringing about in work force planning, recruitment and retention, and in making NHS Scotland an exemplar employer, are not in themselves enough. Everyone recognizes that things need to change in order to achieve higher standards of patient care, delivered by the right staff working reasonable hours. Alongside the initiatives that I have already mentioned, the new contracts for consultants and general practices, together with the pay modernisation proposals under the agenda for change, will be key to enabling the service change that is required. They will provide a platform for new working arrangements, career development and the forging of new roles for all staff groups that work in NHS Scotland, and among independent medical contractors. We need to change what is done and how it is done: we have relied for too long on overworked doctors in training to deliver care round the clock.  Instead, we must look to provide consistently high-quality care through teams of trained staff throughout the day and night. We have to change the relationships between professions as we look more and more to clinical teams and networks of skill to meet the needs of patients safely for 24 hours a day.

I made clear the general position of ministers with reference to service change in responding to Jamie Stone, but I have followed the development of the situation to which John Scott refers. The main issues that are being flagged up in Ayrshire are to do with clinical safety and the quality of care. I will talk about those matters in the last part of my speech. The impression is sometimes created that change in the health service is being driven by work force legislation rather than by a fundamental commitment to improving services. I want to put the record straight today by stressing that that cannot be right. I want change to be seen and understood by staff and patients in terms of better services for the future, because that is how I see it. I want to make it clear that, in my book, service reform means ensuring maximum local access to services that is consistent with clinical safety and high-quality care.

I do not have time. I am in my last minute and I must move to my conclusion. The Executive supports and pays tribute to the staff of NHS Scotland, who make such a difference to the people of Scotland 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. Health care staff matter, and money spent wisely on health care staff is money wisely invested in Scotland's future. No one is pretending that the journey will not be challenging as we move into that future, but I believe firmly that we can, through the policies that we are delivering, meet and overcome those challenges to deliver great benefits for NHS staff and for the people that they serve. I move, That the Parliament appreciates the vital contribution of a high quality healthcare system to the lives of everyone in Scotland and to our economy; acknowledges the fundamental importance of the 150,000 staff who help care for patients and pays tribute to their dedication and professionalism; welcomes the recent significant increases in staff numbers across the NHS in Scotland and the action  taken to promote more flexible ways of working, create safer workplaces and protect frontline staff, support continuing professional development, and develop new roles and teamworking, but recognises the challenges facing the Scottish Executive in achieving a sustainable healthcare workforce in the long term through local, regional and national service and workforce planning and redesign, against the background of wider demographic and labour market challenges.

In 2002, Scotland took part in an international study of asthma and allergies in schoolchildren that suggested that, while the diagnosis of asthma had become more common since 1995, the prevalence of symptoms had declined. The Global Initiative for Asthma has suggested that, of the countries involved in its survey, Scotland has the highest incidence of the symptoms of asthma among 13 to 14-year-olds. Both those studies have yet to be published, but their findings, when available, will inform the policies and clinical practices of NHS Scotland.

Cathy Peattie made two points. I hesitate to discuss the first when the Minister for Communities, who has responsibility for housing, is sitting on my right. However, I have been aware of the issue since I had that responsibility—which was a long time ago—and the issue bears examination. On the second point, Cathy Peattie obviously speaks from a great deal of knowledge and is on to an important issue, part of which might be able to be developed through our commitment to the development of personal health plans. That approach will be of considerable relevance to asthma sufferers, as indicated, I think, by the recent Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline on the management of asthma.

I hesitate to speculate on all the different factors in the causes of asthma, because I have discussed the matter recently with several clinicians and there seems to be a degree of uncertainty about it. In fact, I was curious to discover last week, when I looked into the matter, that the incidence of asthma is just as high on the island of Skye, for example, as it is in industrial areas. The issue is complex, but I am sure that the objectives that Patrick Harvie flags up are desirable for health in general terms, so to that extent I certainly agree with him.

I am certainly aware of that research. I remember that when I was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee I met Stirling Howieson—in fact, I wrote a paper for the committee that included some of his research, but I do not know what happened to it; because I left the committee it seemed to disappear somewhere. I am sure that Margaret Curran is also aware of those issues and that, together, we can explore those important matters.

That is certainly something that we will want to look at as we develop the idea of personal health plans more generally. Working in partnership with patients is an important way forward in the management of chronic disease. This week I spoke to the person who is organising the primary care and diabetes collaborative improvement programme. Certainly, the idea of working in partnership with patients, which includes self-management, is an important part of that programme. I am sure that we will look at the issues that relate to schools as part of that work.

Mohs surgery is used to treat some skin cancers, such as cancers with a high recurrence rate or cancers on the face.

I agree that we need to make more Mohs surgery available, but I am advised that it will remain a fairly low-volume procedure throughout Scotland. The national service advisory group concluded that Mohs surgery was best organised regionally. It has asked the regional planning groups to take the issue on board and I will ensure that that happens. It is thought appropriate to organise the treatment regionally, given that it is a low-cost, low-volume procedure.

We are fully committed to ensuring the privacy and dignity of patients at all times. Ninety-nine per cent of wards meet the target. Changes to wards at Grampian University Hospitals NHS Trust and the North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust will be complete by autumn. Discussions are in progress with clinicians at the Royal Edinburgh hospital on how to ensure that its wards comply with the target as soon as possible.

It is certainly unacceptable; that is why we have put such effort and resources into resolving the problem. A total of £4.8 million was spent and that is why we have made such great progress and have achieved 99 per cent compliance. However, I am certainly not happy with any figure that is less than 100 per cent. In the three trusts that I mentioned, there were reasons for non-compliance. For example, at Stobhill hospital in north Glasgow, there were difficulties with fire safety regulations. I am told that those difficulties will be resolved by June. I expect the other difficulties to be resolved this year as well. By coincidence, there will be a meeting with patients groups and the management at the Royal Edinburgh hospital on Monday. If the situation is not resolved satisfactorily, we shall certainly intervene to ensure that we achieve 100 per cent compliance by the end of the year.

John Reid did not say anything in England this week that I have not said already. On many occasions I have said that we need to have a small number of targets. People accept that targets such as a maximum waiting time are what patients expect. However, I have  said on many occasions—and it is in many of our documents—that we want a limited number of targets. There is an emphasis on local decision making and empowerment of front-line staff. We have been saying that since "Partnership for Care: Scotland's Health White Paper" was published a year ago this month.

Our policy is that palliative care should be available to everyone who needs it. A number of managed clinical networks are already in place, and we will work with all the agencies that are involved to implement key recommendations.

Ken Macintosh rightly gives a balanced view of the report. It indicated a  high level of compliance with most of the standards and could not praise too much the quality of care that is provided by staff. I am sure that we would all like to echo his recognition of their work. The purpose of the report is to home in on weaknesses so that we can have a culture of improvement. Staffing issues were highlighted in the report, along with other issues that Ken Macintosh mentioned. Action is being taken in those respects. We are encouraging the development of managed clinical networks and we are addressing the staffing issues in terms of some of the specialist positions. Further, the Health Department recently sent out a letter to ensure that national health service boards meet their commitment to pay 50 per cent of the recent costs as soon as possible. When I visited St Columba's hospice in Edinburgh last week, one of the staff said that that was a useful letter because it brought that situation closer. A range of actions is being undertaken. The partnership between the health service and the voluntary sector, which was praised in the report, is one of the key elements in the health sector in Scotland.

For 2003-04, the Scottish Executive has allocated £37,000 directly to support the Scottish breastfeeding group and the national breastfeeding adviser. The Department of Health has confirmed that it has a budget of approximately £300,000 for 2003-04 for similar activities. I have contacted both the National Assembly for Wales and the Northern Ireland Office and will forward their responses to the member when I receive them.

I would not like to give the impression that the sum that I mentioned was all the money that is spent on breastfeeding. As Elaine Smith and other members know, we allocate money to boards for general purposes and only ring fence in a small number of cases. Like Elaine Smith, I pay tribute to the health workers and all who are involved in peer support groups such as the one that I visited in her constituency some time ago. Last year, the Executive gave £60,000 to help the development of peer support groups for breastfeeding in Ayrshire. NHS Scotland has also spent a lot of money on the promotion of breastfeeding—last year, the figure was £230,000. Moreover, the chief scientist office is putting quite a lot of money into research on ways in which we can encourage and support breastfeeding.

That information and advice certainly ought to be given. I do not know off the top of my head exactly how many instances there are in which that happens, but I shall look into the matter further and give Mary Scanlon a more detailed response. In principle, however, I agree that what she suggests should certainly happen.

Officials of the Scottish Executive Health Department regularly meet NHS boards and discuss a wide range of issues. The most recent meeting with NHS Fife took place on 9 January 2004.

The meeting on 9 January was held between officials and Fife NHS Board. The issues that were discussed concerned the medical work force. Obviously, I have taken a keen interest in the nursing jobs to which Tricia Marwick referred. When I have discussed the issue both with the medical director and the chair of the board, I have asked the kind of questions that Tricia Marwick raised. The explanation that I was given is that the issue is fundamentally about the redesign of services. The posts are in an older people's ward in a hospital and in mental health. We should remember that the lead-up to the matter is the redesign of mental health so that more care is delivered in community settings. Moreover, and crucially, the older people's ward was being used to hold patients who on the whole were delayed discharges and who were awaiting more appropriate care in the community. I am told that, as NHS Fife has reduced the number of its delayed discharges, it no longer requires those beds for that purpose. In each case, NHS Fife has explained the issue to me in terms of the redesign of care. Of course, no nurse will lose her or his job. As certain posts become vacant, they will not be filled, but new posts will be created and new people will be recruited for more work within the community.

Christine May raised a range of issues about NHS Fife. On money, it is worth noting that the increase given to Fife from April is more than 8 per cent, which is large by historical standards. The redesign of services will go ahead in Fife, where the full business case for the redesign of services is being prepared. On smoking in public places, we have a commitment to increase the number of smoke-free places. The example to which Christine May referred is a good one. She will know that Tom McCabe announced substantial additional funding to support people in giving up smoking—an extra £4 million is coming on stream in due course. That is a key part of the anti-smoking strategy.

As I said, the meeting was between officials and NHS Fife and the issues related to the medical work force, so the question of the hospital at St Andrews did not come up. However, work is on-going on that issue. I will write to the member with the details.

I paid tribute to Esther Roberton on 9 October in the chamber, when she was being unfairly attacked. I repeat today that I pay tribute to all the work that she has done as chair of NHS Fife. Some difficult decisions had to be taken, but the board's new approach to public involvement represents a big improvement on what happened in the past. We know that the plans are now in place and the full business case is being worked up, so as soon as possible we will see the new arrangements in Fife. A range of difficult medical work force issues were discussed at the meeting with Health Department officials on 9 January and various actions—relating to anaesthetists, for example—were taken. The Health Department is arranging a meeting with the Royal College of Anaesthetists to try to resolve some of the issues. We know that there are difficulties, particularly in some smaller board areas such as Fife, where there are problems to do with big hospitals in Edinburgh and Dundee. However, the way in which those difficulties are being approached, with the help of the Health Department, is a tribute to what Esther Roberton has done.

The national services division will be responding to the consultation on maternity services in Glasgow. I expect NHS Greater Glasgow to consider that and all other responses before it comes to a final decision.

I certainly intend to spend a lot of time over the next few weeks looking into the detail of all those issues and I would be pleased to take up Pauline McNeill's invitation to meet some of the clinicians from the Queen Mother's hospital. I assure the member that I am considering in great detail the matters that she raises in relation to the national services division—I recently spoke to someone who is very much involved in that. The division will give an honest account of any problems that it foresees as a result of the proposals and, as I said in my earlier answer, I expect Greater Glasgow NHS Board to take that matter into account.

I am unaware of Catriona Renfrew's statement, so it would be inappropriate for me to comment on that. However, I will ask her about it when I next talk to her. The consultation is in its final stages, so I think that the appropriate thing to do is to let it run its course. I assure Sandra White and other members that I will examine all the issues in great detail before I come to a view on the matter.

In general terms, I agree with Des McNulty. Again, I do not know the specific circumstances around the area medical committee's decision not to comment. As I have  said before in the chamber, one of the distinctive features of the maternity services controversy in the Greater Glasgow NHS Board area is the fact that the clinicians—and in many cases, the senior clinicians—are fundamentally divided. That makes the situation different from that of most of the other service changes in Scotland, where, on the whole, there is a consensus among clinicians.

I do not think that it is right to generalise. There have, of course, been various consultations and it might be true to say that some have been handled better than others. I will consider the allegations about the fairness with which Greater Glasgow NHS Board has considered submissions. In general terms, I accept the principle of transparency and that people should be able to see the evidence that has been submitted. Notwithstanding people's concerns, the right thing to do now is to see the consultation through during the next four weeks or so. However, for the third time, I repeat that I will look in great detail at the matter and at all the points that members have raised.

NHS boards are responsible for staffing levels and have been asked to review their systems in light of the recommendations of the 2002 Audit Scotland report "Planning ward nursing—legacy or design?" In addition, we have commissioned a follow-up project to address nursing and midwifery work-load issues throughout NHS Scotland and I expect to receive recommendations for action shortly.

The reality is that the number of midwives was declining for a while, for factors that are well known, such as the declining birth rate. However, that corner has been turned and we accept that we have to increase the number of midwives, because midwives now have a more central role in the delivery of maternity services than they had in the past. That is a central feature of the EGAMS—expert group on acute maternity services—report. Birth rate plus has been considered very carefully as part of the project that I described. That important piece of work is the first to give serious and systematic consideration to such work-load issues, so there will be action on that issue soon. In general terms, I agree with several of Carolyn Leckie's points. I am also in the process of convening a maternity services work-force group that will examine work-force planning for all the professions that are involved in the delivery of maternity services. We are very much involved in addressing the issues that Carolyn Leckie has highlighted.

I am conscious that there are national service issues that must be examined in the context of Yorkhill, as well as all the other issues with which members are familiar. Members  will also know that I cannot give a final view on that until the end of the consultation process and until the work that I asked for on the patient flows between Argyll and Clyde NHS Board and Greater Glasgow NHS Board has been done. However, Pauline McNeill can be assured that I am already examining those issues in great detail and shall do so increasingly over the next few weeks.

We estimate that up to 600 people may claim in the early years, but it is not possible to give a definite number at this stage. The scheme will pay out to all those who can show that they are eligible. I will be making a joint announcement with my United Kingdom colleagues tomorrow.

The fundamental principle has been that there should be a fair deal for the people who contracted hepatitis C in that way. Without going into the details, which members will understand have to be announced on a UK basis tomorrow, I would like to say that we should be proud that the whole process was started here. The fundamentals of the Scottish scheme will be announced with the UK scheme tomorrow, and I think that everyone in the Executive and in the Parliament can be proud of that. The fundamental principle is that there should be a fair deal, but we must obviously take account of other demands on the health budget. I have no doubt that some people tomorrow will say, "It should have been more." However, I think that a significant payment will be made to all those who are eligible.

The fundamental principle is still as we outlined it and the scheme will apply to people who are still alive and suffering in that way. There will be some detailed changes to the  eligibility criteria and I assure members that everybody will be sent the details of that. There will be some changes in the detail, but the fundamental framework of the scheme will be as we announced some time ago.

There is clearly a wider agenda in terms of care and treatment for all people who suffer from hepatitis C. When we had a debate on the matter two years ago, that was one of the key issues that I highlighted. We wanted a fair deal for those who had contracted hepatitis C in a specific way, but we also wanted to improve care and treatment for all people who have hepatitis C. A great deal of work has been done on finding out more of the data to which Keith Raffan refers to and on improving and making more widely available the kind of therapies that he describes.

I do not know whether Shona Robison was listening to my speech, but I made it absolutely clear—I did this intentionally in view of the allegations that are being made and which have been made before—that I am strongly supportive of the general approach that the expert group has outlined. Shona Robison will understand that it would be quite wrong if I launched one of the most comprehensive consultations ever and gave my final view on every specific recommendation. I repeat, for the third time in the debate, that I am positive about the approach that the expert group has adopted and the way forward that it has mapped out.

I welcome this debate and the opportunity that it provides for members to contribute to the development of a national sexual health and relationship strategy for Scotland. In my statement to the Parliament on 12 November, when I launched the consultation on the expert group's proposals, I stressed the Executive's desire to obtain the views of all sections of Scottish life and interests. In doing so, I recognised the important input that the Parliament could have into the final shape of the strategy. I therefore look forward to hearing members' comments. First, let me briefly set the context. Sexual health in Scotland is poor. Sexually transmitted infections are widespread and are increasing in incidence. For example, there has been a dramatic rise in genital chlamydia diagnoses over the past decade, not all of which can be attributed to better screening. Moreover, between 2001 and 2002, there was a 60 per cent increase in the incidence of rectal gonorrhoea and a 200 per cent rise in the number of cases of syphilis among men who have sex with men. There was also, in 2002, the highest increase in the number of new HIV cases since 1987. Significantly, too, the rate of teenage conceptions in Britain is the highest in western Europe and, sadly, the problem is most acute where deprivation is keenest. If the statistics are worrying, so are features such as regret, violence, abuse, coercion and disrespect, which all too frequently go hand in hand with irresponsible sexual behaviour. For example, studies indicate that a significant proportion of first sex is unwanted, particularly for young women, and that the younger a person is the more likely it is that sex is unwanted. It is abundantly clear that sexual well-being is not just about the absence of disease or the lowering of the incidence of this or that sexually transmitted infection; on the contrary, sexual well-being embraces a raft of social, cultural and ethical issues that must be addressed if we are to attain the level of sexual health, responsibility and well-being in Scotland to which we all aspire. That perspective informed the remit of the group that I appointed to develop a sexual health strategy for Scotland. The remit focused not just  on reducing unintended pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections and enhancing the provision of sexual health services, but on promoting a broad understanding of sexual health and sexual relationships that encompasses emotions, attitudes and social context. The intention was to develop a strategy that would be more comprehensive than that in comparable documents, that would acknowledge the wider social and cultural influences on sexual health, and be rooted in the values of respect for self and others and strong, respectful relationships. Members will by now be familiar with the expert group's proposals. Briefly, the group believes that achieving enhanced sexual health and well-being requires a number of key elements, including a society that views sexuality in an open, positive way and that values and respects diversity; acknowledgement of the importance of economic, social and cultural influences on sexual well-being, the inequalities those cause and the appropriate action to address them; lifelong formal and informal opportunities to learn about sexual health and relationships and the moral issues that they raise; and support from easily accessible, confidential and appropriate clinical services. Five broad actions are identified as key. Those are, first, national leadership through the appointment of a national sexual health programme co-ordinator and a new, ministerially led national sexual health advisory committee to oversee implementation of the strategy; secondly, local leadership, through local sexual health strategies and sexual health networks, and local co-ordination; thirdly, setting clear national and local targets and goals; fourthly, maximising existing mechanisms such as local health plans and the performance assessment framework; and fifthly, monitoring progress to ensure delivery through the new advisory committee at national level and directors of public health at local level. Supporting those key actions are over 100 recommendations, which set out a range of measures that are designed to give focus, structure and coherence to the approach to sexual health. The measures include steps to ensure that tackling the wider determinants that influence sexual well-being is firmly embedded in the development of policy and practice, nationally and locally; that media and mass communications work is used to exert positive influences; that vulnerable groups, especially those in deprived areas, are specifically targeted, including young people under 25 and men who have sex with men; that the important role of schools in providing sexual relationship education in a consistent way is fully developed; that the crucial influence that parents can exert on their children's sexual values and skills is recognised; and finally, in terms of the headlines, that a tiered service approach is taken  to provide a continuum in sexual and reproductive health care provision. It would be quite wrong at this stage, in the middle of the consultation process, to give a final view on all the report's specific recommendations. However, I make it clear that I warmly endorse the general approach and way forward that the group has proposed. I am particularly attracted to the integrated, holistic approach that the group envisages. I believe that structure and co-ordination are crucial to success. Structure will ensure that the key players know precisely what is expected of them, be it schools, the media, the national health service, local authorities or voluntary organisations. Co-ordination is important because joint, integrated working within a strategic framework at national and local levels is crucial if we are to make inroads into the problem. A weakness that I have perceived in our approach has been the lack of a strategic vision and a coherent framework to carry it into practice. The group's proposals go a long way toward tackling that deficit and giving a sharper edge to our drive for better sexual health. Especially welcome, too, is the affirmation of the key values of respect, equality and accessibility to clinical services and lifelong learning. I am clear that respect for self and others and strong, positive, trusting relationships must be at the heart of our approach to enhanced sexual health. It is no accident that relationships feature in the title of this debate and of the expert group's report. The emphasis on a cross-cutting approach and the importance of tackling the wider determinants influencing sexual health is absolutely vital and is in harmony with the thrust of current Executive policies, which place an emphasis on inclusion, equal opportunity, and respect. I am particularly pleased by the recognition of specific gender issues and the emphasis on challenging gender stereotypes. I also welcome the support for the consensus among parents, professionals and faith groups that sexual relationships are best delayed until a person is mature enough to participate in mutually respectful relationships. That is particularly important in relation to potential abuse or coercion, and the high levels of regret recorded in the evidence, particularly by young women. The strategy acknowledges that sex and relationship education is not just about schools, but recognises the key role that schools can play in fostering healthy and respectful attitudes to relationships. The approach that is outlined combines health promotion and service provision information with commitment to encouraging young people to delay sex until they are mature enough to cope emotionally and understand the importance of mutual respect. International  evidence indicates that this is the most effective approach to sex and relationship education. The proposals for an integrated, tiered-service approach and the creation of a managed sexual health network in each NHS board area provide a valuable formula for more consistent, integrated and flexible sexual health services. I would like to pay tribute to service providers, in the NHS and elsewhere in the statutory and voluntary services. Hitherto, this has been a relatively unglamorous element of service provision and the commitment and unremitting work of those in the field, often carried out in difficult circumstances, may have gone largely unsung. I put on record today my appreciation of their huge efforts. I believe that the expert group's proposals offer a practical and thoughtful basis for tackling Scotland's sexual health problems in a meaningful and inclusive way; I look forward to the responses to the proposals. When we launched the consultation process, I said that the Executive's intention was that it should be wide-ranging and inclusive. We have been true to that promise, setting in train a comprehensive and possibly unprecedented array of consultative mechanisms. We have issued about 4,500 copies of the consultation pack, consisting of a covering letter, the full strategy and the summary version. We have commissioned the Scottish Civic Forum to hold a series of meetings across Scotland. By making use of its network of local co-ordinators, it should be able to get feedback from difficult-to-reach groups who might not normally take part in a consultation such as this. We recognise the importance of input from faith groups, and in that regard officials are due to have a meeting later this month with the Scottish Churches Parliamentary Office. It is of crucial importance to obtain the opinions and perceptions of young people themselves. Thus the Scottish Youth Parliament, YouthLink Scotland, Young Scot and the youth project of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, dialogue youth, have been invited to arrange feedback from children and young people of 14 years of age and upwards. Recognising the importance of comments from teachers and parents, we have written to teachers and parents groups and placed an article about the consultation on the Executive's parentzone website. Furthermore, we have set up an internet discussion forum and have made the draft strategy available on the Scottish Executive website. Once the consultation is completed on 27 February, the process of analysing the comments will begin. To assist in this task we have appointed researchers to independently assess and report on the results of the consultation exercise. A suite  of feedback and analysis reports will be published in appropriate formats after the close of the exercise. Thereafter, the strategy will be finalised as quickly as possible. Let me assure members that, in the interim, we are not standing still: a spectrum of measures to promote positive sexual health is in train. They include initiatives by NHS Health Scotland—for example, the think about it campaign—to encourage young people to take a responsible approach to their sexual health. There is also funding to the Caledonia youth project to set up sexual health advice centres in four key locations in Scotland. In addition, more than £8 million has been made available to NHS boards annually to help prevent the spread of HIV and other blood-borne viruses. There is also the inclusion project, which is helping to identify the support that is needed from local NHS services to better meet the needs of people from lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communities. As members know, there is also the national health demonstration project, healthy respect, which is funded by the Executive and led by a partnership of the NHS, local authorities and voluntary and community groups in Lothian. Phase 1 of the healthy respect project will be completed at the end of this month. Although the independent evaluation that we have commissioned will not report until later this year, the project's emerging achievements include the development and distribution of over 5,000 chlamydia postal testing kits through leisure, retail and community settings; the setting up of eight health drop-in centres; and developing and supporting the role of the parents of hard-to-reach young people through training events and booklets on young people's sexual health. Because most of the individual projects were found to be in need of a longer period of demonstration, we have agreed to move to a second phase, where we will identify clear lessons for future policy and practice. All that is in addition to the plethora of initiatives that are provided by NHS boards and partners locally.

First, funding is available for the continuation of healthy respect. Secondly, it is being evaluated. That is important and was always part of the idea of the demonstration project. Thirdly, we have set up a sexual health learning network to help to ensure that the lessons from healthy respect and other current initiatives are taken on board.  As I said on the day that I launched the consultation, I believe that we have an opportunity to make a real difference on a topic that, for too many years, has been relatively neglected for reasons that I am sure we all understand. It may not be possible at the end of the consultation to reach consensus on every dimension of the issue, but I am convinced that there is sufficient common ground among us to develop an inclusive and comprehensive strategy founded on the key pillars of self respect, respect for others and strong relationships. That will enable us to tackle the serious and substantial problem in a meaningful and productive way. The Parliament has a major contribution to make to that process; I look forward to hearing members' views and I assure members that those views will be taken into account in drawing up the final strategy.

The Scottish Executive issued the "National Guidance on Managing Head Lice Infection in Children" in March this year. We were aware of a lack of consistency and clarity in the advice that was provided for parents and carers across Scotland. We wanted to ensure that all children and their families were given accurate and impartial advice and support from professionals on the detection and treatment of head lice.

I agree with Susan Deacon about the need for communication and information about head lice infection. Although people sometimes make light of head lice infection in the wrong kind of way, it is a serious matter. I am pleased that NHS Health Scotland is producing an information leaflet that will come out in January. The leaflet will give facts about head lice, deal with detection and give treatment options. The advice on the issue of alert letters is that, because at least one or two children in each school normally have head lice, alert letters could be going out regularly. We are advised that the sending out of alert letters can sometimes lead to the wrong kind of response, such as the  preventive application of lotions, which is not recommended. The important thing is to have an information leaflet. I accept that perhaps the leaflet could have been produced sooner; I know that Susan Deacon was the minister who started the work to set up the group that produced the guidance. We are making progress now, particularly as the leaflet is being produced.

As I indicated, treatment options are dealt with in the leaflet that is coming out in January. I also indicated that over-use of lotions is neither effective nor desirable, although, obviously, some lotions are acceptable. I agree that wet combing, which is important for detection, can be used as a treatment option. The wet combing method, which is called bug busting, avoids the use of lotions.

As I said at the start of my answer, I accept that we need more and better communication and information. The expert advice is that the correct way to proceed is for parents to be informed about the issue; that is the way to ensure that they take the action that is appropriate. The advice, however, is that alert letters do not complement the key issue of better communication and information. That is because they would have to be sent out on an on-going basis. The advice is that that would not add very much to the fundamental information that people require.

Each board has a general medical services team and a project plan for the implementation of the new contract and is developing detailed plans for those services. The national out-of-hours working group is supporting the service by networking the local plans, sharing good practice, developing new models of service provision and creating national accreditation standards for out-of-hours services.

I know that a great deal of work is being done in Highland to develop an out-of-hours service model to address local issues. I have already referred to the national out-of-hours working group report, which I also mentioned in  this morning's debate. All of that is feeding into what boards are doing and is supporting their work, so a great deal of activity is going on. There is also funding to support that. In this morning's debate I mentioned the Scottish allocation formula, which favours rural areas, and at previous question times I have mentioned improvements to the practitioner inducement scheme. There is a great deal of activity and, if members stay for the next debate, which flows seamlessly from this question, they will hear more from Tom McCabe about what is being done in that area.

I am delighted to open this final debate on the Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill. This important legislation will impact on every person in Scotland and I am pleased to note that the bill's principles have been accepted by Parliament from the start of its passage. In commending the bill to Parliament, I think it only right and proper that I pay tribute to those who have been involved in its progress. First, I thank all of those who have been involved in discussions on the bill, including groups from outside Parliament who took the time to come and give evidence to the committees. The bill will affect everyone who accesses primary care, so I am pleased that Parliament was able to hear the views of doctors—through the British Medical Association and the Royal College of General Practitioners—and of patients, through the Scottish Association of Health Councils and the Scotland Patients Association. I am also grateful to the members of the Health Committee, the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee, all of whom worked hard to scrutinise the bill within what I accept was quite a short time frame. In particular, I thank the members of the Health Committee, whose desire to understand the detail of how the new contract will work has been an example to us all. During the stage 1 debate, the committee convener suggested that I was having nightmares about the regulations. I hope that the draft regulations that we have now shared with the committee are providing Christine Grahame with some light bedtime reading rather than causing her sleepless nights. Finally, I want to thank the clerks of the various committees and—last but not least—our wonderful bill team. This bill represents significant modernisation of the way in which primary medical services will be delivered throughout Scotland and will improve the working lives of doctors and practice staff. Even more important, it will improve things for patients. In many ways, primary medical services are the front line of the national health service. As more  than 90 per cent of patients' experiences with the NHS begin and end with primary care, it is essential that we have a strong, modernised system of delivering primary medical services to the people of Scotland. As we modernise how primary care services are delivered, I want to ensure that they are delivered in modernised up-to-date premises. Patients have already seen, and are using, new and improved premises throughout Scotland, which have benefited from the Executive's modernisation programme. That development has meant better service delivery and more accessible services for patients. Today, I am pleased to announce a further £19 million investment for primary care premises throughout Scotland, which will be used to deliver more services in primary care settings or to bring together primary care and social care services. That investment will build on the £51 million that has already been spent on updating and modernising primary care premises.

I will say more about that in a moment. Indeed, at this point, I will say that I want patients to continue to benefit from the programme. As a result, £4 million of the money that I am announcing today will pump-prime the development of the community health service centres that are described in the partnership agreement. Those centres help to bring together treatment, diagnosis and support services in a single centre. The funding will also help rural areas to develop outreach facilities using information technology and video-link technology. The development of community health service centres and the investment in remote and rural areas will ensure that a wider range of services is available in communities. The second part of my answer to David Davidson's question is that the remaining £15 million will be available over two years, starting in 2004-05, to provide top-up funding to joint working projects that have been agreed between NHS boards and their partner local authorities. There are already a number of good examples of such joint working. For example, at the Dalmellington resource centre in East Ayrshire, patients can access from the same building not only general practitioner, practice nurse, community care and mental health services, but a wide range of local authority services. That type of joint working is very much in the interests of the patient and I am delighted to be able to provide additional resources to allow such an approach to spread across Scotland.  The bill is not about privatising primary care. Indeed, we have already debated that issue at some length at the bill's previous stages. I am pleased that Parliament has accepted the Executive's views and rejected the Scottish Socialist Party's suggestions. I want to reiterate my position one more time—GP practices that provide services under the current arrangements will continue to do so in the new world. Big private companies will not be able to hold a general medical services contract. The provision of out-of-hours care is already changing. People who pick up the phone at night in many parts of Scotland find that their call is not answered by their own GPs. Everyone agrees that a tired GP who has worked all day should not have to work through the whole night. Many GPs have formed co-operatives to share the burden of out-of-hours care. Moreover, we have set up NHS 24, which is a confidential 24-hour nurse consultation telephone service that is available to everyone in Scotland for the cost of a local call. We will build on these changes for the new system and people will still have access to help, advice and treatment whatever the time of the day.

Tom McCabe will deal with that issue in some detail in his closing remarks. However, a report will be published today by the group that has been carrying out work on out-of-hours services. Members might want to read that detailed report, because it describes some of the models that are being developed. The group has been set up to share some of that good practice and to work alongside NHS boards to come up with solutions. I should also say that Mary Scanlon knows about the difficulties of recruiting and retaining GPs in rural areas—the contract will be a great benefit in that respect. As I said, Tom McCabe will make other points on that subject when he closes. The bill is not about removing services. Patients will still be able to go to their local GP practices for the vast majority of their needs. As far as more specialised needs are concerned, people might have to go to a different practice if, for example, their doctor does not provide minor surgery. However, they will still be able to access such services in a primary care setting instead of needing an outpatient's appointment at their local hospital, which is perhaps what happens at present.  Patients will not be left to find their way round the new system on their own. Practices and health boards will have to ensure that patients are helped to access the full range of primary medical services. I am happy to repeat that key commitment today. The bill seeks to empower GP practices to recruit the right mix of people in order to provide high-quality services to patients. Under the new contract, funding will follow the patient. Practices will receive funding for the services that they provide, not for the number of GPs in them. Moreover, they will be able to decide how to use funding to recruit and retain the right mix of staff for those services. That approach recognises the unique contribution that nurses and other health-care professionals can bring to general practice, and will free up GPs' time to allow them to carry out the work that they are trained to do. By offering more opportunities for GPs to work flexibly, the bill seeks to make general practice an attractive career option for the next generation, and to retain GPs who already provide such a high level of commitment to the NHS. It will also make it easier for them to move in and out of salaried and independent contractor status. With that measure and a new portfolio approach to career development, GPs will find it easier to adapt their careers to suit their aspirations. The bill is about safeguarding and developing services in rural areas as well as in our towns and cities. The whole bill and the contract are designed to aid recruitment and retention in all parts of Scotland. However, the contract tries to address specific remote and rural issues. The new Scottish allocation formula—used to allocate the global sum to practices and the enhanced service floor, and board-administered funds to health boards—will directly benefit remote and rural areas. The Scottish allocation formula reflects the additional costs of providing services in remote and rural areas and ensures that practices in those areas receive proportionally more than practices in urban settings. Rural boards will also receive proportionally more to help with the costs of providing enhanced services and with expenditure on, for example, premises and information technologies. I hope that that reassures members that GP practices and patients in rural areas will benefit from the new arrangements. The bill is about ensuring that resources follow the needs of patients. Under current arrangements, money follows the doctor, so the more doctors there are in a practice, the more money there is. If a GP leaves, the income of the practice reduces. That will not happen in the future.  Of course, the bill is part of a much wider modernisation agenda. We are also improving contracts for consultants and for nurses and support staff through the agenda for change. Neither of those contract changes will require primary legislation, as members may be relieved to hear, but they demonstrate our commitment to creating a modernised pay system across the NHS. We need to reward the actual responsibilities that staff take on rather than the job title that they work under. We need to offer the prospect of higher inclusive salaries rather than rely on expensive, outdated and inflexible special allowances. We need to provide flexibility so that jobs can be designed to suit patient needs rather than with rigid demarcation lines on what staff think they are allowed to do. The bill will help to introduce those changes for those staff who provide primary medical services. The bill will also link into other changes that will be brought in by the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill. That bill will allow community health partnerships to evolve from local health care co-operatives. In relation to the general medical services contract, community health partnerships will play a key role in working with NHS boards to identify service needs, particularly those in the enhanced categories. As I said in the stage 1 debate, community health partnerships will then work with local practices and other providers to ensure that those services are delivered most effectively within each community health partnership area. The involvement of community health partnerships will also ensure that we take a broad, multi-professional and multi-agency approach to provision of services. It is in supporting the development of new services in local settings and in supporting the shift from hospital-based care to community-based care that community health partnerships will come into their own. Let us remember: if it can be done in primary care, it should be done in primary care. Services should and must be organised around the needs of patients, not for organisational convenience. Services should and must be organised in a way that ensures that resources are marshalled appropriately for the type of care that is necessary and in the right place, at the right time. Some services that have been traditionally provided in hospitals can be provided in the community; we will look to community health partnerships and the new GMS contract to promote that shift in activity. I will listen with interest to the speeches from Shona Robison and David Davidson on their amendments to the motion. I am sure that Tom McCabe will provide a detailed response once he has heard their speeches, but I would like to make some general comments about why I think they should be rejected.  I understand the sentiment behind David Davidson's amendment, but it is unnecessary. In the stage 1 debate, I said that I was confident that we would be able to share drafts of the GMS regulations with the Health Committee before the end of November. I am pleased to say that my confidence was not misplaced. Copies of the regulations were sent to that committee on 24 November and the following day Tom McCabe appeared before the committee to discuss them. We have further undertaken to provide another draft to the committee before the final version is ready to be laid. I am happy to repeat that undertaking today. Shona Robison is concerned about out-of-hours services in relation to rural practices and single-handed GPs. I should perhaps point out that those are not necessarily one and the same. For example, a large number of GPs in Glasgow are single-handed practitioners; I cannot see that they will have any difficulty in transferring their responsibility for out-of-hours cover should they choose to do so. More fundamentally, any GPs who cannot opt out will receive additional funding. Tom McCabe will have more to say on that detail of that. For the past 60 years, GPs have been at the heart of the NHS, but the NHS is changing and it is only right that general practice changes with it. The bill will help to achieve that. There is much in the bill for GPs, but there is even more for patients and for the whole NHS. That is why we introduced the bill and have supported its passage through Parliament. I am grateful for Parliament's recognition of the key principles of the bill. The Health Committee supported our changes at stage 2 and we have had had some interesting discussions today at stage 3. I now ask Parliament to approve the bill and allow us to begin to implement the benefits that we all agree it contains. Accordingly, I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The amendments in the group cover dispute resolution. They will clarify our intention to use a panel of persons for dispute resolution and they will allow us to make it clear how the regulations that will cover the dispute resolution process for providers of primary medical services will interact with other similar primary legislation powers in the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978. The amendments will also make it clear that the regulations may be applied to existing GMS providers as well as to potential providers. Amendment 4 will simply clarify wording. It will add the word "and" to the end of proposed new section 17E(3D)(a) of the 1978 act. Amendment 5 relates to pre-contract disputes about arrangements under section 17C of the 1978 act and amendment 7 relates to pre-contract disputes for GMS contracts. It has been decided that a panel of three people will be appointed to hear pre-contract disputes about section 17C arrangements and GMS contracts. Amendments 5 and 7 will make it clear that regulations may make provision for that because that is our clear policy intention.  Amendment 5 will insert a reference to a "panel of persons" into the new provision about pre-contract disputes in proposed new section 17E(3D), which contains an illustrative list of what pre-contract dispute regulations that are made under section 17E might cover. The amendment will make it clear that regulations may establish a panel to hear such disputes. That is also our clear policy intention. Amendment 7 will insert a reference to a "panel of persons" into the regulation-making power in proposed new section 17O(1) of the 1978 act, which provides the power to make regulations about GMS pre-contract disputes. The new wording will clarify that those regulations might provide for a panel to be appointed to hear such disputes, as is our policy intention. Amendment 8 will make it clear that regulations may also provide for persons who are already providing primary medical services under a GMS contract to become health service bodies. That is in addition to the availability of that option to persons who are about to enter into a GMS contract. The amendment will make it clear that the regulations that can be made under proposed new section 17O(2) can deal with the election to be a health service body by those who have entered into a GMS contract, as well as by those who will enter into a GMS contract. As for amendments 9 and 10, in its stage 1 report, the Health Committee called for draft GMS regulations to be made available to assist the committee in its scrutiny of the bill. In drafting those regulations, it was noted that some ambiguity might arise because the bill had similar primary powers on dispute resolution for all GMS contracts to the powers in section 17A of the 1978 act, which deals with dispute resolution on NHS contracts. The policy intention is to allow the same panel to decide disputes on NHS GMS contracts when the dispute resolution procedure is compulsory, and to decide disputes on non-NHS GMS contracts when the dispute resolution procedure is elected. Amendments 9 and 10 will allow ministers to prescribe in regulations how section 17A of the 1978 act will operate in relation to GMS providers or potential providers that elect to become health service bodies by making any necessary modifications. Therefore, the provision is for a limited purpose only. It will allow the panel to apply the same dispute resolution procedure to all contracts, under the same primary powers, without concern over ambiguity about the primary powers or the regulations that can be made under them. I move amendment 4.  Amendment 4 agreed to.  [Amendment 5 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.]

The amendments will add to the schedule of modifications. Some of the amendments will update legislation to reflect the new terminology and the new regime that the bill will introduce. The amendments also make several consequential repeals of sections of legislation that are no longer appropriate. Amendment 11 will add to the schedule a consequential amendment to the 1978 act. It will remove an unnecessary "and" from the definitions in section 17D(2), in which the penultimate definition will no longer be the penultimate definition. Amendment 12 will add to the schedule several consequential amendments to the 1978 act. Amendments 13 and 14 add to the schedule amendments to the National Health Service (Primary Care) Act 1997 that will tidy the statute book by removing redundant references. Amendment 13 will add the repeal of section 33 of the 1997 act, which inserted additional sections into and amended the 1978 act in respect of old GMS provision. Those changes will be redundant because the bill will bring old GMS provision to an end. Amendment 14 will add to the schedule the repeal of paragraph 40 of schedule 2 to the 1997 act. Paragraph 40 changed section 22 of the 1978 act, so because the schedule to the bill will repeal section 22, paragraph 40 is no longer needed. The amendment will tidy the statute book. Amendment 15 will insert into the schedule consequential amendments to the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman Act 2002. Subparagraph (2) of the amendment will amend schedule 2 to the 2002 act, which lists the persons who are liable to investigation by the ombudsman. Schedule 2 refers to persons providing old general medical services or personal medical services, so those references will be replaced by their successors under the new regime. Subparagraph (3) of amendment 15 will amend schedule 4 to the 2002 act, which sets out matters that the ombudsman must not investigate, which include actions by a health board under section 19 of the 1978 act. The bill will repeal section 19, so  the 2002 act will be updated to refer to proposed new section 17P of the 1978 act. Amendment 15 will also insert a consequential amendment to schedule 1 to the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002, which lists various public authorities and includes providers of old general medical services and personal medical services. The amendment will replace those references with their successors—those who provide primary medical services under a GMS contract or section 17C arrangements. I move amendment 11.  Amendment 11 agreed to.  [Amendments 12 to 15 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.]

I am grateful for the opportunity to inform the Parliament of the circumstances surrounding a blood transfusion incident involving variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and of the action that is now being taken. The background is that, in March 1996, a blood donor, who was at the time free of the signs of variant CJD, donated blood to the National Blood Service in England and Wales. Shortly after that, the donated blood was transfused into a patient who underwent surgery for a serious illness. Three years later, in 1999, the donor developed variant CJD and died from it. The recipient of the blood died in the autumn of 2003. Initial post-mortem examination of the recipient of the blood showed changes in the brain indicative of CJD. Further examinations and tests confirmed the diagnosis of variant CJD. The link between the donor and the recipient was first reported to officials in the Department of Health in England on 9 December 2003, at which time the diagnosis of variant CJD in the recipient was still being confirmed. I was first alerted to the incident on Friday 12 December. In the light of the statement delivered yesterday in the House of Commons by the Secretary of State for Health, I thought it right that the Scottish Parliament should be similarly informed and made aware of the action that has been taken in Scotland and in the rest of the United Kingdom. In the light of the facts that I have outlined, it is possible that the disease was transmitted from donor to recipient by blood transfusion. I wish to emphasise, however, that that is a possibility and not a proven causal connection. It is also possible that both individuals separately acquired variant CJD by eating BSE-infected meat or meat products. This is a single incident and it is thus impossible to be sure what the route of infection  was. However, I am advised that the possibility of transmission being transfusion related cannot be discounted, albeit that this is the first report from anywhere in the world of the possibility of transmission of variant CJD from person to person via blood. As yet, there is no blood test for variant CJD. There is therefore no way of screening blood donations for the presence of the CJD group of diseases. In recognition of that, since 1997, a range of precautionary measures—based on expert advice—has been put in place. It might be useful if I briefly rehearse them. In 1997 a research study, the transfusion medicine epidemiology review, was funded to examine links between all variant CJD cases and any form of blood transfusion. It is through that study that the association between the two patients was identified. Since 1997, all cases of variant CJD that are reported to the national CJD surveillance unit and which are diagnosed as having "probable" variant CJD result in a search of blood donor records. If the patient has given blood, any stocks of that blood are immediately destroyed. On 17 July 1998, a £70 million programme was introduced to remove most of the white cells from blood that is destined for transfusion. That process of leucodepletion was progressively implemented by the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service and completed by the end of August 1999. On 12 November 1998, a further £30 million programme was announced to phase out the use of UK-sourced plasma in the manufacture of blood products. From the end of September 1999, all blood products in Scotland have been made using plasma that is sourced from the United States of America and Germany. On 17 December 2002, to ensure continuity of supply, the Department of Health purchased the largest remaining independent US plasma collector, Life Resources Incorporated. As indicated yesterday by the Secretary of State for Health, the National Blood Service informed the Department of Health that 15 people in England and Wales had received donations of blood from donors who subsequently developed variant CJD. In Scotland, two similar cases are known to us. Of those individuals, we have been informed that some received blood after leucodepletion had been implemented and others before that happened. The earliest such transfusion was in 1993 and the latest in 2001. All will be told about the circumstances of their case and will be given the opportunity to discuss the risks with an expert counsellor. The Scottish centre for infection and environmental health, supported by the Health Protection Agency, is in the process of contacting the affected patients in Scotland.  Of course, other patients, including haemophiliacs, will have received plasma products before plasma was sourced from the USA and Germany. They will have received products that, because they are derived from the large pools of plasma that are donated from many thousands of people, are heavily diluted. The UK-wide CJD incidents panel considers the risks for this group to be even lower than it is for those who received whole blood. It is very difficult to trace all individual recipients of products that were made from those plasma pools, but the incidents panel will be advising on a case-by-case basis which recipients will need to be contacted as the necessary information becomes available. Those people will also have the opportunity for a discussion with an expert on an individual basis. These are very significant arrangements that are designed to counter the possibility of transmission from blood. The need for continuing vigilance remains, however, and the relevant expert groups have been considering whether further measures are required in relation to variant CJD and blood. In October 2003, our expert advisory committee on the microbiological safety of blood and tissues for transplantation advised, on the basis of a risk assessment, that further action, such as stopping people who have received a blood transfusion giving blood, was not necessary. However, in the light of the present case, the committee was asked to look comprehensively at whether further precautionary measures could be taken that would not adversely impact on the safety or availability of blood. Meanwhile, in Scotland, we have asked the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service to begin to assess the implications of deferring the taking of blood from those who have received transfusions. In conjunction with the other health departments, we are also initiating action to consider whether the use of blood and blood products can be confined to situations in which, medically, that is absolutely needed. Although that has been an on-going activity for some time, it will now be given added impetus. We have been concerned to ensure that people who may be worried about the implications of this incident are given appropriate advice. The NHS helpline has therefore been briefed with relevant information and the chief medical officer has written to health professionals updating them on the present situation. We will take any further appropriate steps to inform and reassure people who remain concerned. Finally, I emphasise that this tragic case must be seen against a background in which, since 1996, some 24 million units of blood or blood components have been given to patients in the United Kingdom. Blood transfusion can be a life- saving treatment but no medical treatment is free of all risks. A wide range of measures is routinely used to reduce the risk of transfusion by screening for HIV/AIDS, hepatitis B and C and other infections. Indeed, we are generally regarded internationally as having a very safe blood service, especially because of our precautionary approach. That said, we will continue to strive for yet further improvement.

I thank Shona Robison for those important questions—they go to the heart of the matter. The simple answer to Shona Robison's questions on the advisory committee on the microbiological safety of blood and tissues for transplantation is that it will act soon and quickly. The committee has been asked to come up quickly with its view on this important matter. All members will accept and agree that the correct approach is to ask the United Kingdom experts to examine the matter and it is important that the committee comes up with a view very quickly, in the light of the new knowledge. I discussed that point yesterday with Melanie Johnson, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Public Health in England, and we agree that that must and will happen quickly. On potentially excluding people who have received blood transfusions from donating blood,  we have—as I indicated in my statement—asked the SNBTS to begin to assess the implications of that. Again, that will be done promptly and urgently. On reassuring the public, we must be honest about the fact that, owing to the lack of tests for variant CJD, we cannot be at all confident about the extent of the problem. In relation to blood, the figure that I quoted at the end of my speech puts the matter in context. Twenty four million units of blood or blood components have been given to patients since 1996, and out of those 24 million units this is the only such incident—I remind members that a causal connection is only a possibility. We should explain the context to the public, while following the precautionary principle. That is why we have asked for urgent pieces of work to be done by the SNBTS and the advisory committee on the microbiological safety of blood and tissues for transplantation.

I thank David Davidson for his questions. As I indicated, the SNBTS has begun its work on assessing the implications. I am sure that part of that assessment will relate to the second point that David Davidson raised. If the assessment shows that it may be difficult to secure enough blood from this country, the SNBTS would have to consider the implications of that, as would the Executive. We must let the SNBTS do that work, and David Davidson's point must be considered within that broader context.  That leads back to David Davidson's first point, which is that it becomes even more important that blood is donated in this country. We all support that and we welcome the publicity that has been given, particularly at this time of the year, to blood donation. I am sure that we would like to thank all the people who generously give blood. On David Davidson's other point about identifying those who have had a transfusion, I am confident that the SNBTS will do that in its current work.

The fact that there has been a gap of a few hours between the two statements is not a major issue. It was more important that we should do all the necessary preparation in Scotland. Obviously, we plan to do that. The fact of the matter is that the statement was made in the House of Commons slightly more quickly than we anticipated. I do not think that that is a major issue.

I thank Ken Macintosh for drawing the information about Strathclyde to the attention of the Parliament and also for speaking  about the Human BSE Foundation. I shall look closely at the correspondence that he mentions, now that he has drawn it to my attention. I certainly applaud all the work that the Human BSE Foundation does on this important matter.

Although Tommy Sheridan expresses the concern that this case might undermine blood donation, we all hope that it might have the opposite effect. Issues have been raised about people who have had transfusions, but it is clear that the vast majority of people have not, so there is no question mark over their donation of blood. As I have indicated, I praise the campaigns that have been conducted by the SNBTS and I support and encourage further publicity on this important issue.

The first point that I made on that matter related mainly to blood transfusions given during operations, and I understand that that is an area in which Scotland has been making more active progress than other parts of the United Kingdom have. The principle that is now followed is that blood transfusions are, of course, given where necessary, but perhaps not quite so readily as in the past, because the medical view in Scotland now is that they used to be given more often than was necessary. Further action will be taken to ensure that blood transfusions are given only when they are necessary, not when other procedures and processes that modern surgeons can carry out can be used. That was my main point on that matter. I do not know whether I took in the whole of Stewart Stevenson's second point on blood  products. I referred in my statement to blood products in the pre-1999 situation, but I will look into any other issues on the sourcing of blood products and try to give him a fuller reply in writing.

I will be in that category soon as well, but it is not for me to give a view on that matter: it is for the clinicians to decide on it. However, I will communicate Phil Gallie's point to the chief medical officer. The best way in which I can reply to Phil Gallie will be to send him a letter with the medical view of his suggestion.

I am sure that we all join Carolyn Leckie in extending our sympathies to the two individuals who are involved and, indeed, to all the other individuals and families who are affected by vCJD. On her next point—if I understand it correctly—there is a CJD incidence panel, which has met for some time and comprises not only clinicians but ethicists and others. It has been considering what to do about informing people about such situations, particularly as there is no cure for the illness. Therefore, the difficult question of when we inform people has been considered. Research into a screening tool continues. The fact of the matter is that no such screening is available at present. It is being investigated, but I am afraid that I have no good news to report on the matter at present.

Consent is central, perhaps far more than it was in the past, but I will have to write to Christine Grahame about the precise information that is given.

That, too, is a central question, and the SNBTS has already started to work on it. The SNBTS is considering the implications of such a change, which will include the time scale in which it could be implemented. The conclusions of the deliberations of the advisory committee on the microbiological safety of blood and tissues for transplantation and of the SNBTS's work will be communicated to the Parliament at the earliest possible opportunity.

One of the key themes of both "A Framework for maternity services in Scotland" and the subsequent report of the expert group on acute maternity services—EGAMS—is that maternity services should be community based as far as possible and targeted to address specific needs, including those of women from the most deprived sections of society. Implementation by national health service boards will be monitored through a performance assessment framework for maternity services that is currently being developed.

The matter is a subject of great debate throughout Scotland, and the principle that I mentioned in my original answer remains true: as some of the services become more specialist and concentrated in specialist centres, other services will be delivered more routinely in the community. Therefore, there is a two-way movement, which is true of many service reorganisations. At the end of the day, the key issues for women are, I am sure, clinical safety and the quality of care, and all the evidence, especially on specialist treatments for maternity services, is that those will be delivered more safely and more effectively in specialist centres where there are consultants who deal with a reasonably large number of women each year. I know that the debate is controversial and difficult, but people will understand that, as long as as much care as possible is delivered in local communities—and community-led midwife units are being created in some local communities—the specialist services are sometimes better delivered in larger concentrations.

There are clearly major issues about neo-natal transport around the review, although there is a pan-Scotland neo-natal intensive-care transport service. I believe that Sandra White is referring to two leaflets, and it appears that she cited one rather than the other. All the details of the evidence are of great interest to me, and I want to be fully aware of both pieces of evidence—I am sure that people in Glasgow will equally want to be aware of them. However, as Sandra White is referring to two leaflets and the argument is complex, it is not for me to give an immediate, specific ruling on that question. I am sure—

I am sure that Sandra White will raise the issue with Greater Glasgow NHS Board in the appropriate way.

I thank the Conservatives for giving us the opportunity to expose their unfair, uncosted and unworkable policies on health, education and crime, although it turns out that they had little to say about the latter, except on there being a directly elected element to police boards. At that point, I agreed for once with Shona Robison when she said that they were acting under orders from Michael Howard because all  members of police boards in Scotland, unlike in England, are already elected as councillors. The Conservatives had a little more to say about education, but it was still "simplistic tosh" as Judith Gillespie said the other day. It was not thought through and David McLetchie had no answer when Rhona Brankin asked him about people not having the right to send their child to their local school. We believe in increasing choice in schools, we believe in appropriate choice between schools and, most of all, we believe in raising standards in all schools. James Douglas-Hamilton asked what we had achieved since 1999. We have free school places for all our three and four-year-olds; we have classroom assistants in all our schools; we have smaller class sizes; we have more young people sitting exams and getting qualifications; we have more young people getting better grades; we have more young people going to university; and we have year-on-year improvements in literacy and numeracy standards from the disastrous legacy of the most recent Conservative Government. As always, there was complete distortion today of what we are saying and doing: for example, in relation to the independent health sector, which we are prepared to use on an equitable basis; in relation to centralisation, which I will describe in a moment; and most of all according to the terms of today's motion, in relation to what we are saying and dong about choice. Let us be clear about the dividing lines: we believe in choice for all, but the Conservatives believe in choice for those who can afford to pay. The people whom they will support in the independent sector would still have to pay thousands of pounds out of their pockets. Choice is illustrated for us in the action that we took in setting up the national waiting times database so that patients can choose, if they wish, to go to a different hospital in Scotland where there is a shorter waiting time. However, there is a second dividing line because patients want choice, but they want more than that. That is why they want to influence directly the nature of the care and services that they receive. That is why we place such emphasis on learning from the experience of patients and on involving them in redesigning specific services. I was pleased to speak to patients and clinicians at the launch of the managed clinical network for stroke and coronary heart disease in Glasgow. Clinicians and patients there are making decisions at the front line. That is also an example of better links across traditional boundaries. That work will be carried forward next year as we set up community health partnerships to bring a new focus to local decision-making and delivery.  It is a great pity that David McLetchie was not at the launch of the managed clinical network for stroke and coronary heart disease in Glasgow. Once again, he was running down everything that the health service does. I tell him that the chair of the national advisory committee on stroke said recently that Scotland is currently doing more for stroke services than any other country in the world except Norway, through the stroke strategy, the extra investment in the stroke strategy, the stroke managed clinical networks, the stroke standards that are being developed by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland and because of the national stroke audit.

Once again, the Conservatives show a complete lack of knowledge about what is happening. I mentioned the waiting times database—that information is available in GP surgeries. GPs and patients can access that information together today and that gives them choice. The Conservative motion calls for the setting up of foundation hospitals. I say to the Conservatives that we have our own reform agenda in Scotland and that we do not take lectures from London, as they do from their party leader. We support a single health system that breaks down traditional barriers rather than a centralised one. We support patient journeys that are integrated across traditional boundaries and we support decision-making at the front line, as is happening in managed clinical networks and which will happen in community health partnerships. The key to change is to give health care teams support to solve old problems in new ways. We support, value and empower staff—a point on which I agree with Carolyn Leckie. That is precisely what the centre for change and innovation has been doing for the past year. It has undertaken 10 major programmes of work with front-line staff to secure practical changes and to improve waiting times and care of patients with specific illnesses. The SNP asked about recruitment and retention of staff. In the latest year, there have been 572 doctors and 956 extra nurses employed, which is almost unprecedented in the past decade or two in the health service. The SNP talked about a national strategy—Sandra White talked particularly about maternity services. We have a national maternity strategy, which we outlined in a white  paper. There will be another detailed piece of work on the back of that. The SNP asked for a debate. In The Herald on Monday, I said that I supported a public debate on the important issues of service reorganisation; it must be a serious debate that has at its heart clinical safety and quality of care, as well as local access wherever that is consistent with those principles.

I have only one minute left. On reorganisation and the health service more generally, we heard the typical unbalanced approach from the SNP. Christine Grahame was even laughing at herself by the end of her speech as she talked about dirty hospitals, but she did not talk about the new national standards on clean hospitals or about many other things that are driving up standards of care. Shona Robison once again ran down the new Edinburgh royal infirmary. I do not have time to read out the letter about that in The Scotsman today, but I hope that she has time to do so later. Both the SNP and the SSP showed their usual ideological opposition to PPP. That opposition would slow down modernisation of our health infrastructure and that is not what patients want. It is not all PPP—total capital investment in health by the traditional route will be £400 million by 2005-06, which is more than double that in 1997-98 and includes £87 million for the new Beatson oncology centre. Across the board, we support a focus on patients, pupils and victims first. We support equal access rather than access based on ability to pay. We support national standards and inspections as a framework that underpins the devolution of decision-making to front-line staff, and we support sharing of best practice and action to tackle poor performance. We do not support the abolition of comprehensive health and education systems, as advocated by David McLetchie, and we do not advocate patient passports to penalise the poor. The clearest choices relate to health. We advocate a modern NHS, whereas the Tories advocate the end of the NHS. We advocate equal access, whereas the Tories advocate access that is dependent on ability to pay. We advocate choice for all, whereas the Tories advocate choice for those who can afford to pay for it. I know what the people of Scotland support and what they will continue to support.

David McLetchie mentioned waiting times. Does he acknowledge that a maximum waiting time for in-patient treatment of nine months is a lot better than the maximum waiting time of 15 months that was achieved in the latter stages of the last Conservative Government?

Emergency calls to the Scottish Ambulance Service will be categorised in the same way, whether or not a sporting event is being held in a locality. The service uses an electronic call-categorisation system to assist staff in prioritising the response to emergency calls.

There is clear guidance on safety at sports grounds, which is why ambulances are required to be in attendance at major sporting events. I am sure that we all understand the reason for that. In those circumstances, the Scottish Ambulance Service must ensure that the requisite number of emergency vehicles are available for all the other calls that may be necessary. I know that there was a tragic incident in Glasgow recently, which I was very sorry to read about, and I extend my condolences to the family involved. I know that the Scottish Ambulance Service is urgently reviewing the circumstances of the case, but I do not think that the fact that there were two ambulances at Ibrox is a relevant factor.

Ambulance transport will be provided wherever there is a clinical need. In other cases, financial support for travel costs is available for those who need it.

The reality is that the moves that have been made out of the Vale of Leven hospital were made for reasons of clinical safety, which has to be the paramount consideration. Equally, services will be and are delivered locally wherever that is possible. I know that, for example, a lot of the cancer services that the question refers to are delivered at the Vale of Leven hospital. As I said, when patients have to travel, they will get an ambulance if that is clinically required. That is a matter for the clinicians to decide. When patients use public transport, the same system will apply throughout Scotland—although there is an extra provision in the Highlands—and people on low incomes will not pay. People who are over 60 and have to use public transport will benefit from the national scheme that we all know about.

Over the next year, NHS Argyll and Clyde will undertake a major piece of work in its clinical services review. It has already made some decisions on maternity provision, which I have commented on, and it is looking at all the other services. The question mentions cancer patients and many of the patient flows from Jackie Baillie's constituency into Glasgow are to the Beatson oncology clinic. The same travel arrangements will apply as I described earlier.

I look to NHS boards to assess local needs for dermatology services and to provide appropriate services to meet those needs. However, the Health Department's centre for change and innovation is working closely with boards, clinicians and patient representatives on the Scottish Council for Dermatology to support service redesign and improvement.

I am aware of the issue in Aberdeen. I should point out that there has been an increase in dermatology consultants and, even more significantly, an increase in specialist registrars who will become tomorrow's consultants. The national waiting times unit has made a specific allocation of £100,000 to dermatology in Grampian. The most important aspect is the work that is taking place on the redesign of dermatology services, which is being spearheaded by the centre for change and innovation. The redesign of  dermatology out-patient services is the most radical programme for redesigning out-patient services that has ever been seen in Scotland. Indeed, dermatology is one of the first services to be redesigned. A group of clinicians is leading that work, about which I will attend a national event in February. I expect to see big improvements in the quality of care and in waiting times.

Highland NHS Board and  Argyll and Clyde NHS Board are co-operating on a review of health services in the west Highlands. When they have proposals for me to consider, I shall be happy to do so. In the meantime, it is a matter for the boards.

As I said last week in the debate on maternity services in Glasgow, I have to wait for proposals to come in before I give a view on them. I understand the strong concerns in Oban, Fort William and the surrounding areas. However, at the same time, the vast majority of people accept that things cannot stay the same. I have spoken to the chairs of both NHS boards this week and they have assured me that they will take time to work with the communities on finding solutions. As is the case with changes in many parts of Scotland, we must have clinically safe services of the highest possible quality, but they must be locally accessible wherever possible. We must follow those two principles in dealing with the issue.

As I said, this week I have spoken to the chairs of both boards, who are conscious of local decisions. They have assured me that no decisions will be made in the immediate future and that they will take time to work with communities on the issues. For example, the chair of Highland NHS Board assured me that an option that was proposed at the meeting in Fort William a couple of weeks ago will be evaluated fully.

As I said in my original answer, the purpose of the changes is, of course, to improve the quality and, crucially, the safety of care. The west Highland project did not come from either of the NHS boards involved, but from the remote and rural areas resource initiative, which commissioned work on the issue, based on the widespread recognition that the status quo was not an option. Some work has been done, but the boards accept that much more needs to be done.

The west Highland project, which was the main issue in the original question, is a good example of health boards working across boundaries. In last week's debate on maternity services in Glasgow, I talked about the regional dimension of maternity services. The thrust and direction of health policy is towards more regional planning. The National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill, which the Health Committee is considering, will place a duty on boards to co-operate. That is a new feature of health policy.

I thank Sandra White for securing this important debate. I will respond to some of the points that have been raised, but it would be inappropriate for me to discuss the detail of the proposal, which is currently the subject of public consultation. At the end of the consultation period, the NHS board will submit its final proposals to me and I will have to come to a view then. It would, therefore, be wrong—and procedurally impossible—for me to express a clear view today. I can, however, explain what I will consider when the proposals are put to me next year. I will need to consider two issues: the adequacy of the public consultation and the substantive proposal—in particular, the consistency of the proposed reorganisation of maternity services in Glasgow with national policy. In consulting on the proposals, the NHS board is required to follow the draft guidance that was issued in May 2002. That guidance will be reissued in its final form soon. The principles underpinning consultation are that end-process consultation is not acceptable; that boards should develop proposals for change in partnership with all the affected groups and communities; and that boards should formally consult on the outcome of that development process. To underline further the importance of consultation and public involvement, the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill will place a duty directly on boards to secure public involvement in planning and development and decisions affecting the operation of health services. I am sure that the points that Paul Martin raised will be discussed in the context of that bill. I assure Parliament that I will pay close attention to the substantive arguments that are being made and to the nature of the consultation. I will consider all the information that is available and all representations that have been made to me before I come to a view. I have already started to look at the issues in detail and I will continue to examine them over the coming months. Like Sandra White and other members, I visited Yorkhill in the summer and I have spoken to many clinicians and members of the public about the proposals. However, as I said at question time recently, I have been struck by the way in which, more than in most reorganisations, senior clinicians are totally divided on the issue and are expressing contrary views. That is a particular challenge to us all in addressing the matter. I will refer to two specific points before moving on to talk about maternity services more generally. First, Carolyn Leckie raised a point about ECMO. That is funded by the national services division and, therefore, will continue to be provided in Glasgow. It is something for which we are responsible.

That is certainly one of the many points that I can look at. I wanted to establish the principle that we, not Greater Glasgow NHS Board, control that service. Several members—including Murray Tosh, Robert Brown, Jackie Baillie and Tommy Sheridan—raised the issue of planning services in a regional context. As members know, and as Jackie Baillie reminded us, I asked NHS Argyll and Clyde and Glasgow to undertake further work in that area and for that work to be taken forward alongside the review that is currently being undertaken by Glasgow. I have asked for a report of that work to be submitted to me by April 2004 and can assure Tommy Sheridan that Glasgow will take no decisions until that work has been completed. I need to put the issue in the more general context of maternity services in Scotland. The fact that the birth rate in Scotland is falling is not irrelevant, although I know that people can draw different conclusions from it. We should remind ourselves that, in the decade between 1991 and 2001, there was a 22 per cent fall in the birth rate. Another important general point was made by Johann Lamont when she emphasised the importance of flexible local antenatal and postnatal care. Whatever the outcome in Glasgow, the reality is that more maternity care will be delivered in local communities. That partly answers Paul Martin's question about how services will improve. Murray Tosh said that there had been no national debate and that there was no national strategy. I have to remind him and others that, in 2001, the Scottish Executive published a framework for maternity services in Scotland and that, in 2002, I set up the expert group on acute maternity services—EGAMS—which was a short-life working group of professionals and other stakeholders that considered how the principles of the maternity services framework should be applied to care during childbirth.

I fully accept that we can do a better job of communicating some of the  general issues around maternity services and I assure Mr Tosh that we shall do so. Indeed, that is what I am attempting to do in the closing minutes of my speech. The EGAMS report addresses some of the issues about consultant-led units, which are at the centre of the debate for many people. The EGAMS report concluded that the current configuration of acute maternity services needs to change. Women at risk of complications in pregnancy should have consultant-led care. The falling birth rate means that some units will not care for sufficient numbers of women and babies to ensure that professional skills and experience can be maintained to an adequate level to provide the highest quality of care. In short, the specialists working in smaller maternity units simply do not get the experience that they need to maintain their skills and to provide safe, specialist care. A rationalisation of consultant-led units will ensure that women who require it will benefit from hands-on care from specialist staff. It will also ensure that staff in training are well supervised and supported. The report also concluded that we need to realise the full potential of midwives to ensure continuity of care and the provision of childbirth services at as local a level as possible. The midwife's role should be maximised to lead management of pregnancy and childbirth for low-risk women; steps in that direction should include establishing midwife-led units. I was pleased to hear Jackie Baillie welcome the creation of a midwife-led unit at the Vale of Leven hospital.

That point goes to the heart of the debate, but the fact is that obstetricians in general believe that maternity services should be co-located with adult services. There is a splendid service at Yorkhill, but that model, involving only maternity and child services, is not used in any other hospital in the United Kingdom. Of course, that does not take away from the fact that Yorkhill provides an excellent service. Following the EGAMS report, the Executive provided £150,000 to put in place three regional maternity services co-ordinators to ensure that local planning and commissioning of services take place within a regional context. That is part of our and the EGAMS report's general emphasis on regional planning.  We have provided more than £1 million for training and education in order to upskill midwives and, through a national work force planning group, we have established a process for work force planning for maternity services. I assume that my time is more or less up, so I will conclude. Implementation of the EGAMS report will ensure that local, regional and national networks provide vehicles for the provision of high-quality maternity care throughout Scotland as part of a framework of tiered care, with clear and explicit communication and referral pathways.  As far as Glasgow is concerned, I can assure members that I will pay close attention to all the arguments that have been made today, as well as to the points that have been raised by many other people, including members of the public and clinicians, with all their diverse views on the issue. I will consider the substantive proposals that have been made and the adequacy of the consultation. There will be no rubber-stamping. The important next step is for the consultation to proceed.  Meeting closed at 18:16.

We are funding the development of a managed care network in Forth Valley for people with multiple sclerosis. That work includes developing standards for services in primary care and in hospital that are endorsed by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. We wish to see those MS networks developed throughout Scotland. The Executive is also pleased to support the risk-sharing scheme, which makes disease-modifying drugs available to patients who are assessed as suitable for treatment. I am glad to report significant progress with that initiative.

There has been some misunderstanding of the NICE guidelines. They are guidelines and are not mandatory in England. They can be used by the managed clinical networks that we want to see develop in Scotland, and I hope that they will. In reality, we need a vehicle for delivering standards. We believe that managed clinical networks—or, even better, managed care networks, as in Forth Valley—are the way in which to do that and I will be very active in promoting them. They must have a quality assurance framework that is endorsed by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. That is the way in which to proceed towards national standards. Tricia Marwick referred to a report that was published in 2000. She should also have mentioned the progress that has been made since then, which the Multiple Sclerosis Society has acknowledged. For example, nine extra specialist MS nurses have been appointed in Scotland since the 2000 report was published, including the clinical lead in Forth Valley. I am very pleased that that post is held by a nurse specialist.

I accept fully that there is much more to do. Equally, we must acknowledge the progress that has been made. I undertake to raise the issue with those boards that do not yet have a specialist MS nurse. However, we must acknowledge the progress that has been made—and not just in the appointment of nurse specialists. Since 1997, the number of neurologists has increased by 40 per cent. The MS Society has acknowledged that as an important reason why services have improved, although there is a long way to go.

To help NHS boards reprovide the service, the out-of-hours development fund will be increased from £6.3 million in 2003-04 to £10 million in 2005-06. In addition, GP practices that opt to transfer their out-of-hours responsibility to the board will have their global sum allocation reduced by 6 per cent, which will release further funds to assist boards with the costs of service reprovision.

We should not exaggerate the number of GPs who will opt out. The report of the out-of-hours development group, which was published this week, states that the indications are that between two thirds and three quarters of GPs will still want to work out of hours—they may not want to have responsibility for an out-of-hours service, but they will want to work out of hours. A survey in Glasgow indicated that the same proportion of GPs will want to work out of hours in Glasgow as currently work for out-of-hours co-operatives in Glasgow. We should not exaggerate the extent to which doctors will withdraw from the service. Redesigned services can be developed. That is another major feature of the report of the out-of-hours development group that was produced this week. I have given examples of such services before at question time, such as that provided by the paramedics whom I met in Moray in the summer. That is one of many examples of services being provided differently. However, GPs will still be a key part of the system.

Before I answer that question, I reassure patients that under the patient services guarantee, all out-of-hours work will be carried out by accredited providers. That is another part of the agenda of developing standards. On GPs, I have said that, in exceptional circumstances, it may not be possible to transfer the service, but that in the vast majority of cases, it will be possible to do so. A lot of work is being done. It would be useful for interested members to read the report that was brought out this week, which mentions the different models of care that are being developed. The role of the out-of-hours development group is to co-ordinate that work and to promote and encourage new models of care. There is a mixture  of redesign and use of traditional personnel, who are GPs. The developments are not out of line with the other redesigned services that are being developed throughout Scotland.

That is a high priority on which we are making significant progress. Since 1999, £52 million has been invested from the central primary care premises modernisation fund. That has supported over 100 community-based health and community care premises projects. Patients are benefiting throughout the country, with excellent examples of modern facilities delivering joined-up services. There will also be a 70 per cent increase in recurring annual expenditure to fund new purpose-built leasehold premises between 2002-03 and 2005-06.

I am certainly pleased that £200,000 has been allocated to the project from the modernisation fund but, like Susan Deacon, I am concerned that it has been taking so long. There are two reasons for that. First, there has been a protracted period of negotiation on valuation issues. Secondly, Lothian NHS Board must get its business case in as quickly as possible—I understand that it is to be submitted in December. When it does come in, I undertake to have the Health Department deal with it very quickly. Susan Deacon's final point was about involvement with the Health Department. The department has been working with Lothian NHS Board to help it to develop that business case. I hope that the whole issue will be progressed and concluded quickly.

This has been an excellent debate. The central message, as was the message of the audit and review, is that protecting children is everyone's business. The most vulnerable children have a right, like all other children, to be safe and secure. If our society is to protect children and prevent child abuse, we must work together across agencies and professional boundaries. We have set up a reform programme, as described by Peter Peacock and others. A key part of that will be a multi-agency inspection process with measurable standards, which was welcomed by Mike Rumbles and others. Recently, Peter Peacock, Cathy Jamieson and I have written to chief executives of local authorities, leaders of NHS boards and chief constables requiring statements of assurance that they have reviewed how their services act individually and jointly to protect children, that they are either satisfied or have identified areas for action and that they have robust quality assurance mechanisms in place. Health has a vital role to play in this area and I will deal with that as well as responding to points that have been made. Fiona Hyslop and Robin Harper talked about the helpline proposal from Children 1 st . We already support helplines—ChildLine and ParentLine in particular—and have made additional resources available to them. However, we are considering the Children 1 st proposal and will respond in due course. While welcoming the reform programme, Mary Scanlon asked how it would be monitored and reviewed. Key to that will be the inspection of services and we will announce proposals for that in the new year, based on the national standards that will focus on outcomes for children.  Margaret Mitchell asked about new offences and sentences in England with respect to internet-related activity. I am advised that we already have stringent legal recourse in Scotland in many of those areas but I will ask officials to examine the comparisons that were made and to write to Mrs Mitchell. Health has a vital role to play and the Caleb Ness inquiry report highlighted several areas for improvement. Those areas are consistent with the findings of the national audit and review of child protection and other inquiries into child deaths. In particular, action is required to address accountability and leadership, communication and information sharing and staff training. We will continue to value and support staff, as Mary Scanlon said we should, but we will do so within a proper culture of accountability. The Caleb Ness inquiry found a lack of clear responsibility for child protection at various levels within the NHS. We will require chief executives of NHS boards to ensure that there are unambiguous lines of accountability and responsibility for child protection in their organisations. As part of that process, we will ask chief executives to contribute to the current review of the role and remit of child protection committees and to consider how best to include senior health representation in relation to multi-agency work so that regular reports can be made to NHS boards. Communication is critical, both inside individual agencies and across professional and organisational boundaries, as Scott Barrie emphasised. Effective information sharing among the relevant professionals is crucial to protecting children. Although confidentiality is important, agencies must not hide behind it, as the focus must always be on the welfare of the child. Guidance to health professionals in relation to protecting children is unequivocal. For example, the General Medical Council has already advised doctors that information must be disclosed to an appropriate agency or person where the health professional believes a patient to be a victim of neglect, or physical or sexual abuse. Because we know that that remains an area of concern for many staff, the Scottish Executive is about to issue a short good-practice guide on sharing information about children at risk. It is designed to help staff approach this complex area with greater clarity and confidence. Sharing information can also be assisted by appropriate information technology systems. The children's services stream of the e-care programme, part of our modernising government programme, is running pilot projects that include the development of an integrated children's services record and the identification of core data  for a shared assessment framework. The protection of children at risk is a key driver.

We are already examining the inspectorate's powers. There is a requirement on those agencies to take action in relation to those assurances. If they have not taken action, we will ensure that they do. On the second point, some initiatives ought to have been in place already and, while much progress has been made, far more needs to be done. I will say more about what we are going to do in that regard to ensure that that happens. Training is a key area. The Caleb Ness inquiry reinforced the importance of effective training in child protection for staff at all levels in organisations, including those that are not directly involved in caring for children. We will take up those issues with chief executives and chairs of NHS boards to ensure that all NHS staff participate effectively in child protection training so that they have a clear understanding of when and how to share information and what to do with it and are clear about their individual and corporate responsibilities for protecting children. Janis Hughes praised the work of NHS Greater Glasgow. I join her in that and point out that we have recently provided pump-priming funding for a managed clinical network for child protection in the west of Scotland. That arrangement will improve access to specialist health child protection services for children at risk and will support staff training and the development of standards and quality assurance processes In the next few weeks, we will be issuing guidance on child health surveillance, which is the programme of checks that tends to be undertaken by health visitors. The guidance will recommend that child health surveillance activity should be refocused to ensure that health visitors provide more intensive support to those families most in need. At the next meeting of NHS board chairs later this month, child protection will be the major theme. I will be requiring NHS chairs to ensure that the boards give proper consideration to their responsibilities for child protection work and take account of the findings of recent inquiries. It will  also be the main agenda item at the next meeting of NHS board chief executives next week. Fiona Hyslop and Rosemary Byrne raised concerns about parents with drug-use problems. That is a growing social phenomenon that we should all be concerned about. Obviously, some action has been taken in relation to support services being strengthened. The new surveillance that I referred to will be relevant in that regard. We are actively reviewing the findings of the recently published report "Hidden Harm", which deals with the needs of children whose parents abuse drugs, to see what further action needs to be taken, including by the child protection reform team. That is an important piece of work. Robin Harper said that there was no standard in respect of seeing children on supervision. I assure him that we will issue guidance on that in the near future and that we have already given a commitment to that effect. Campbell Martin said that social workers are walking away from their jobs. I could say a lot about recruitment, but not in the time I have left. The fact is that there are more social workers now than at any time, notwithstanding the difficulties of the profession. We know that the job can be stressful and, today, we are launching an initiative to support frontline staff. The national audit and review of child protection showed that we must take action. We have shown the progress that we have already made in the reform programme and I have also outlined the important steps being taken within the NHS to ensure that the findings of the recent report into the tragic death of Caleb Ness are taken on board and acted on. We look forward to receiving the support of members in delivering a tough programme of reform that will truly improve children's lives.

Today, I announce to Parliament the launch of a wide-ranging consultation on proposals for a national sexual health strategy that have been prepared by an expert reference group. I do not want to take time out of my statement to deal with the points of order that have been raised; however, I want to make it clear that this is not our report—it is the expert group's report. That is the full answer to Bruce Crawford's point of order. The consultation is a crucial step in the Executive's commitment, as set out in the partnership agreement, to develop and implement a national sexual health strategy. First, let me set the context. However we look at it, sexual behaviour and attitudes are changing. Behind the trends and opinions, the statistics tell us that sexual health and well-being in Scotland are poor. For example, diagnoses of chlamydia rose by 41 per cent between 2000 and 2001, followed in 2002 by a 12 per cent increase, from more than 10,000 to more than 11,000 cases. Moreover, the rate of teenage conception in Britain is the highest in western Europe, and in Scotland slightly more than half of the pregnancies in under-16-year-olds and two fifths of those in the 16 to 19-year-old age group are terminated. Sadly, rates of teenage pregnancy are higher in areas of deprivation than elsewhere. During the 1990s, the differences in rates of teenage pregnancy between more affluent and more deprived areas widened. If statistics are worrying, so are features such as regret, violence, abuse, coercion and disrespect that all too frequently go hand in hand with irresponsible sexual behaviour. For example, studies indicate that a significant proportion of first  sex is unwanted, particularly for young women, and that the younger a person is, the more likely it is that the sex is unwanted. One thing is abundantly clear: sexual well-being is not just about the absence of disease or lowering the incidence of this or that sexually transmitted infection. On the contrary, sexual well-being embraces a raft of social, cultural and ethical issues that must be addressed if we are to attain the level of sexual health, responsibility and well-being in Scotland to which we all aspire. That is no easy task. It is crucial that, in developing a strategy, we have regard to and respect for the many genuinely held views on this sensitive and emotive topic. That is why, in August last year, I set up the expert reference group, which had a broad membership from the field of sexual health services and education as well as representatives from voluntary organisations and religious groups. The group had a wide remit, which included the promotion of a broad understanding of sexual health and sexual relationships that encompasses emotions, attitudes and social context, while retaining a particular focus on measures to reduce unintended pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections, and the enhancement of sexual health services. Such an approach not only reflects the wide social and cultural influences on sexual health, but highlights the Executive's aim for a strategy that is rooted in strong relationships based on self-respect and on respect for others. The outcome of the group's work is the proposals that are contained in "Enhancing Sexual Wellbeing in Scotland: A Sexual Health and Relationships Strategy", which was made public earlier today. I take this opportunity to express my gratitude to all the members of the expert group, under the chairmanship of Professor Phil Hanlon, and to NHS Health Scotland, which provided support for the group's work. The reference group's proposals are being published precisely in the terms in which they were submitted to the Executive. The proposals have been built on a survey of existing sexual health services in Scotland and on an analysis of the attitudes and lifestyles found in a sample survey of Scots. The survey draws on existing research findings, both at home and abroad, and the experience of people who work in the field of sexual health. Although we are publishing the reference group's proposals in full, it does not mean that they will all form part of the final strategy agreed by the Executive. I launch the consultation today in order to inform the Executive's final decisions. The draft strategy provides a succinct and telling commentary on the state of sexual health in Scotland, to which I have already referred. It  highlights that health inequalities, which the Executive is resolved to tackle, carry over to many aspects of sexual health, and it identifies a strong link between social disadvantage and early initiation into sexual activity. It is apparent that improvements in sexual health and well-being are inextricably connected to broader efforts to tackle health inequalities. Of paramount importance, too, is the nurturing of self-esteem, respect for others, individual responsibility and responsibility to the wider community. The reference group recognised that there are no simple solutions or quick fixes. No one intervention will provide a panacea. What is required is a multicomponent and multilevel programme that adopts an integrated, long-term and socially orientated approach. That is founded on evidence that shows how a range of interventions, in various settings, to address multiple influences on sexual health, can lead to significant improvements in sexual well-being. Five key actions are highlighted by the reference group. The first is the need for national leadership to be addressed by the appointment of a national sexual health programme co-ordinator and the creation of a new national sexual health advisory committee. The second is local leadership, with all NHS boards having a sexual health strategy informed by a multi-agency strategy group. The third is the setting of clear national and local targets and goals. The fourth is to use existing mechanisms, such as local health plans, community plans and the performance assessment framework to ensure the ongoing integrated delivery of the strategy's goals and vision. The fifth is to monitor progress to ensure delivery, with the proposed new advisory committee monitoring national progress towards targets. Those key actions underpin over 100 recommendations made by the reference group. It is not the time today to focus on specific recommendations since the consultation process will give full opportunity for that. Suffice it to say that the recommendations address the needs of those facing the greatest barriers to sexual health; outline a broad approach to sexual health promotion; respond to the importance of acquiring knowledge and skills about sexual health and well-being; set out, respectively, the roles of schools, higher and further education institutions, and parents and carers; identify the contribution of the media and mass communications; and highlight specific actions to reduce sexually transmitted infections, including ready access to services. The group has produced a comprehensive, well-researched and positive report, which needs to be  considered in the round. I believe that its strengths lie in the integrated approach that it proposes. Particularly welcome is its affirmation of the key values of respect, equality and accessibility to clinical services and lifelong learning. I am clear that the group's proposals provide the basis for a workable and constructive framework within which progress to enhance sexual well-being can be made. However, I am keenly aware of the many views that exist in Scotland, and indeed in the Parliament, on this complex issue. That is why we are embarking on a wide-ranging consultation before we consider which of the recommendations to accept, or whether to accept them in their entirety. Copies of the draft strategy have been placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre, and it can also be accessed electronically on the Scottish Executive website. The group has prepared a summary version that can be made available in other formats, including Braille and audio tape and in different languages to facilitate access for ethnic minority groups. For those who are interested, background supporting papers used by the group can be accessed on the Scottish Executive website. All this reflects our determination to ensure that the consultation process is as broad ranging and comprehensive as can be arranged. In addition to the traditional means of seeking comments from groups and organisations, we will invite the Scottish Civic Forum to facilitate aspects of the consultative process and will make special efforts to engage minority groups. I hope that people, young and old, throughout Scotland will feel able to engage in the consultation process. I look forward to receiving the comments of parents, young people and other individuals, as well as organisations and professional bodies, to help to ensure that the final strategy that emerges from the consultation is a fair reflection of the views of people in Scotland. The time is right for a mature and considered debate on this sensitive, but vital issue and I am sure that the reference group's proposals provide a helpful focus for that. I hope that the debate will not be hijacked or sidetracked by focusing on high-profile or single, contentious issues. The topic is too serious for that. Moreover, as the reference group's report stresses, success does not rest on one single intervention, but on a range of initiatives and services across the whole policy spectrum. In short, a holistic approach is needed. I recognise, of course, that some of the issues that are raised in the draft strategy will be controversial and that complete consensus may be elusive. However, that is not a reason to do nothing, or to concentrate disproportionately on the points of difference. There is a great deal on  which we can unite and build, and the consultation will allow us to identify the common ground and the difficult decisions that may have to be made. Members, and indeed the Parliament, will no doubt want to contribute to the consultation, and the Executive will propose to the Parliamentary Bureau that a debate be held in the Parliament on the subject before the end of the consultation period. There is a real opportunity to make a difference. Sexual health is a dimension of health that we cannot afford to neglect if the quality of life and overall health in Scotland are to be enhanced. The reference group has shown the way in producing proposals that have regard to the diversity of views that surround the issue. The challenge for all of us now, including the Parliament, is to contribute our views in a measured and constructive way that will pave the way for improved sexual well-being for this and future generations. The pillars of that improvement must be self-respect, respect for others and strong, respectful relationships. I am confident that we can build on them together.

Shona Robison made a great many points. The leading one was about the time that it has taken to reach this stage, but, in a sense, she answered her own question. She said that, at the end of 1999, the Executive established a new group to establish a demonstration project—I do not have the exact name—which is a  separate issue. That project was, of course, the healthy respect demonstration project, which is on-going and from which we have set up a learning network for sexual health. Many lessons are being learnt from that project, but Shona Robison must know that that group was not the expert group. I set up the expert group in my first year as Minister for Health and Community Care. I appointed the members and gave the group its broad remit, which was important. The expert group asked me for an extension of time to allow it, as part of its work, to carry out a more comprehensive consultation and involve more of those who have expertise in the area. There are valid reasons for the time that the work has taken. I hope that Shona Robison will also agree that there are valid reasons for our carrying out a proper consultation on the issue, which is why it would be wrong for me to give the Executive's view of each recommendation in the report. I have made the Executive's general position absolutely clear, but it is right that the people of Scotland should be involved in deciding the final strategy on this important issue. I will mention a matter on which I did not want to spend too much time in my statement. Given that the report comes from the expert group, it was up to that group to launch the report, which it was due to do at 1.30 today. If the report got to the media at 1 o'clock rather than 1.30, I had no control over that. The point is that the report would go to the Parliament when the expert group released it. It is not my report; it is the group's report.

I remind David Davidson that the proposal for a tsar comes from the expert  group which, he will accept, is a broadly constructed group that represents many key players. To return to the beginning of the question, I observe the slight irony that the man who lambasts me every other day of the year for having too many targets is now criticising the group for not having enough targets. Passing over that, I agree that the parents' role is central and I am glad that the expert group takes the same view. Our present guidance on sex education in schools—which flows from the McCabe report, which the present report endorses—lays out that the involvement of parents is crucial. I agree entirely with David Davidson on that point. One of the points that the group makes—partly because it was given such a broad remit—is that, apart from the headline issues of sexually transmitted infection and teenage pregnancy, there are other big issues about the social and wider ethical and cultural influences on sexual behaviour. One of the points that the group flags up, which I mentioned in my statement, is that many people regret that they began sexual activity so young. The group has taken that point on board and we also want to do that. Because the group had a broad remit, that point came through. We intended that to happen because we do not want the issue to be considered narrowly; we must consider the wider issues of attitudes, emotions and values.

I certainly agree with Susan Deacon's main point about ensuring that  the consultation goes beyond the traditional methods of involving people in this matter. As I said in my statement, we are going to set in train a series of measures to ensure that the broadest possible range of people is consulted. I pay tribute to the work that Susan Deacon did in this area when she was a minister, and to the work that she has done subsequently. I also agree that we must ensure that we listen to those who are silent, as well as those who are vocal on the issue. We must make an effort to get a cross-section of public opinion. I am not hiding from that. We are trying to build the broadest possible consensus around the issue, which is an admirable thing to do. There is a broad consensus around the values that I and the expert group have described, concerning mutual respect and responsibility, irrespective of people's religious beliefs. Those with religious beliefs and those with no religious beliefs share in that consensus, to a large extent, and we want to build this strategy around that consensus.

I welcome the fact that Mike Rumbles has pointed out the key word on the front page of the document—relationships. In many ways, this is a strategy about relationships. We should welcome the fact that, unlike comparable documents in some other places, it takes a broad view and locates sexual health within relationships and within the values of respect and responsibility, which I have highlighted. I also thank Mike Rumbles for pointing out the broad basis of the group. He referred to the religious people, and I welcomed their presence. Many sexual health professionals were also involved, and I was keen for there to be a representative of Zero Tolerance on the group as well. We wanted to build all those views and perspectives into the group. It is not up to me to speak about the precise views of all the individuals on all the recommendations; it is up to them to speak for themselves. However, the fact of the matter is that they all signed up to the report.

As I have said, in relation to education the expert group is backing the McCabe report and calling for it to be fully implemented. It has been implemented, to a large extent, but if there is still more to be done, that will be taken on board. Equally, the group is saying that people have a right to sexual health services. There have been debates about the location of those services, and that matter is left open by the report. However, it is clear that people have a right to sex education. The guidance that we have issued on that indicates our broad approach, and much of the thrust of the document is about improving the availability of sexual health services within the broad context of the values that I have described.

Carolyn Leckie has fastened on to one important sentence in the document. We will certainly consult on the matter and give a view in due course. The strategy is clear and some issues relating to the availability of contraception that she mentions have already been taken on board.  I think that all of us support the principle of access to sexual health services in general and that there is no disagreement in principle. Obviously, there is a debate about the location of such services. It is well known that the Executive has ruled out the morning-after pill in school settings, but of course the Executive is not saying that the morning-after pill should not be available. Indeed, it is available in sexual health clinics, pharmacies and through general practitioners' prescriptions. We certainly support such routes.

On the member's first question, I strongly agree that young people will have to be involved as fully as the other groups whose views will be sought. We will certainly ensure that we approach the matter in the most imaginative and innovative way that we can. On the second question, prescribing contraception is fundamentally an issue for those who are involved in prescribing; I hesitate to intrude on their territory. However, I am sure that all of us accept the general principle that Margaret Jamieson has enunciated.

I do not know where to start after all that. I would have thought that, as a result of the consultative steering group principles—which I thought we all supported—we would welcome the fullest possible consultation. Indeed, if I gave the final say on 100 recommendations today, I am sure that Fiona Hyslop would attack me for making consultation less meaningful, if not meaningless. The reality is that we will have a debate in the Parliament, subject to the view of Fiona Hyslop and the other members of the bureau. That is what the Executive proposes. We will have a wide-ranging consultation that we hope will be—I am sure that it will be—more inclusive than a traditional consultation. We will end that at the end of February. Obviously, we will produce the final strategy soon after that. That does not mean that there is no other activity going on simultaneously in this area. For example, the healthy respect programme is about to go into its next phase and the Caledonia youth project, which has set up excellent services in Glasgow, Dundee, Falkirk and Edinburgh, is being funded by the Executive. Furthermore, we give £8 million to health boards each year to tackle blood-borne viruses such as HIV and hepatitis C. Such work does not stop because we are consulting on a more general strategy, although I stress that it is important that we get that long-term strategy right.

The section on sexual health services—roughly from page 41 to 62—is the most substantial section of the report. Obviously, the issues that Margaret Smith has raised have been examined comprehensively by the group. We should acknowledge the model of service that has been produced. There is a tiered  service that has five levels and it is proposed that various services should be networked consistently with the general model of managed clinical networks that we have for other services. We are committed to providing funding for the services that Margaret Smith mentions but, once again, I have to say that I will be able to give details of the precise amounts at the end of the process rather than today. I assure Margaret Smith that we acknowledge that funding is required for the strategy and that we will take that fact on board.

I agree with Elaine Smith's point about violence against women. I would also like to flag up the fact that the dimension of violence against women has been built into the draft strategy. Gender is an important aspect of the issues that we are discussing today. I thank and congratulate the group for taking such a broad view and for encompassing gender and health inequalities as well considering as the media and the other broader issues to do with social, cultural and ethical influences on sexual behaviour. I entirely agree with what Elaine Smith says. Although I cannot respond to every recommendation today, I welcome in general terms the recommendation that Elaine Smith refers to.

I cannot disagree with Maureen Macmillan. The aspect that she raises is another dimension of the problem that will be examined. Indeed, my colleague Tom McCabe is examining the issue in relation to the broader  alcohol strategy. The sexual health agenda overlaps many other agendas, which is another way of saying that we have to approach the subject holistically. As that was the last question, I take this opportunity to thank the expert reference group for its comprehensive, well researched and positive report. The report needs to be considered in the round—I hope that it will be considered by the people of Scotland in that way. We shall certainly do everything that we can to ensure that that happens.

Planning for acute NHS services is primarily a matter for NHS boards,  working with all their partners, subject to departmental guidance on consultation. I am pleased to see continuing progress in planning, consulting on and implementing acute and related health care strategies across Scotland. That is essential if Scottish patients are to get the modern health care services that they need and deserve.

I am sure that Dennis Canavan would agree that I should examine the matter thoroughly. I received a letter from Stirling Council in the middle of October and I am sure that he would also agree that it was right for me to examine thoroughly the issues that were raised in that letter. I have looked into those issues and will soon come to a conclusion. I assure him that I will respond to Forth Valley NHS Board very soon—well before the end of the year.

The reality is that there is a large degree of consensus in Forth valley on the need for a single site. That is welcome, but it is understandable that there are differences of opinion on precisely where the site should be. I must examine both the details of that and the nature of the consultation, which, in this case, was detailed and robust. The key issue is the site. I shall come to a conclusion on that very soon.

I assure Cathy Peattie that "very soon" means quite quickly. I repeat that I am confident that the consultation was robust. All  sides will think it right that all the relevant issues should have been examined in detail.

As I have stated previously, I will consider very carefully the adequacy of the public consultation and the substantive proposal that is submitted to me. I will pay close attention to the views expressed by the public and by clinicians.

I support the principle of full transparency in this as in other matters. I assure Pauline McNeill that I will listen to what clinicians and the wider public have to say on this issue. I have already received different kinds of representations from different clinicians. As I said last week, one of the distinctive features of this issue is that very senior clinicians are genuinely on different sides of the argument. That makes it even more complex than some of the other service reorganisation proposals that are being considered.

When I responded to Argyll and Clyde NHS Board's proposals, I certainly made it clear that it should do further work with Glasgow in looking at patient flows across health board boundaries. That is a key issue in maternity  services planning that should be considered on a regional basis. Clearly, that further work will be important before final conclusions are arrived at.

Planning and providing maternity services in Glasgow is in the first place a matter for NHS Greater Glasgow. At its meeting on Tuesday 21 October, the NHS board approved proposals that will now be the subject of public consultation. The outcome of that process will in due course be submitted to me for consideration.

As I indicated in my first answer, at the end of the consultation and once the board has submitted its final proposals to me, I will have to come to a view. It would therefore be wrong for me to express a view at this stage. I assure Patrick Harvie that I am conscious of the very strongly held views in support of Yorkhill. I am also conscious that other points of view are being expressed. One of the things that strikes me in the debate, which is possibly different from other debates, is the genuine division of opinion among senior clinicians on the issue.

One of the issues that I have to look at is the adequacy of the public consultation round the issue. The second issue is the substantive proposal that is to come to me on the reorganisation of the services. Those are the two key issues that I will look at. Clearly, I will pay close attention to what the paediatricians are saying. I will equally listen to the views of obstetricians.

The correct thing to do is to ensure that public consultation takes place now. It would not be appropriate for me to take the action that Sandra White suggests. I can certainly assure her that I will pay close attention not only to the substantive arguments that are being made but to the nature of the public consultation. As I made  clear this week, when the final decision is made, there will be no question of my just rubber stamping it. Over the next two months, which is the length of the remainder of the consultation, I will look in great detail at the issues. I have already started to do that and I assure her and others that I will continue to do that.

As I indicated, the reality is that the proposal from Greater Glasgow NHS Board will probably not come to me for another three or four months, which will be in alignment with the time scale that Tommy Sheridan indicated. However, he has flagged up an important issue, which will be raised again in Carolyn Leckie's question. I will deal with the regional dimension at that point. I made clear to NHS Argyll and Clyde that I was not going to simply rubber stamp its proposals. I am asking for further work to be done.

The Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill and the contractual arrangements that it underpins will benefit general practitioners and patients in remote and rural areas, just as they will benefit people in more urban settings. For example, they will assist recruitment and retention and will facilitate the development of a broader range of high-quality services in primary care, with a 33 per cent increase in resources for primary care over a three-year period.

I shall certainly work with NHS Highland. In addition, the group that is working on out-of-hours provision is working with NHS boards, and work on the issue is also being undertaken with boards through the remote and rural areas resource initiative. Jamie Stone is right in what he says. The new contract is good in that it provides extra resources and, under the new formula, gives an extra weighting to rural issues. Overall, it is a very good contract for rural areas, as it is for urban areas. Work is being done on out-of-hours services. I saw some of the redesign work, which involved using paramedics in new ways, when I visited Moray during the summer. GPs and nurses will of course be involved too. There is great scope for services to be delivered in different ways. Any transfer of services will be made only to an accredited alternative provider.

Some of the details are still being negotiated, but inducement practitioners can be reassured. As I said at a previous question  time, their current income is guaranteed. In fact, the situation is improving for them. Not only will they benefit by the new formula, which is particularly beneficial for rural areas, but the current system, whereby practitioners who earn extra income beyond a certain point have that clawed back, will end. Inducement practitioners will certainly benefit from the new contract, as will primary care health care professionals and, more important, patients throughout Scotland.

The report of the expert group on acute maternity services makes it clear that acute maternity services should be planned and commissioned in a regional context. To help to facilitate that, we have provided funding for a regional maternity services co-ordinator in each of the three regional planning groups. I also emphasised the importance of looking at maternity services across board boundaries when I responded to the Argyll and Clyde maternity proposals last week.

I do not think that we can have a moratorium, because it is widely recognised that some of the current services are not sustainable. However, I certainly accept that we need to do more in a regional context. That is why I asked both Argyll and Clyde and Glasgow NHS boards to undertake further work in that area. It is important that we do not look at the matter just in the context of board boundaries. That is my strong view and it is the view of the expert working group on acute maternity services report to which I have referred. Therefore, there is a strong regional dimension to the issue and a strong national dimension in terms of the framework that the EGAMS report outlines. Obviously, Carolyn Leckie raised other points about community midwife-led units and Yorkhill. I have talked about Yorkhill, but just as there are different views on Yorkhill, so there are different views on community midwife-led units. Carolyn Leckie has a view and many other people, including other midwives, have different views. Certainly, the EGAMS report believes that there is a place for community midwife-led units. That is certainly an important way of giving women choice and the opportunity of local delivery.

The site has three generators, any two of which can provide for the full requirements of the hospital. There were differences between the two recent power interruption incidents at the ERI. The first one, on 4 September, was due to equipment issues; a forensic examination of equipment and systems has been undertaken. The second, on 21 October, was due to human error, and a programme of retraining for engineering staff at the infirmary has already started.

It is quite a big jump from two power interruptions to that conclusion. I understand the extreme frustration and dissatisfaction of the chair of Lothian NHS Board, Brian Cavanagh, and I commend him for the robust attitude that he has taken towards Consort Healthcare. It is unacceptable that such power cuts happen. As I explained in my initial answer, robust action is being taken to deal with the problem and we do not expect the power supply to be interrupted again. There is now 24-hour cover by permanent engineering staff should anything go wrong again.

Does David Davidson not accept that the most important point about enhanced services is that some services will be delivered in primary care that were previously delivered in a hospital setting and were never delivered anywhere in primary care?

I point out briefly another advantage of the bill, which I did not have time to mention. In the past, funding went in accordance with the number of GPs in a practice. The bill will ensure that funding goes in accordance with the needs of the population, which means that a more deprived area will get more money that it does at present.

More than 90 per cent of patients' contact with the national health service begins and ends in primary care, so the quality and accessibility of primary medical services are of huge importance to the people of Scotland. The bill represents a fundamental change in how those services are delivered and is a key part of our health reform agenda, ensuring that we improve the primary care experience for patients, staff, carers and the NHS as a whole. The Health Committee took evidence on the bill from a range of interests, including the profession and patient groups. I thank the committee for its report and welcome its endorsement of the general principles of the bill. I support the bill because I believe that the legislation and the contract that it underpins represent a good deal for staff and, even more important, for patients. It will mean more and better services and a team-based approach to care. It will boost recruitment and retention. It will put in place national standards and expectations for patient care while allowing NHS boards and local practices to agree on the best way of providing care in response to local circumstances. Through the introduction of the quality framework, practices will be encouraged and incentivised to provide a first-class NHS primary care service. Practices will receive additional payments based on their performance against a set of clinical and organisational indicators that are designed to reward quality of service. High achievement against the quality standards will bring high financial rewards to practices and improved standards of care to patients. I am particularly pleased that patient views will be strengthened through measuring patient satisfaction as part of the quality and outcomes framework. Practices that listen to what their patients say will earn more than those that do not.

In a moment. I want to finish the first part of my speech.  Access is also important. By April next year, we want patients to be able to see a primary care professional within 48 hours. I believe that the new contract, along with the work of the primary care collaborative, will ensure that we meet that target on an on-going basis. The contract will benefit patients in many other ways. There will be a patient services guarantee whereby health boards will be under a duty to ensure that the full range of primary medical services is available for people in their area. Resources will increase by 33 per cent over three years—that means an extra £142 million going into primary care. The new funding formula ensures a fairer resource allocation that is based on the needs of patients. Areas with a high level of patient need will receive higher levels of funding. As a result, general practitioners will have extra money to expand their services, so that patients will be able to access more services from their own doctor in their own practice.

In a moment. In particular, enhanced services will help the shift of work and, where appropriate, resources from the acute sector to primary care. Instead of having to travel to hospitals, patients will be able to access more specialised services in their own area. As the contract is practice based, it will help to develop the multidisciplinary approach that we are already seeing in parts of Scotland. GPs, nurses, pharmacists, health visitors and a range of allied health professionals will pool their skills to provide better services in their local communities. In addition, there will be extra investment in information technology and premises in order to improve further the quality and integration of care.

I was about to talk in detail precisely about out-of-hours services. On Tommy Sheridan's point about patient consultation, any change to out-of-hours services will need to be done with the full consultation of patients. I will now speak for at least two minutes on out-of-hours services, so perhaps the issues that Tommy  Sheridan raises can be addressed in that way. The new right of GP practices to transfer to health boards the responsibility for providing care at nights and weekends has caused a great deal of debate. Although many practices will give up the responsibility, we expect a substantial number to be willing to contract with the health board to provide services. That will build on the positive changes that patients have experienced in recent years through the development of out-of-hours co-operatives, in which GPs take turns to provide cover at nights and weekends. The change is not about cutting services; it is about providing the service in a different way. Anyone who needs access to primary medical services out of normal hours will get it. That is guaranteed. However, that does not mean that they will always get it from their own doctor. An anxious mother with an upset child might just need the reassurance of a discussion with an experienced nurse, but if she needs a doctor, she will be able to see one. Work is already under way to support the changes. A national working group, bringing together all interested parties, including the Scottish Executive, the boards and trusts, the GP co-operatives, the Scottish Ambulance Service and NHS 24, has already met several times. It will support boards by, for example, sharing best practice and undertaking modelling work on possible options. We are increasing the out-of-hours development fund to help boards to reprovide the services. The fund will increase by £3.7 million over three years, from £6.3 million in 2003-04 to £10 million in 2005-06. That funding will help NHS boards to fund reprovision of out-of-hours services. In addition to the out-of-hours development fund, NHS boards will have available to them £7,000 on average for each GP who gives up their out-of-hours responsibility. Boards are already beginning to plan for the change by asking practices to indicate whether they plan to transfer their responsibilities and whether they would wish to contract with the board to provide services. The transfer of responsibility will lead to services being delivered in different ways, but responsibility will be transferred only to an accredited alternative provider. I saw an example of how that is already happening when I visited Moray in the summer. A pilot scheme has been in operation in Buckie since April, in which ambulance staff work closely with colleagues in the community hospitals and health centres to triage, examine and treat patients out of hours. Staff morale has increased, as have staff skills and professional development. Patients are happy, as a high standard of care is delivered locally, which for some has avoided the need for admission to hospital.

I will give way to Mr Stone.

The out-of-hours development fund will be used in part to compensate the small number of GPs in Scotland who are unable to transfer their out-of-hours responsibilities.

I have to move on. On the services that are to be provided under the new contract, the Health Committee is concerned about the lack of definitions. Let me clarify the matter. Under the new arrangements, there will be three main types of service, all of which come under the overarching new duty of "primary medical services". Services will be essential, additional or enhanced. Given the concerns that I know members have on that crucial area, I will spend some time on the detail of what patients can expect under each of those services. "Essential" refers to routine, day-to-day GP work. It covers the management of patients who are ill or believe themselves to be ill, with conditions from which recovery is generally expected. It includes chronic disease management and the general care of terminally ill patients. Essential services also include health promotion advice and referral to other parts of the health service where that is required. All GP practices will have to provide the full range of those services. "Additional" covers cervical screening, contraceptive services, vaccinations and immunisations, child health surveillance, maternity services, excluding delivery, and some minor surgery. Practices will normally be expected to provide those services but may choose to opt out. The reality is that more than 90 per cent of practices provide all those services at the moment; we do not expect the new contract to change that. "Enhanced" is where there is scope to develop primary care and to transfer work previously  confined to the acute sector. Some enhanced services—those that we are calling "directed enhanced services"—must be provided by all NHS boards. They include more specialised minor surgery, for example, and they have national specifications and benchmark pricing. There are also national enhanced services, which boards may decide to commission for their area. If they do, the service must be provided to national minimum specifications and with regard to the national benchmark prices. An example of a national enhanced service is more specialised services for patients with multiple sclerosis. Local enhanced services allow boards and practices to develop and agree a service to meet the specific health needs of the local population. Definitions of essential and additional services have been in the public domain since the contract document, "Investing in General Practice", was published in February. The document also set out what might be included in enhanced services. Since then, the Scottish General Practitioners Committee and the NHS Confederation in Scotland have published specifications and benchmark pricing for five directed enhanced services and 12 nationally enhanced services. We in Scotland have a unique opportunity to ally the development of community health partnerships to the implementation of the new contract and the delivery of local services. Community health partnerships will build on the best of local health care co-operatives by working with local communities to identify needs and to design services in new ways to meet those needs. They will do that in partnership with specialist services and other agencies—in particular, local authorities and the voluntary sector. Crucially, they will also be directly involved with NHS boards in planning services throughout an area. In the context of the new general medical services contract, community health partnerships will play a key role in working with NHS boards to identify service needs, particularly those in the enhanced category. They will then work with local practices and other providers to ensure that those services are delivered in the most effective way in each community health partnership area. That will mean that a broad, multiprofessional and multi-agency approach is taken. Community health partnerships will be particularly well placed to support the development of new and enhanced services in local communities to continue to shift the balance of care from hospital to community. The bill is accompanied by an unprecedented increase in funding for primary medical services. This year alone, we have increased funding by £42 million. Funding will increase further in the first years of the contract and will rise to £575 million in 2005-06. Two thirds of that new investment is in  quality. As far as I am aware, this is the first time that money has been so directly linked to the quality of care that the patient receives. GPs' performance will be judged against a set of objective measures that are based on the best available research evidence. High achievement will bring substantial rewards, but poor performance will not. The contract has twice been the subject of a formal consultation process and a ballot of GPs. On both occasions, GPs voted by a significant majority to accept it. The Executive has not carried out any further consultation on the bill. That reflects the bill's unique position. However, we are engaged in a consultation process on the way in which the contract is to be implemented. We have established a series of working groups to consider implementation issues; the membership of those groups includes the public and patient groups. I have referred to public consultation on out-of-hours provision. The bill offers a legislative framework for the provision of primary medical services—the services that patients receive from their GP practices. It enables ministers to make orders that are subject to parliamentary approval to give effect to the terms of contractual arrangements that have been negotiated between ministers and primary care contractors. I understand the Health Committee's desire to have the regulations early to see how the terms of the contract will be implemented through the bill and subsequent subordinate legislation. The committee will be given the opportunity to scrutinise and comment on the regulations before they are formally laid. I guarantee that the Scottish regulations that cover the disputes process and the listing of doctors who provide primary medical services will be shared with the committee by mid-November. The rest of the GMS regulations are being drafted on a United Kingdom basis, as we are implementing a UK contract. All the information that is available to me makes me confident that I will be able to share those regulations with the committee by the end of November. Health Committee members are concerned about the fact that they can only accept or reject the regulations once they are laid. That, of course, is the position with all regulations that are put before Parliament. Even so, I repeat my offer to appear before the committee while the regulations are in draft form. That will allow the Executive to take on board comments from the committee and to consider any changes well before we lay the final versions. Delaying the bill and the regulations could delay the introduction of the new contract. The contract is UK-wide, but it has some Scottish variations that  are advantageous to Scotland. The contract will be good for GPs, patients and the whole NHS. I want Scottish GPs and patients to profit from the undoubted benefits of the new arrangements as soon as possible. I am confident that we can find a way forward that allows us to make progress and to give Parliament its proper place in the scrutiny of the legislation. It only remains for me to comment on the Scottish Socialist Party's amendment by pointing out that the vast majority of GPs are independent contractors and have been since the start of the NHS in 1948. Is the SSP really saying that that hard-working and dedicated group is any less committed to the NHS than, say, nurses, just because GPs are not NHS employees? I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill.

I congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing the debate and, like Cathie Craigie, I pay tribute to the part that she played in  bringing about the important collaboration between Macmillan Cancer Relief and the CAB, which started in Airdrie and has expanded to the whole of Lanarkshire. I also thank and congratulate all the staff and volunteers who have been involved. I know that we are all pleased that cancer mortality rates in Scotland are beginning to fall, as has been highlighted this week, but the corollary of that, particularly with an increasingly elderly population, is that more people are living with cancer. It is therefore more important than ever that we take a broad, holistic view of cancer care. That is what led me to announce in the cancer debate on 4 September a broadening of the important cancer scenarios work on mortality rates to encompass morbidity and the implications of living with cancer. The provision of a service to people who are affected by cancer, by offering debt assistance and employment, housing and other benefit advice, is a valuable contribution to the overall support of people with cancer. The service benefits patients most of all, but it also benefits carers and indeed health professionals, as Donald Gorrie, David Davidson and John Swinburne pointed out. I am therefore happy to welcome and congratulate the new partnership between Macmillan Cancer Relief and the Lanarkshire CABx. I am aware that they plan to roll out the partnership into other areas and I wish them well in that. The partnership with Macmillan Cancer Relief is only one example of the increasing role of the CAB service—as Shona Robison reminded us—in delivering advice in health settings. The CAB service currently delivers advice in over 200 locations across Scotland, which include more than 20 health care settings, ranging from general practitioner surgeries to clinics and from hospital sessions to home visits. For example, in the north-west Edinburgh local health care co-operative, CAB sessions in the GP surgery provide dedicated social and financial advice to patients and their carers. I recognise and applaud the efforts of voluntary groups, which work tirelessly to provide support for people who are affected by cancer and, indeed, by any illness. That is why we are giving specific support to Voluntary Health Scotland to work with NHS boards to ensure their increasing involvement with the voluntary sector. Partnership and collaboration—with NHS Scotland, with the voluntary sector and with patients and their carers—are central to everything that we do and to the on-going successful implementation of "Cancer in Scotland: Action for Change". In early September, I was invited to launch the Scottish cancer coalition: a partnership of cancer charities in Scotland, which have collaborated to  form a new group. The coalition includes Macmillan Cancer Relief and I pay particular tribute to the enormously important work that that organisation carries out in a range of areas, such as carer schemes and the invaluable Macmillan nurses. I was pleased to have a useful meeting recently with the director in Scotland, Ian Gibson. We discussed cancer scenarios, patient involvement and a range of other issues. He also had a meeting recently with community care officials to discuss how Macmillan can play into the joint future agenda. We are providing him with the addresses of the joint future managers of local partnerships so that direct contact can be made with local decision makers. I hope that that will lead to further collaborations. More generally, we applaud the voluntary sector collaboration that has resulted in the Scottish cancer coalition. The Scottish Executive looks forward to working with the coalition in the future, particularly but by no means exclusively in the key area of patient involvement. Another good example of partnership and collaboration in practice is the new opportunities fund project in the Forth valley that is managed by Falkirk Council housing and social work service. That project, too, focuses on the provision of money advice to people with cancer and their families by providing advice on financial issues such as benefit entitlement and debt advice and by signposting other useful services that are provided by health and social work departments. Social work involvement in managed clinical networks should be part and parcel of the provision of multidisciplinary services. Cancer is an excellent example of that. Networks aim to integrate health and social care; that is important if we are to be able to meet the holistic needs of people who are suffering from illness and its effects, whether cancer or any other debilitating disease. The Scottish Executive's carers strategy recognises and values the huge contribution that carers make to the health and social care of thousands of people throughout Scotland. The Executive is committed to ensuring that carers are better supported than they have ever been before. The resources that are given to local authorities to support carers have risen from £5 million a year in 1999-2000 to £21 million this year. We recognise the very special difficulties that people with serious illnesses such as cancer face and the strains that those illnesses cause for those people and their carers. We support the innovative work by Macmillan Cancer Relief and the citizens advice bureaux to address problems that cancer patients and their carers face and we applaud their contribution to helping many people to cope better with their illnesses and their lives.  Patients' difficulties in getting the information that they need, in the format that is best suited to them and at the time when they need it, is an issue that arises time and again. There are many options for resolving that problem, such as using textbooks, booklets, brochures and videos. Earlier this year I launched a Cancer in Scotland publication called, "A Guide to Securing Access to Information", which highlights the frequently asked questions from people who are affected by cancer as they progress through the patient pathway. The document also highlights areas where there are information needs, including clinical, practical, emotional and financial needs. The document sets the wider strategic picture that surrounds patient information and asks NHS boards and regional cancer advisory groups to focus on whether local patient information strategies meet the specific needs of people affected by cancer.

I recognise that a series of funding issues arose in the debate, with reference to CABx, support of the voluntary sector, local authorities and health. I will not make any funding announcements in this debate, but I recognise that funding is crucial for that collaborative work. Christine Grahame will know of the significant investment that we are putting into the cancer strategy. However, the important aspect is to build genuine partnerships and collaboration, because at the moment the bulk of the cancer money goes into other areas. It is important that those with cancer have access to accurate and timeous information and to the support services that they need to help them continue with their lives in as normal a manner as possible. Our work on providing information links up with the specific initiative that we are discussing. I thank Karen Whitefield for reminding me of my comments on Tuesday. As I said, there are undoubtedly initiatives throughout Scotland that can be adopted and adapted for local use. The collaboration between Macmillan and Lanarkshire CABx is undoubtedly in that category. I pay tribute to everyone involved in cancer services in Scotland, but particularly to those who work in the Macmillan and Lanarkshire CABx initiative, which demonstrates that by working collaboratively and in partnership we can secure real and lasting improvements in services for people with cancer.  Meeting closed at 17:52.

Officials of the Scottish Executive Health Department meet Fife NHS Board regularly and discuss a wide range of issues.

I am glad that Tricia Marwick has raised this issue. Fife NHS Board asked for the report to which she refers because it realised that there were issues that it had to address. It is now acting on the report. I regret that parts of the document have, in the past, been misreported—I am not saying that that has happened today—and reported out of context. Any questions that the report raised about leadership in Fife related to financial leadership at an operational level. It is a matter of deep regret that those comments have been transferred to the board's chair, who was not criticised in the report. I am glad that the Conservative member Brian Monteith said, in a recent press release, that the chair's ability was not in question. I am also glad that she received a good performance appraisal from the chief executive of NHS Scotland. I hope that people will focus on the real health issues in  Fife rather than on personality issues, which are not relevant.

It is obvious that Christine May knows more about that situation than I do, and I am sure that members heard what she said. Fife NHS Board, others in Fife and I are focused on the real issues of concern to patients in Fife. For example, the board has made progress on waiting times. There have been some difficulties in one or two areas, but I commend the progress that the health board has made in reducing waiting times. The board has also been active on the patient focus agenda and is proceeding with the health reorganisation plans.

Iain Smith makes a similar point to those that were made by me and by Christine May. People in Fife are interested in all the issues to which Iain Smith referred and progress is being made on several fronts. That is what patients are interested in and I am sure that that is what is of interest to the majority of MSPs.

Plans will include provision for extra staff, more beds, increased critical care capacity, additional nursing home places and continued co-ordinated action on delayed discharge. That is supported by significant extra investment. Health spending is set to increase on average by more than £630 million each year from 2003-04 to 2005-06 and £30 million has been allocated to address delayed discharges from hospitals.

I assure Irene Oldfather that letters from the Health Department are clear. Placing the winter-pressures money in the general allocation was supported by the service-led winter planning group and clear information was provided in letters from the department on 9 July and 18 August. I know that Irene Oldfather does not criticise that policy, but I remind members who do that I was criticised last year for not putting that funding in the board allocations.  The other issue that Irene Oldfather raised is important to winter planning. The flu injection programme is being repeated this year and people who are over 65 will be offered the pneumococcal inoculation at the same time. Those are important preventive measures.

It is clear that some of the points that I raised in my first answer to Irene Oldfather's question are extremely relevant to Dr Turner's question. It must be said, however, that delayed discharge is among the biggest—if it is not the biggest—issues in relation to trolley waits. That is why I was so concerned by the reverse over the past year in the trend for numbers of delayed discharges to decline—the figure had started to come down very significantly, although it is true that it is still 680 fewer than the figure for this time last year. On Tuesday, my colleague Tom McCabe held a meeting with some of the authorities in which the trend in the figure has gone into reverse and I have asked for rigorous analysis of the reasons for that. We will take whatever further action is necessary to ensure that the trend in delayed discharges is that their number continues to fall.

Emergency contraception is already available free on prescription. Some pharmacies also provide it without cost under local national health service board initiatives. Future arrangements will be considered in the context of the national sexual health strategy for Scotland, about which we will consult soon. I have now received the final report of the expert group. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the group for all its hard work and deliberations and I am pleased that all its members have signed up to the draft strategy. We will now take the opportunity to consider the group's report, which will be published in full and will be subject to wide public consultation later in the autumn. We will consider all responses before we make final decisions.

The reality is that everybody has signed up to the strategy and it is up to the group to comment. I have only just received the report, which the group worked on over an on-going period. I have already looked at the report and believe that it is more comprehensive than comparable documents. For example, it clearly acknowledges wider cultural and social influences on sexual health. I am sure that Carolyn Leckie will welcome that, given the final two lines of the motion on the sexual health strategy that she lodged recently. As for Carolyn Leckie's question, emergency contraception will be considered. However, it is not the only issue that will be under consideration, and I repeat the first line of my answer: such contraception is already free on prescription.

No. All health boards must  face the task of balancing operational financial pressures with the need to improve services for patients. The Health Department is working with a small number of boards to ensure that robust financial plans are in place that protect patient services.

First, Lothian has a budget of £758 million, including a 7.4 per cent increase in this year. Secondly, Lothian has a robust financial plan for the next five years, which it presented at its accountability review, although there has been some slippage over the past few months. Thirdly, that slippage has nothing whatsoever to do with PFI. Fourthly—I will describe my personal involvement—I have talked to the chair of NHS Lothian, who is committed to managing the slippage in a corporate way, which NHS Lothian has a record of doing across the system. He has assured me that the management of that slippage will not affect patient care. In any case, some of the measures that are being taken require to be taken. I highlight the action taken to reduce the use of agency nursing and I am glad that during the past three weeks, NHS Lothian has made significant progress on that.

A five-year financial  recovery plan is in place at present and I will certainly keep a close watch on any effect on patient care that results from that recovery plan. We all know the circumstances of NHS Argyll and Clyde and regret that such a financial problem built up. It must be accepted that health boards have to live within their means, especially as record resources are going into the health service. I discussed the matter with the chief executive of NHS Argyll and Clyde last week and he described the plans for the immediate future. Clearly, some options were floated that attracted a lot of publicity. I am glad that those options are not being pursued.

It is important to distinguish issues that arise as a result of financial pressures—we all know the factors that arise from that in terms of demography and pay—from service redesign issues, which are separate. The service redesign agenda is driven by quality of care, although there are related issues such as the working time directive, which is a requirement of European law. It is important that we do not mix up those two issues in our discussions.

Under the terms of the new United Kingdom general medical services contract, by 31 December 2004, the vast majority of GP practices will be able to apply to have responsibility for providing out-of-hours services transferred to their local NHS board. The boards will be required to have in place alternative arrangements that will need to meet mandatory accredited standards. Planning for the new out-of-hours arrangements is underway. As part of the implementation process, a national working group has been set up to look at the issues around out-of-hours services across Scotland, in both rural and urban settings.

The reality is that, on the back of the new contract, there is a 33 per cent increase in the resources that go into primary care. There is also a minimum practice income guarantee so GP practices in rural areas—like GP practices elsewhere—should be better off than they are now. Financial arrangements are also in place for the funding of out-of-hours services. We are beginning to see new innovative models of care. For example, when I was in Moray during the summer I saw new arrangements that are already being developed and which involve a new role for paramedics. A lot of work is going on. One of the key points about the new contract is that the money follows the patient. That principle will apply to the out-of-hours services as it does to everything else.

It is accepted as part of the contract that in a small minority of cases in the most remote areas it may not be possible for GPs to opt out. I stress that that applies only to a small minority of cases. In the vast majority of cases GPs will be able to opt out if they want to do so, although David Davidson will have heard representatives from the British Medical Association state at the Health Committee that although many GPs might opt out of responsibility for out-of-hours services, they would still wish to provide those services. One of the other great advantages of the new contract is that it is a practice-based contract. If practices want to employ more GPs and more practice nurses, they can do so. I am sure that  David Davidson welcomes last year's unprecedented increase—of about 90—in the number of practice nurses in Scotland. For all the complaining that some people have been doing about the number of people undertaking GP training, there has been an 18 per cent increase in GP registrars since 1997. As David Davidson will know, I assured members at the Health Committee last week that, contrary to what had been reported in some newspapers, the increase that was put in last year would be maintained this year.

Some details are still to be finalised, but the inducement practices will also be subject to the minimum practice income guarantee, so none of the GPs in those practices will be worse off. They will have the opportunity of being a lot better off if they take on, for example, enhanced services. They will also not have the clawback that sometimes takes place under the current arrangements. Those practitioners can certainly be reassured by that.

The Scottish Executive had a stand at the fair and trusts were involved in that stand.

There has been much action and some success in improving Scotland's health since public health was the subject of the first ever debate in the Scottish Parliament in 1999. For example, the incidence of premature mortality from coronary heart disease continues to decline and is much lower than it was one or two decades ago. The simple fact, however, is that Scotland's health is not improving fast enough. Scotland is a wealthy country and should enjoy much better health than it does. A vision of a thriving and healthy Scotland and a plan for action were outlined in "Improving Health in Scotland—The Challenge" in March 2003. Achieving that vision presents an opportunity for the Parliament to act together in a way that the people of Scotland expect and that cuts across traditional party lines. I hope that we can have a constructive and helpful discussion of the ways of moving towards that vision. We require nothing less than a sea change in attitudes to health and health improvement, starting with the Government, but running through the whole of society. The challenge plan is reinforced and extended by the partnership agreement, in which we make a strong commitment to long-term and sustainable improvements in Scotland's health for all our people, while particularly targeting those who are most vulnerable and disadvantaged. We are committed to stepping up action on health improvement overall. We are tackling alcohol abuse; improving diet; reducing smoking; promoting better mental health and well-being; increasing physical activity; piloting new initiatives such as personal health plans and well man clinics; and introducing free eye and dental checks. We are taking ambitious actions to produce real change, but there is no quick fix. To change health, we also need to change the factors that  influence it, such as child poverty, employment, housing and the environment. We have backed our commitment to health improvement with substantial extra new investment that moves well outside the traditional health funding routes. Health improvement is not just for the national health service; it is everyone's business. We have committed over three years £63.5 million for promoting healthy school meals and fruit in schools; £24 million for expansion and development of the active primary schools programme and school sports co-ordinators; £15 million for the national health demonstration projects and national learning networks; £24 million towards improving mental health and well-being; £180 million for quality-of-life funding to local authorities; £108 million for sure start Scotland; £90 million for the better neighbourhood services fund; and £47 million for Glasgow homeless hostels decommissioning.

The issue is mentioned in "The Challenge", with reference to health improvement. We talk about encouraging national best practice among professionals, especially in multi-agency settings, and there are wider issues of training for health professionals beyond the health improvement area. We have introduced a duty of health improvement into the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill, underlining our determination to give effective leadership to the process of improving the health of the nation. The Local Government in Scotland Act 2003 introduced a power of well-being for local authorities, which provides underpinning for community planning partnerships and the development of joint health improvement plans. Health improvement is rather like a large and difficult jigsaw. Many disparate factors impact on health and life expectancy, including life circumstances and lifestyles, and we need to take effective action in both areas. That is a massive challenge and everyone has a role to play: the Executive and the Parliament; the NHS and local councils; the voluntary sector and the private sector; communities; and every individual in Scotland. The challenge is not just to improve the health of the nation overall. Addressing health inequalities and closing the health gap is the overarching aim of the challenge and must be  central to everything that we do on health improvement. As is well known, Glasgow suffers from the highest concentrations of deprivation and consequently has some of the starkest health inequalities. The Executive is giving financial support to the establishment of the Glasgow centre for population health, which is well placed because of the needs of Glasgow and the relevant academic expertise there. The centre is an important initiative for building a strong evidence base for future work on health improvement and health inequalities. That evidence base will be of benefit to the whole of Scotland.

The council and the NHS board in Glasgow have made great strides in relation to health improvement and I commend them for their joint efforts. However, we are putting substantial resources in and we think that a mixture of universal and targeted provision is the best way forward. Another important dimension is the development of more sophisticated indicators and monitoring so that we can effectively track progress towards our goal of reducing health inequalities. Experts are currently working on that for us. We are also promoting innovative and targeted approaches to health inequalities through initiatives such as integrated community schools, healthy living centres and the implementation of our health and homelessness action plan.

Absolutely. I said that the biggest concentrations of deprivation are in Glasgow, which led me to talk about our support for the Glasgow centre for population health. However, the same problems exist in many parts of Scotland. I have taken three interventions, so I will skip some of what I was going to say about wider action throughout the Executive. However, I make it clear that, in general, we see health improvement as something that will be carried forward throughout the Executive, as well as more widely throughout Scotland. We must develop  capacity for health improvement in all our public services, so that every public service worker is a health improvement worker. We need to move away from the idea that health improvement is just for health professionals. To accelerate that change, I will today announce funding for the appointment of health improvement staff to help to develop capacity in Sustrans and sportscotland, two organisations that can help us to deliver a more physically active Scotland. "The Challenge" gives us a framework for moving forward and for building on and extending work that was started in the first four years of the Parliament. The document's four key themes—early years, teenage transition, the workplace and communities—allow us to move forward more rapidly, enabling more effective linkages and partnership working in support of health improvement. I will talk briefly about each of the four themes in turn and explain how we will gauge success. For early years, success will be when every child and family receives the support that they need to ensure the opportunity to maximise their potential for health and well-being. That means access to good nutrition, both before and after birth; support for breastfeeding; smoke-free environments; safe and active play; good parenting; and a good, safe place to live. Measures to promote children's oral health, the work of the starting well national health demonstration project in Glasgow and a range of integrated services for children and families that are provided through early-years policies such as sure start Scotland are helping children to get off to a better start in life. The integrated strategy for the early years that we are working towards will be a key plank in delivering all that support in a more effective and joined-up way.

We have identified several gaps in the statistics and are taking steps to address the issue. We will respond soon to the consultation paper on the oral health of children and that factor will certainly be taken on board in our detailed response. As I have taken an intervention, I will not go through all the details of the other three themes. However, teenage transition is clearly crucial for some of the issues that we will be discussing today, such as sexual health, smoking, alcohol and mental health and well-being. The workplace is also a key area for increased action on health improvement. We have already expanded Scotland's health at work scheme and an inclusive  short-life working group is informing development of an integrated programme of action for healthy working lives. For communities, which I believe are at the very heart of health improvement, we want to build voluntary sector and community-based capacity to develop health improvement through community action, so that we can support local people in taking a lead in developing local solutions to local community problems. That is beginning to happen. In many areas, social inclusion partnerships are bringing together key local players in a series of initiatives to reduce health inequalities and promote health improvement, especially for young people. For example, the Kool Kids children's health club in the Pollok area of Glasgow makes children more aware of the healthy choices that they can make. Fifteen hundred primary 4 and 5 children from local primary schools have benefited from greatly increased activity levels and improved diet. The Scottish community diet project is also doing important work to build and develop food knowledge and skills in low-income communities and the excellent health demonstration project Have a Heart Paisley is galvanising community action in that part of Scotland. The first specific issue that will be developed in the context of the four key theme areas is smoking. Smoking is the single greatest cause of preventable illness and premature death in Scotland and action on smoking cessation has contributed to a small decrease in the percentage of adults who smoke. We need to keep up the impetus. I am pleased to announce today that we will invest an additional £1 million per annum, through NHS boards, to expand smoking cessation services, particularly in our most disadvantaged communities. We will also shortly launch a new action plan on tobacco control designed specifically for the needs of Scotland and including a major section on smoke-free environments. Some progress has been made on smoke-free environments in public places in Scotland, but there is much more to do. We are keen to enter into a public dialogue on how best to push the boundaries further. On alcohol, we are taking action to reduce binge drinking and harmful drinking by children and young people. Our plan for action on alcohol problems has delivered high-profile advertising to tackle binge drinking, established a national framework for service delivery and strengthened our capability to respond to alcohol problems at local level. Next week, the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will launch a Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline on the management of harmful drinking and alcohol dependency. We have also committed ourselves in the partnership agreement to doubling resources to tackle alcohol abuse; the new  resources for health that were announced last week will enable us to meet that commitment. Diet has also been a major area of recent activity and we are taking action throughout the entire food chain. We are promoting healthy diet and food choices through the healthy living campaign and working with public and private sector caterers to improve the preparation and provision of meals. We are working with communities to increase access to healthier food choices, particularly in low-income and rural areas. We are also working with the food manufacturing, processing and retailing industries to develop and promote healthier food choices and we are ensuring that agriculture and fisheries interests contribute fully to achieving the Scottish dietary targets. Those measures illustrate the fact that our challenge is to take action across all the Executive's areas of responsibility.

We certainly believe in having a national framework, but one of our other key messages today is about local delivery. I have seen some good, innovative projects in rural areas and I very much take on board the point that Rob Gibson has made. We have invested in a revitalised school meals service. In Scotland, nutritional standards for school meals have been developed and are set out in "Hungry for Success: A Whole School Approach to School Meals in Scotland". I have mentioned the funding for that already. Raising levels of physical activity is also central to improving health. We are working with key partners to implement the physical activity strategy for Scotland, developing five-year action plans for active homes, active communities, active schools and active workplaces. As I indicated, £24 million has been committed to the expansion of the active primary school programme. We also recognise the crucial role that community planning partnerships play locally in developing national policy. Initiatives such as West Lothian on the Move, Let's Make Stirling More Active and Perth and Kinross Council's liveACTIVE strategy have already established ways of implementing the physical activity strategy through community planning partnerships.

Progress is certainly being made on that initiative and local government has been given record resources, so we expect that commitment to be delivered. We have our part of the agreement and local authorities have theirs. I want to move on to mental health and well-being, which is an important new area for health improvement in Scotland and one that is attracting international attention. We have already made early progress in addressing stigma, in promoting greater awareness of positive mental health and in suicide prevention. Further work is in development. A central theme is the need to improve and promote increased public awareness and understanding of positive mental health and well-being. We must ensure that there is both early identification and early intervention and support when mental health problems occur. On sexual health, I announced in August last year that I had commissioned an expert group representing a broad range of interests to guide the preparation of a national sexual health strategy for Scotland. The group was established against a background of increasing levels of sexually transmitted infections and an unacceptable number of unwanted or unintended teenage pregnancies. I have asked the group to consider in its remit the broader social context for those issues. The expert group is in the final stages of its work on the strategy, which I expect to receive shortly. Sexual health is a sensitive and complex area and I want to get the views of as many Scots as possible, young and old, so that there is full consultation on the strategy, which will be published later this autumn. Our national health demonstration projects are proving a valuable testing ground for action to achieve improvements in a variety of areas. The starting well project promotes child health, the healthy respect project promotes the sexual health and well-being of young people and Have a Heart Paisley tackles coronary heart disease. Moreover, two weeks ago I spoke in the cancer debate about colorectal screening. We are committed to a second phase for the first three of those projects and we expect to learn valuable lessons from the work that has been done so far. That information will be captured, disseminated and shared through national learning networks. We have also taken action to ensure that health improvement work is effectively supported at national level by a strengthened and dynamic special health board, NHS Health Scotland. Combining the skills and experience of the Public  Health Institute of Scotland and the Health Education Board for Scotland, Health Scotland will play a key role in partnership with NHS boards, local authorities, the voluntary sector and all parts of Scottish society in implementing the health improvement agenda and informing future evidence-based policies and strategies. I cannot say too often that health improvement is all about partnership. All our efforts are underpinned by the development of an effective community planning framework. Partnership working in action between local councils, the NHS, the voluntary sector, the private sector, local communities and individuals is absolutely crucial for success and I pay tribute to the valuable contribution that all our partners are making. In particular, I congratulate the voluntary sector on its unstinting work in communities throughout the country in support of health improvement. As "The Challenge" explained, to achieve a more rapid rate of health improvement in Scotland we need to inspire, encourage and challenge the nation to achieve that vision. We need to implement policies that will transform elements of Scottish life and make a real difference to individuals' expectations of good health. We need to select a few key objectives, such as increasing physical activity and reducing fat intake, and deliver them effectively. As I indicated, we need to encourage national best practice among professionals. To make rapid progress, we perhaps most of all need to release the inner resources of individuals and communities by building social capital and improving the infrastructure of communities. If we do all those things, we will make a real difference to the health of the nation. I hope that we can collectively meet the challenge of culture change so that we move the debate forward faster and further than ever before. We must meet the health improvement challenge for the sake of this generation and future generations, so that people experience a better quality of life, with positive health achieved through healthy lifestyles and improved life circumstances.

In 2003-04, Orkney received revenue funding of £1,185 per capita and the Western Isles received £1,650. That compares with a national average of £1,054. Per capita funding for the Western Isles is greater than that for Orkney because the Western Isles has a high proportion of elderly people in the population and a relatively high level of deprivation. Both those  factors add greatly to the demands placed on the national health service in the Western Isles.

Mary Scanlon was on the Health and Community Care Committee at the same time as I was when we looked in detail at the Arbuthnott formula. She will know that there is a significant adjustment in that, which did not previously exist to the same extent, for remote areas. Of course, the formula will be reviewed—probably in about 18 months—so no doubt the arguments will run on. However, we must acknowledge the advantages of the Arbuthnott formula and the way in which it pays more heed to deprivation—which is a particular factor in the Western Isles and in other parts of Scotland—and the number of older people in the population, which we all understand is fundamental in terms of the amount of resources that go the health service.

Scotland's cancer plan, "Cancer in Scotland: Action for Change", is two years old. I want to use today's debate to report on progress and, more important, to map out some of the further developments that are required. From the outset, two key features of the strategy have been the involvement of front-line staff in decisions about investment priorities and ring fencing of the additional investment, which built up to £25 million a year, to avoid the kind of leakage that happened with the English cancer plan. I am pleased to announce that the additional investment will be ring fenced within board allocations for at least the next two years, so that the targeted investment can continue and the progress can be monitored. I do not have time to list all the investments that have been planned or that have come on stream, but I refer members to the bi-annual reports on progress, the most recent of which was published on 11 August. There are many striking examples of progress. For example, the use of £561,000-worth of new video endoscopy equipment in more than 2,600 procedures in Highland has improved safety and quality and has enabled patients to be seen locally. The provision of £175,000-worth of additional equipment and clinical nurse specialists will allow an extra 400 patients to receive chemotherapy locally in Fife. The investment of £458,000 in an additional haematologist and nursing support in Argyll and Clyde means that a no-wait policy for investigation and treatment of haematological cancers has been achieved. However, there is much more to do. The objectives are equity of access, more rapid diagnosis and treatment and making a real difference to the quality of care. Above all that, there has been a £33 million investment programme for radiotherapy equipment and, on 1 March, I announced a further £5 million to support the introduction of positron emission tomography. Today, I will concentrate on the changes that must accompany the investment, particularly in relation to staffing, patient focus and the redesign of care through managed clinical networks.  "Cancer Scenarios: An aid to planning cancer services in Scotland in the next decade", which underpins the cancer plan, is an innovative piece of work that is recognised across the world, as I discovered when I spoke at an international cancer conference in Milan earlier this summer. The focus in "Cancer Scenarios" is on prevention and mortality rates in Scotland over the next few years, and it is now time to consider broadening its scope to include morbidity and the implications of living with cancer for patients and services. I have therefore asked my officials to work with the health service information and statistics division and others on an exploratory scoping exercise to establish the best way of acting on that. That should include the specific implications for the work force that are already being implemented more generally by our new integrated approach to work-force planning and development at local, regional and national levels. Through the recent cancer investment, more than 300 additional staff are now in place, including 20 new consultants, 140 nurses and 30 radiographers. That includes 100 extra staff at the Beatson oncology centre, and I was pleased to hear yesterday from Professor Alan Rodger of recent successes in recruiting radiographers and his quiet optimism about recruiting oncologists. That will be bolstered by the fastest possible progress on plans for the new Beatson oncology centre. As members know, work-force planning was seriously deficient in the past and there is a great deal of catching up to do in some areas. That is why, for example, 24 more training places have been created in radiology during the past two years. A framework for cancer nursing is also being developed, in two parts. First, there is the strategic framework and secondly, there is a competency-based clinical framework that will ensure consistency of nursing practice throughout Scotland. Undoubtedly there is untapped potential in cancer nursing to improve patient outcomes, but there, as elsewhere, it is all about the patient and what we need to do to deliver the best care for patients.

I will if I have time, but I think that I have only three minutes left. Turning to patient focus and cancer care more generally, there is a dedicated patient involvement worker with the south-east Scotland regional cancer advisory group and additional Scottish Executive funding will see another such worker in the west of Scotland quite soon. Moreover, patient involvement will be a key component in the cancer  service improvement programme that is being run by the centre for change and innovation. In that area, as I said at the voluntary sector cancer coalition launch yesterday, I place particular importance on collaborating with the voluntary sector. However, it is widely recognised that more work remains to be done in the systematic exploration of patient experience and that was a major feature of my speech in the debate on 18 June. As I said then: "It is only by exploring the experiences of patients that we can develop services that are responsive to patients' needs." I went on to say: "we need a systematic and comprehensive understanding of patients' experiences ... we have some further work to do within the patient focus and public involvement agenda in order to achieve that objective."— [ Official Report , 18 June 2003; c805-806.]  A key resource for that will be the new cancer care research centre at the University of Stirling, which I am delighted to be opening on 6 October. Its director, Professor Nora Kearney, is an international leader in the field and members might wish to hear her speak about the centre at the cross-party group on cancer on 17 September. Turning to redesign and managed clinical networks, recently I had the pleasure of meeting some of the members of the west of Scotland colorectal cancer network. They showed me audit evidence of their success in driving up standards of care and the major progress that they have made in complying with NHS Quality Improvement Scotland standards. They also described a redesign pilot in south Glasgow that resulted in a mean waiting time for diagnosis of 21 days in comparison with waits of several months before. One of the advantages of networks is that best practice can be shared, helped by the redesign facilitators whom we have recently appointed to work in the networks. I reiterate our commitment to introduce a national colorectal screening programme. We acknowledge the challenge that that represents, and it will take some time to develop, but we are determined to build on the success of our major Scottish pilot in that area.

The problem with short speeches is that interventions get squeezed. My time is up, and I apologise for not dealing with the major health improvement issues that relate to cancer, but the wind-up speech might  touch on them and we hope to have a major debate on health improvement soon. It remains only to say that we reject the amendments—the seductive Scottish National Party one because it has a hidden agenda of breaking up United Kingdom pay arrangements, and the brass-neck Conservative one because of the Conservatives' record in government on all the issues that we have discussed today. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the progress made and the remaining challenges in implementing the cancer strategy; recognises that the £60 million investment is leading to many improvements to patient care; welcomes the development of managed clinical networks and the redesign of cancer services under way across the three regional cancer networks; supports an increased focus on patient experience and patient involvement, and looks forward to continuing change and innovation in order to reduce waiting times and improve the quality of care.

At 31 March 2003, the number of qualified nursing and midwifery staff vacancies totalled 1,516 whole-time equivalent posts. The latest data on consultant vacancies were collated on 30 September 2002, when there were 202 vacant consultant posts within NHS Scotland.

The nursing figures that came out last week were extremely interesting. I accept that there was a marginal increase in the overall number of vacancies, but of far more significance was that over a six-month period  there was an increase of 928 in the number of qualified nurses and midwives working in NHS Scotland. As far as I know, that is an unprecedented increase over such a period. As the number of qualified nurses expands rapidly and, simultaneously, the number of posts expands rapidly to increase the capacity of the service, it is not surprising that there is a marginal increase in the overall number of vacancies, but not in the percentage of vacancies. On the point about pay, it is time that the truth was told about the "Agenda for Change" offer that is being given to nurses, as it is widely misrepresented. What is on offer is 3.25 per cent this year, 3.25 per cent in April and then in October 2004 a further significant increase, which varies from nurse to nurse but is, for example, 6 per cent for nurses in their first year. That is an increase of more than 10 per cent for many nurses in the next 12 months or so. It is time that the nurses of Scotland and the people of Scotland were told the truth about that.

If Jean Turner has evidence of that I would like her to draw it to my attention. My comments about nurses in my previous answer also apply to consultants. We have already seen a significant increase in the number of consultants and we are committed to accelerating further that increase as part of the partnership agreement. We have been putting the building blocks in place by creating extra specialist registrar posts, from which consultants are recruited. A rapid expansion of the consultant work force is taking place. As I said in relation to nurses, as that expansion takes place, the service expands simultaneously, and the overall number of vacancies may go up marginally, but the percentage of vacancies is declining.

Duncan McNeil makes an important point. The issue of working time  regulations and, in particular, junior doctors' hours is important in understanding some of the issues and pressures in the health service. In a sense it is a good development for doctors and patients because doctors used to work hours that were far too long, which explains one of the difficulties that we have to cope with in making progress. That is why it is important to have extra consultants, extra nurses and extra junior doctors, but equally important is the redesign of services, about which we will say more in the forthcoming cancer debate.

An expert group has been taking forward the preparation of a national sexual health strategy. A report for public consultation will be published by autumn 2003.

There were three strands to the remit that I gave the group that is considering the matter. One strand was to enhance the provision of sexual health services. The other strands were to reduce unintended pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections and—crucially—to promote a broad understanding of sexual health and sexual relationships that encompasses emotions, attitudes and social context. We want to take a much broader view of the matter than has been taken in the past and I look forward to receiving the recommendations so that we can carry on with the consultation.

I can certainly give Susan Deacon that assurance. I am sure that we all want to pay tribute to her work in the area. We are building on the foundations that she created. For example, the healthy respect demonstration project, which is a testing ground for issues, has been feeding into the work of the strategy. Earlier this year, we also set up a sexual health and well-being learning network, which is disseminating information about what works and examples of good practice.

The provision of sexual health services is one of the key strands of the strategy, so that issue is part of the strategy that we must keep in mind.

The Executive has regular discussions with all NHS boards on a wide range of issues, including financial issues. The most recent discussion with Greater Glasgow NHS Board took place at the annual accountability review on Wednesday 25 June.

I remind members that Greater Glasgow NHS Board's uplift next year will be 7.4 per cent, which is high by any historical standards. However, Robert Brown is right to say that a small adjustment had to be made because of a fall in population. There is a risk-sharing scheme for beta interferon and the Scottish Executive has issued guidelines on the drug. Clearly, Greater Glasgow NHS Board must implement those guidelines. The issue was raised with the board, which assured us that patients will continue to be assessed and prescribed beta interferon where that is clinically appropriate.

The board has already given an assurance that patients will continue to be assessed. The drug is subject to the clinical guidelines. Not all patients with MS will benefit from beta interferon, so assessment must take place. However, those who will benefit will be prescribed the drug. That is precisely what will happen in Glasgow as elsewhere.

Following new data, the United Kingdom Committee on Safety of Medicines has advised that Seroxat should not be used in children and adolescents under 18 with depressive illness because the balance of risks and benefits is negative. The committee's current advice is that Seroxat is an effective medicine for the treatment of adults with depressive illness and anxiety disorders and that the benefits of treatment outweigh the risks. An expert working group of the Committee on Safety of Medicines will examine urgently what implications, if any, the new findings have for the use of Seroxat in adults.

I certainly agree with that point—alternatives must be available. The major piece of work on mental health services for young people will take that on board. In relation to Adam Ingram's first point, the guidance from the Committee on Safety of Medicines is clear on people who are under 18 and it will be followed.

The Executive decides whether means testing is appropriate on a case-by-case basis.

The whole of that question deals with matters that are for the Westminster Parliament. We need to have a balance. We cannot deliver all benefits and services on the universal principle or through means testing; neither of those is a credible or realistic option. The health service, for which I am responsible, is the best example of a universal service and the Scottish Parliament can take pride in the fact that it extended that principle in its first session to deal with personal care for the elderly. That was a major extension of universal benefits, but it does not follow that because we decided that that was appropriate, every service and benefit should be universal. It is simply not realistic to run a government in that way.

I am slightly surprised at some of the claims that have been made today. I suppose that I am surprised because a scheme very similar to the one that we are debating has applied to road traffic accidents since before the start of the national health service. I am slightly puzzled at why Carolyn Leckie thinks that the scheme in the bill uniquely undermines the universal principle of the national health service. According to that argument, we must never have had the universal principle, as a similar scheme has applied since before 1948 in relation to road traffic accidents. Stewart Stevenson asked what the cost of the scheme would be to the health service. Of course, one of the reasons for the scheme—not the only one—is that the health service will gain money from it. The estimate is £7 million to £12 million. I reassure Janis Hughes that that will be additional money. No new bureaucracy is involved in the scheme. Stewart Stevenson also referred to timekeeping. There is a well-established system in relation to road traffic accidents. Charges are made by the day and no bureaucracy is involved in that. Stewart Stevenson's colleague, Shona Robison—who, of course, was the first speaker after me in the opening speeches—started with the well-worn Scottish National Party point about Sewell motions, which I regard as entirely ideological. If it is in the Parliament's interests and, more important, in the Scottish people's interests, to buy into, as it were, a small part of UK legislation, we should surely do that, particularly in the current situation, in which the implementation of the relevant section of the bill is entirely within our control. Indeed, when the regulations are drawn up, we do not need to implement the scheme at all if we so choose.

It would not be because the regulations were the wrong ones that the question of not implementing them would arise. As I made clear at the end of my opening speech, we would want to ensure that the insurance market had addressed the potential inequalities in the charging of premiums. That is the key condition  that we would want to be applied. However, like the UK Government, we would not implement the scheme until the review to which I referred had been completed. I welcome the fact that Shona Robison did not object in principle to the scheme. She was concerned about insurance premiums. That is a fair point—I made it myself. There are problems with some businesses being able to afford compulsory employers' liability insurance because of the rising cost of such insurance, but those problems arise for reasons that are unconnected with the recovery of NHS costs. Any further increases that are directly attributable to the recovery of NHS costs will be small compared with overall premium costs. There is an issue with premiums, but the recovery of NHS costs is a small part of that problem. I remind members that we are talking about employers. That leads me to perhaps the strongest argument in favour of the bill—even stronger than the additional money that it will bring to the NHS—which is that the bill is a very good public health measure because it will put more pressure on employers to ensure that they have good health and safety arrangements in their workplaces. That is why I was surprised that Carolyn Leckie was so against the bill. She said that there had been no proper consultation. I assure her that her trade union noticed the consultation and made a lengthy submission to it. I am sure that Janis Hughes—who happens to be a member of the same union—Carolyn Leckie and their union will welcome the fact that more money will go to the health service as a result of the bill. Janis Hughes's suggestion about spending money to protect staff and taking further measures against violence against staff is entirely good. It is not in the bill—

I will do so in a moment. Individual trusts would decide how to spend the additional money. I am sympathetic to the suggestion that Janis Hughes made, which I am sure could be explored further if members thought that that was a good idea.

A consultation was undertaken on the issue. Many people, including Unison, made submissions as part of it. The insurance industry was also consulted, which answers one of the points that David Davidson made. I understand the point that Carolyn Leckie is making and the logic of it is that we would never have a Sewell motion. I believe that, in certain situations, a Sewell motion is appropriate. We have a full legislative programme and all of us have to prioritise when it comes to the legislation that is advanced in the Scottish Parliament. If part of a Westminster bill appears to embody a good piece of policy, it is entirely reasonable that we should proceed by means of a Sewell motion. That is particularly the case on this occasion because, as I said, we have complete control of the implementation of the measure that is before the chamber today. Concern was expressed about those who cannot pay; in the main, they will be employers. However, ministers have been given powers to waive the requirement to pay NHS charges that are due in cases where payment would cause exceptional financial hardship. Ministers can do that prior to an appeal against the level of the charges. The provision exists for cases of genuine financial hardship to be dealt with in that way. I remind members that claims for NHS charges are secondary in law, which means that only when compensation has been paid will payment to the hospital be made.

I referred a moment ago to the exceptional situations in which an appeal is made to ministers. David Davidson made a general point about the appeals procedure. I confirm that that will be done by the appeals service of the Department of Work and Pensions. It is not possible to answer Shona Robison's question in relation to the particular point that I make, as no one knows how many people will appeal. I do not imagine that any great bureaucratic cost will be involved in the appeals procedure, given that we are talking about the making of ministerial decisions. David Davidson asked several questions, most of which I think I have covered. If I have omitted to answer one of them, no doubt he will remind me—I see that he is about to help me out.

Any committee of the Parliament can scrutinise a statutory instrument when it is presented and anybody can pray against a statutory instrument. There is absolutely no bar on that happening. I have found my note on another of David Davidson's points, about the upper limit. I confirm that it is entirely within the control of the Scottish Parliament to decide what the upper limit should be. If members have concerns on that matter, they can raise them. On the more general point that was raised, the amount that is to be paid is entirely a matter for Scotland.

I certainly would not argue about matters of procedure. In any case, I do not think that I said that statutory instruments would be referred to any committee; instead, I said that any committee or individual member is perfectly entitled to pray against a statutory instrument. There is no bar in that respect. We are pursuing pragmatically this entirely sensible measure to ensure that Scotland can feel the potential benefit of the provision. It is in the interests of health and safety at work that employers are made to take their responsibilities seriously, and this small measure will help to achieve that objective. Moreover, the additional money that becomes available will be good for the NHS. The measure does not constitute a departure from the fundamental principles of the NHS. Indeed, I repeat that a similar means of allocating extra money to the NHS, from road traffic accidents, has existed from the very day of the health service's inception. I remind members of my commitment not to commence the scheme until the insurance market is in such a position that employers who take the health and safety of their employees seriously are not subsidising those who disregard those aspects. Once again, I ask Parliament to agree to the motion.

The motion relates to the Health and Social Care (Community Health and Standards) Bill, which has received its second reading in the House of Commons, and completes its committee stage today. It was not possible to bring the motion to the Parliament sooner, because of the election in May. Part 3 of the bill, together with schedule 9, proposes the establishment of a scheme whereby national health service charges relating to an injured person can be recovered, in most cases, when that injured person receives a compensation payment from the person who is responsible for his or her injuries. The person paying the compensation will be liable to pay the NHS charges, not the compensated injured person. The bill provides for two separate but parallel schemes: one scheme for Scotland, for which Scottish ministers will be responsible, and another for England and Wales, for which the Secretary of State for Health will be responsible. Essentially, the bill provides that where treatment has been provided by NHS Scotland, the relevant charges are to be paid to the relevant hospital via Scottish ministers. There is a desire for a consistent approach to cost recovery within the United Kingdom and no suitable legislative opportunity is likely to arise in the near future in our legislative programme, which is why we are debating the motion today. The principle of recovering NHS charges is not new. Since the 1930s, under the terms of compulsory motor vehicle insurance, if personal injury compensation is paid to the victim of a road traffic accident, the insurer paying compensation is liable to meet the costs of any hospital treatment that the victim might need. The arrangements for recovering such costs were revised and centralised through the Road Traffic (NHS Charges) Act 1999. Like the provisions in front of us today, the 1999 act applies in England, Scotland and Wales, but for Scotland the matter is devolved. Therefore, the 1999 act confers on Scottish ministers powers to make regulations setting the amount to be recovered and the timing,  manner and procedure for appeals. We have here an opportunity to regulate for a scheme whereby those who are responsible for causing injury to others will contribute to the costs of their wrongdoings, including the costs of NHS treatment, thereby removing from the general taxpayer the burden of meeting such costs. Subsidising wrongdoers who do not take active steps to reduce the risk of causing injury costs NHS Scotland an estimated £7 million to £12 million each year. If people have to pay for causing injury to others, albeit through increased insurance premiums, it is likely that they will take care to avoid doing so. Any improvement in health and safety, particularly of employees, is of course a good thing. I stress, however, that NHS costs would be recovered only where a wrongdoer paid personal injury compensation to an injured person. The injured person would pay nothing and would not suffer any reduction in their compensation payment. In most cases, the injured person would be unaware that the cost of their NHS treatment was being recovered. Like the present road traffic accident scheme, the compensator will have a right to have the charges reviewed and a right of appeal. Furthermore, responsibility for setting the tariff of charges to be recovered lies with Scottish ministers. The RTA scheme has an upper limit; I envisage that the proposed scheme will also have such a cap when it is commenced. The cap currently sits at £33,000. Also, like the present road traffic accident scheme, NHS costs that are recovered will go to the NHS trusts or boards that provide the NHS treatment. Ambulance costs, which are not part of the RTA scheme, but will be part of the proposed scheme, will go straight back to the Scottish Ambulance Service. Since the Road Traffic (NHS Charges) Act 1999 came into force in April 1999, more than £18 million has been returned to hospitals in Scotland. I am sure that members will have concerns, as I do, about the impact of such cost recoveries on the insurance market, particularly while the Department for Work and Pensions is carrying out a review of employers' compulsory liability insurance. The Health and Social Care (Community Health and Standards) Bill presents an opportunity for the introduction of a scheme to extend the coverage of the RTA scheme, but those provisions allow Scottish ministers to determine when such a scheme should be commenced. The Department of Health has given a commitment to the Department for Work and Pensions that it will not commence a scheme until the outcome of the employers' compulsory liability insurance review is known.  I am going one step further in that I have given a commitment that commencement will be deferred until such time as the Executive is content that the insurance market has addressed the potential inequalities in the charging of premiums, either by introducing a fairer system of premium setting, or by seeking an alternative solution. I move, That the Parliament endorses the principle of ensuring consistency in recovery of NHS charges where compensation is paid following injury as set out in Part 3 of the Health and Social Care (Community Health and Standards) Bill and agrees that the relevant provisions to achieve this end including extending ministers' powers to make regulations under a scheme for recovery should be considered by the UK Parliament.

We are discussing with the UK Government the issue of devolved powers and social security aspects. The issues involved are complex and those discussions are still in progress.

I am sure that Shona Robison and others will understand that the negotiations involve detailed legal interpretation of the Scotland Act 1998. We have certainly made  the UK Government aware of our legal advice, and clearly we must allow Westminster to come up with its interpretation of that act. I have already discussed the matter with the new Secretary of State for Scotland since his appointment last week, and I can assure Shona Robison that my officials and I are doing all that we can to continue discussions and negotiations with the UK Government.

I dealt with the patient focus agenda at the start of my speech, before moving on to public involvement. As other members have acknowledged, the issue has been growing over a period of time.

Will Mary Scanlon give way?

I would just like to clarify that point. That consultation formed one part of a  much larger debate. If Mary Scanlon were to consider the balance of my speech, she would find that the patient focus agenda was at the centre of it.

David Davidson has focused on an important point. Perhaps I did not clarify the issue of choice sufficiently. Of course I support patient choice, but the key issue for me is that I support a lot more as well. Ultimately, the difference between Labour and the Conservatives is that the Conservative Party has the reductionist view that it all boils down to choice and markets. Choice is part of the issue, but my view is that patients should not only be able to choose a service that somebody else provides but should be involved in creating that service. In theoretical terms, I am a co-productionist and David Davidson has a simple market model of the health service.

That is obviously another interesting point. As a decentraliser and as someone who wants more power for clinicians, I think that that is a good part of foundation hospitals. I want more power to be in the hands of front-line clinicians in practices—not just GPs, but the primary care teams—and doctors in hospitals. However, in Scotland, we have a more integrated approach to health care, so we believe that foundation hospitals are a very conservative—with a small c—idea, because they will serve to fragment and accentuate the difference between the acute sector and primary care. That is why we object to foundation hospitals; we do not object to them because we do not want to devolve power to front-line staff.

At the heart of our vision in the health white paper and the partnership agreement is a patient-focused culture of care, which is developed by a new partnership between patients, staff and Government. Our ambition is to develop systems of care that reflect the needs, concerns and experience of patients. For that to happen, we must engage with patients in a far more serious and systematic way than at any point in the past. A key chapter of the white paper, which was deliberately put at the start of the various health service sections, is called "Listening to Patients". That is the central theme of my speech. The agenda has several strands. It starts with involving and respecting individual patients. The white paper says: "People now expect to be involved in deciding about their own healthcare as responsible partners in care. They wish to be treated with dignity and respect, to be treated as individuals and not as cases, and to have the right care in the right place at the right time." Those last words raise the issue of waiting, which is an important one for patients and therefore for us as well. No one can be in any doubt of our determination to make progress on that front. The radical out-patient action plan, which I launched last Friday, is all about making out-patient appointments quicker, more responsive and more convenient for patients. However, patients are not concerned only about waiting. It would be wrong to judge the health service by that yardstick alone. The rest of the paragraph from which I quoted refers to wider attitudes towards individual patients. There is no doubt that treating them as partners in care involves a sharp break from the health service of the past. It is a major culture change, which will not be completed overnight but which is essential not only for increased satisfaction but for better health outcomes. The aspect of patient focus was given particular attention in the recent NHS Quality Improvement Scotland report "Safe and Effective Patient Care: Generic Clinical Governance Standards". Although  the report found that there had been progress in involving patients in all aspects of their care, it highlighted the need for significant improvement in many areas. That report and the other reports of NHS Quality Improvement Scotland are important drivers for change. Better communication is an important part of the changes that are required. The Executive's action on staff training, patient information and advocacy will all help to bring about the necessary improvements. First, on staff training, together with the royal colleges, NHS Education for Scotland, the ethnic minority resource centre and staff and patients throughout Scotland, we are developing standards for communication training that will be embedded within pre-registration, post-qualification and continuing professional development of all national health service staff.

I will take an intervention when I have finished this section. In addition to the changes that I outlined on staff training, the centre for change and innovation has established a specific programme on doctors' communication. My second point relates to patient information. Patients today have access through the internet to a huge range of health information, but they tell us that they lack quality-assured information from the NHS. Our patient information initiative is therefore under development. We will consult shortly on a framework for the production of quality-assured information across NHS Scotland. Recently, I launched a guide to securing access to information for cancer patients, which is an important tool for NHS boards and cancer networks in their progress towards more patient-focused services. Such a service is already being applied in the Forth Valley NHS Board area—I am thinking of its highly commended patient-held guide to chemotherapy and colorectal cancer. My third point relates to advocacy. Some patients need help and support to express their views and to ensure that health services offer them what they need. Advocacy is of key importance in that respect, as it ensures that people who cannot express themselves or who might have difficulty in communicating their views have the help that they need. We have made a significant investment in advocacy and in the training and development that are needed to support it, with almost £500,000 being spent in the current year. We have also given a commitment in the partnership agreement to strengthen patient advocacy services through  the Advocacy Safeguards Agency and the Scottish Independent Advocacy Alliance.

Many members will want to raise issues about service reorganisation. I will address public involvement in service change in about five minutes. It is important for us to achieve balance in the debate. To do that, we need to start with the patient agenda. The wider public involvement agenda is slightly different and I want to complete my remarks about patient focus before moving on to it. Patient focus does not mean only the involvement of individuals in their own care; it is the key part of the wider quality agenda—indeed, I see it as the very heart of the debate. The starting point for improving quality must be the experience of every single patient who passes through the health care system. It is only by exploring the experiences of patients that we can develop services that are responsive to patients' needs. That is why we must and will invest in professional time and techniques to understand and analyse the wants and needs of different groups of patients. There are many good examples of health care staff listening to and acting on what are sometimes called patient stories. I am pleased that that is an important part of the Royal College of Nursing leadership programmes that we are supporting. There are also good local examples such as Tayside NHS Board's study of cancer patients' perceptions of cancer and palliative care services, "Listening to Different Voices". However, I believe that we must do that kind of work in a much more extensive and systematic way. We might be missing important aspects of patients' experiences because we are not asking them properly or not asking them at all. As a result, we might be failing to discover the problems that require to be addressed. Those problems can range from patients' concerns about the symptoms that they are suffering to the range of issues that are referred to in chapter 3, section 4 of the white paper: "fear of dying, loss of dignity and independence, cleanliness, privacy" and so on. We know about some of those issues and we are taking action on them—clean hospitals are a good and important example. We might be missing other issues, so we need a systematic and comprehensive understanding of patients'  experiences and programmes to ensure that that does not happen. I accept that we have some further work to do within the patient focus and public involvement agenda in order to achieve that objective. Priorities for research should be responsive to the expressed needs of patients. I am pleased that that was emphasised in the recently launched nursing and midwifery research strategy. Patient-focused research, which involves patients from the inception and engages with their experiences, is a key new frontier in which the patient agenda, the research agenda and the quality agenda come together. Patients are the fundamental source of the definition of quality and research is a key underpinning element of quality improvement. Patient experiences are also essential to the wider issues of service redesign as highlighted in the motion. The fundamental principle of change is to see care and services through patients' eyes.

I will give way when I have finished this section. That is beginning to happen, for example, in the development of managed clinical networks for coronary heart disease. The central involvement of patients was a key feature of the pioneering network in Dumfries and Galloway. It is beginning to happen in diabetes services. People with diabetes are involved in the work of diabetes service advisory groups throughout Scotland. We have also provided Diabetes UK with some £150,000 of funding to set up a diabetes patient and carer involvement project. It is also beginning to happen in cancer services, although in that area, as elsewhere, we seek to step up our efforts as part of our new redesign initiative. We will use techniques that allow the perceptions of patients to have a real influence so that their experience of the pathway of care can make tangible differences for other cancer patients.

I will in just a moment. I have a lot more to say on the patient agenda. I need to summarise that briefly and get on to public involvement. I will take one intervention on the way, because I have just heard that my speech is 15 minutes long, not 20. I will summarise the other bits of the patient agenda. The first relates to patients being involved in monitoring quality, which is, of course, the work  of NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. The second is the complaints procedure, which is about acting on patients' concerns. It is out to consultation and there will be a new complaints procedure that will be independent in a way that it has not been before. I also acknowledge the role of the voluntary health sector in the patient agenda, because it represents many patients groups. I refer to our "Fair for All" initiative in relation to the specific needs of ethnic minority patients. There is a very wide patient-focused agenda. I will take John Swinney.

John Swinney makes a fair point. Patients obviously come first in patient involvement, but carer involvement is a key part of that, and the "Listening to Different Voices" project, which took place in his part of the world, involved carers as well as patients. I commend and support that. I must move on to the wider public involvement agenda. It is fair to say that all patients are citizens, but not all citizens are patients. Therefore, how we engage with citizens is not necessarily the same as how we engage with patients, but it is vital for the planning and development of services. I realise that some of the main controversies in the debate will be around that, but I am sure that we can at least all unite in agreeing with the motion's statement that it must be done more effectively than in the past.

I cannot take any more interventions, as I have only four minutes in which to cover public involvement. The key point is that public consultation as done in the past was totally inadequate, because it was end-stage consultation. In the new guidance that we published some months ago, we made it absolutely clear that local communities must be engaged with and involved at an early stage before proposals are developed.

I cannot take any more interventions.

I have only three minutes left, so I cannot possibly give way. The partnership agreement commits us to ensuring public involvement in health service reorganisation plans by obliging NHS boards to consult stakeholders more effectively. We intend to ensure that those principles are reflected in our planned health bill, which will, for the first time, place a duty on NHS boards to promote public involvement. I wanted to give some examples of good public involvement. Once again, I will have to skip that, although I will mention that I talked to the people in Tayside recently about the public partnership group that I launched there, which is a good example of the NHS board and the local authorities working together on this important agenda. Others may want to consider it. Sticking with that part of the world, I think that it is good to see the way in which some of the historic issues to do with Stracathro hospital, which I dealt with when I was on the Health and Community Care Committee, have been dealt with through proper public involvement and engagement. There is a lesson in that for all of us. If we do public involvement better, the public will understand some of the dilemmas and issues a lot more. That is the key issue that we have to confront. There will be much comment today on service change. I will make one general comment about the principles of service change. I believe—and contrary to the nonsense in the Conservative amendment, the white paper states—that more services should be delivered in local communities and that more power should be devolved to lower levels of the health service. However, the key issue is that, as far as clinical safety is concerned, it is often better to provide some in-patient and specialist services in more specialised settings. We and various boards are trying to deal with that balance across Scotland, and we need a much more mature public debate on the issue. To support a strengthening public involvement, we plan to establish—as the motion mentions—a Scottish health council, one of whose key functions will be to monitor and quality assure what health boards are doing to involve the public. It will have a structure of local advisory councils to ensure that the voices of patients, carers and communities are heard. The consultation on that issue came to an end only a few days ago and I will read people's comments with interest. Although I have set out the plan for the moment,  bits of that can obviously change as we discuss the matter over the next few months. I have only a minute left, so I will deal with the amendments. I have mentioned the Conservative amendment already. Sometimes I almost despair of having a sensible debate about health with the Conservatives, because they engage not with what we say about the issue but with some fantasy of their own creation. The whole message of the health white paper is about the devolution of power. It is the complete opposite of the centralisation of the health service which, if I may say so, was at its height under the previous Conservative Government. It is quite unbelievable for that party to talk about increasing bureaucracy when it created the most bureaucratic system in the history of the health service. We are not putting political priorities over clinical ones; no one is keener than I am about that. As the white paper makes clear, we are working and taking action to ensure that clinicians have a stronger role. However, we also want a strong patient agenda, which is my main theme this afternoon. If David Davidson is talking about the issue of waiting in his amendment, I point out that what he calls "political priorities" are actually patients' priorities. As politicians, we have a duty to speak for the patients whom we represent. My time is up. We will have an interesting discussion about elected boards over the next few months, although I do not think that that in itself will solve the wider issues of patient focus and public involvement that I have highlighted today. As members know, we have secured wider representation on NHS boards in various ways. However, I accept that we need to discuss that matter. The key issue that people must think about is accountability, and I see some members in this chamber who would be the first to object if we had more local variation and postcode care. That would indeed be a consequence if primary accountability were local rather than national. I have many more things that I would like to say, but I have no more time. Instead, I move, That the Parliament welcomes the measures in Partnership For Care: Scotland's Health White Paper and the Partnership Agreement to step up progress to ensure that greater patient engagement and wider public involvement are at the heart of a modernised NHS and supports the Scottish Executive's commitment to placing the patient at the heart of the design of services, implementing a patient information initiative, ensuring public involvement in health service reorganisation plans by obliging NHS boards to consult stakeholders more effectively and setting up a Scottish health council as a national body with a local presence across Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I just want to clarify for the record that I knew about the timings earlier today. I should have been a bit more precise in my remarks. When I conceived this speech, I thought that I had 20 minutes but, as I have just said, I knew about the timings earlier today.

Meeting the requirements of the new deal for junior doctors has proved to be a challenge for the service, particularly in some specialties. The new deal implementation support group is working with trusts to provide assistance and guidance in that area. Junior doctors are currently excluded from the working time regulations but, from August 2004, junior doctors' working hours will be progressively reduced to a maximum of 48 hours a week.

Many issues arise from the implementation of the working time directive, in relation not just to doctors but to other health care staff. We have known about the situation since 1992. It is unfortunate that we made so little progress in the 1990s, but we are catching up and most people believe it a good thing that doctors should not have to work excessive hours. On the specific question about Ayr hospital, I am aware that there is public engagement with Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board. I pay tribute to the board, because it is not going for the traditional end-stage consultation; it is engaging with the public in a new way at an early stage, in accordance with the Executive's new guidance. That is the correct way of dealing with such complex issues. The board has not made any decisions yet.

The posts will not be completely compliant by August. However, the figure to which the member refers is from a few months ago and there has been a great deal of progress since then. We are taking a partnership approach towards the issue and are working closely with the junior doctors committee, which was recently involved in a big event in Edinburgh to drive the matter forward. The issue is complex; it involves service redesign and doing things differently. We are getting there but, as I said, progress was slow in the 1990s. We are catching up but, as my answer indicated, it may take several years to get to the full 48-hour limit.

There is a co-ordinated approach. There is no simple solution. We have been introducing 375 extra junior doctors and that process continues this year. That is part of the solution. We are also in the process of expanding the consultant work force in an unprecedented way. In the partnership agreement, we have set a target of 600—more consultant-delivered care is also part of the solution. The third vital strand is the redesign of services, but that will be done in accordance with the principles of quality and patient safety. Those are the key criteria that will be applied, but we cannot avoid the European working time directive. Ultimately, it is in the interest of patients for junior doctors to work reasonable hours.

The Scottish Executive is taking positive action to recruit and retain radiographers and oncologists in the Greater Glasgow NHS Board area, including providing significant extra resources and pursuing a targeted recruitment drive for the Beatson oncology centre. On top of that, the Executive is implementing a range of recruitment and retention initiatives, including various courses and incentive schemes for all national health service staff.

I am sure that I speak for  all members in welcoming Professor Rodger to his post as the medical director of the Beatson from last week. Professor Rodger discussed the issue in question in his first week. Many staff have been recruited at the Beatson and a significant number of therapy radiographers have applied for and got jobs there. There is great progress in that area. Robert Brown referred to oncologists and particularly clinical oncologists. We know that there is an international problem in that respect. I am pleased that over the past two or three years in Scotland we have increased the number of specialist registrars, who are the health professionals who will become consultants in due course. Robert Brown will have heard Alan Rodger speak with confidence about attracting applicants for some of the clinical oncologist posts that are currently being advertised at the Beatson.

Many factors will help to attract consultants to Glasgow, one of which is the splendid new Beatson that will be built very soon. The £700 million capital investment in the health service in Glasgow will also attract people. I regret that, in all Jean Turner's excursions into the territory, she has not noticed that the sale of land is helping to pay for £700 million of investment in Glasgow's health service. We are making positive progress on consultants' contracts in Scotland. Jean Turner will know that such progress has not happened in England. If we continue to negotiate in the final stages—which I believe we will do—the Scottish health service will have significant inducements and advantages.

High standards of health care and services are important not only in the Highlands but throughout Scotland. That is why we established NHS Quality Improvement Scotland to focus on improving quality and standards and why we will promote a culture of continuing improvement in NHS Scotland.

The partnership agreement makes it clear that drugs that have been approved by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland should be made available in each NHS board area and I have made it clear that drugs and treatments that that body recommends should be available to meet clinical need. There is no delay in implementing the policy; we will monitor its implementation to ensure that that commitment is met. That is an important strand of the organisation's work, along with its wider work on national standards, to which I referred in my first answer.

The Scottish Executive met with officials of Fife NHS Board this morning to resolve outstanding issues.

I am concerned about that uncertainty, about which representations have been made to me. That is why I am keen that the outline business case should be approved as soon  as possible. I am pleased to report that officials from the NHS board and the Health Department had a positive meeting this morning to discuss Fife's financial plan. Subject to some detailed clarification, which is expected very soon, the department believes that there is a sound financial basis for Fife to take forward the "Right for Fife" project. Once the department has received the clarification, it expects to approve the outline business case very soon and enable Fife to move forward with detailed planning of the favoured option.

I agree that that has been one of the strengths in Fife; others, such as public involvement in primary care and good joint working between primary care and Fife Acute Hospitals NHS Trust, were highlighted in the NHS Quality Improvement Scotland report that was published last week. In general, we are keen to increase the number of practice nurses. Throughout Scotland last year, there was an increase of about 200 in the number of practice nurses. Further impetus will be given to that process if the GPs vote in favour of the proposed new GP contract, because that will increase the resources that go into general practices by a third. Much of that money may be spent on other health care workers such as practice nurses.

I apologise to Bruce Crawford as I have not read the paper that he has in his hands, but I read another paper that carried a clear statement from Fife NHS Board that there is no question of surgery being cancelled for a  month in Fife this summer.

I pay tribute to the work that has been done by Marilyn Livingstone and Christine May, who have lobbied me hard on the issue. It has been a matter of ensuring that the redesign plans are built on firm financial foundations. That is precisely the reassurance that was given this morning. As I announced, I am confident that, subject to clarification of the further fine details, approval will be given very soon.

Scottish Executive Health Department officials met representatives of Fife NHS Board this morning.

The issues that were discussed this morning and have been discussed in the past few weeks aim to ensure that Fife NHS Board's plans are clinically safe—that is the most important issue—and financially affordable. As I said earlier, we are now almost there on the second important criterion. I am confident that, in the very near future, the outline business case will be approved and that the further detailed work can be done—that includes the work of the group that I asked the board to appoint in relation to the development of services at the Queen Margaret hospital in Dunfermline. Of course, I insisted that  local people were involved in planning.

That is an important point and connects with one of the key messages that I would like to stress about the health service throughout Scotland. In general, the policy direction is to have more services delivered in local communities, but the corollary is that, for some services, it is clinically safer and better in respect of the quality of care to concentrate services for certain specialisms. That is the framework for all the acute services reviews and the controversies that we all know so well throughout Scotland.

There are many recruitment and retention initiatives, including various return-to-practice courses and incentive schemes.

We have funded, increased and promoted a large number of schemes. For example, there has been a big increase in the number of nurses doing return-to-practice courses. Those were funded over the last year, and they will continue to be funded by the Executive. It is not just nurses who go on those courses: allied health professionals, doctors, dentists and pharmacists also attend. That may be of some comfort to Mr Davidson, in case he has to return to work in that sector one day.

Last year, the Scottish Ambulance Service converted stations at Dunoon, Fraserburgh and Stranraer from part-time to full-time working. The service has a programme of reducing on-call work wherever possible and  constantly monitors on-call hours worked.

That decision is properly for the Scottish Ambulance Service's chief executive. One of the service's priority stations for conversion from part-time to full-time work is Peterhead, but Mr Stevenson should remember the other significant changes that have taken place in the service in his area recently, such as the start of priority dispatch, joint working initiatives with the national health service and full-time working at Fraserburgh, to which I referred. He should also remember the significant developments in the service throughout Scotland, most notably the recruitment of 200 extra emergency ambulance staff in one year—last year—throughout Scotland.

The Scottish Executive is  committed to aiming to increase the number of consultants in the NHS, including consultant surgeons, by 600 by 2006. We are centrally funding some posts in specialties in which there are shortages. In the past two years, the number of specialist registrars in surgical specialties has increased from 287 to 339.

The decision that was taken in the Argyll and Clyde NHS Board area was made very much on the ground of clinical safety; I am sure that everyone must agree that clinical safety and the quality of care must be absolutely fundamental to such decisions. There is on-going work in Argyll and Clyde to examine the configuration of services in accordance with those principles. In response to Jackie Baillie's substantive question, however, we are taking unprecedented action to increase the consultant work force. My reference to specialist registrars is particularly important, because that is the grade below consultant level and that is where we have increased the numbers. I would like to mention one other important issue. In Scotland, we are still successfully negotiating the final details of the consultants' contract, which is something that has not happened in England. That will be good for consultants and, more important, good for patients and it might give us an advantage over England.

Today marks the culmination of an inclusive and extensive process that has shown our new Scottish legislative arrangements working at their best and has delivered a landmark bill that places patients and their welfare at its heart. That is exemplified by a coherent set of principles to which anyone discharging functions under the bill must have regard; a new mental health tribunal that will combine professional, legal and practical experience in deciding what is best for patients; a new compulsory treatment order, which will allow care and treatment to be tailored to the personal needs of each patient, whether in hospital or in the community; duties on local authorities to promote the well-being and social development of all persons in their area who have, or who have had, a mental disorder; additional safeguards in the use of certain medical treatments; a strengthened Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland to ensure that the mentally ill are properly protected; novel provisions to ensure that advocacy is available to all persons with mental disorder; and mechanisms for the nomination of a named person with significant rights to represent the patient's interests. I am grateful to everyone who has contributed to the preparation of the bill and its proceedings. I thank again the Millan committee of four years ago. The mental health legislation reference group played a significant part in the preparatory work, both in the development of the policy statement, "Renewing Mental Health Law", which preceded the bill, and by acting as a sounding board and a source of sensible advice on issues that have arisen as the bill has progressed. One of the amendments that I moved this morning followed late advice from that group. The Mental Welfare Commission and the Law Society of Scotland have also been particularly helpful in bringing a keen and experienced eye to the bill. A large range of voluntary organisations, such as the Scottish Association for Mental Health  and the National Schizophrenia Fellowship, have, by their tenacity and persistence, kept us on our mettle and ensured that the patient's perspective was always clearly recognised. I thank all those bodies, mentioned and unmentioned. On the Health and Community Care Committee has fallen a huge burden, so I give a warm thanks to its members, its clerks and everyone who gave evidence to it over a period of several weeks. The bill is by far the largest to have been considered by the Parliament. With the consideration of some 1,400 amendments at stage 2, the committee's energy and commitment to the task were clearly demonstrated. The committee's efforts have resulted in a number of significant changes to the bill. Indeed, many amendments that we have considered in the past two days were lodged in response to the committee's views at earlier stages of the bill. Last, but by no means least, I thank the officials in the bill team. Given the complexity and length of the bill, theirs was a particularly difficult and arduous task, so I place on record my thanks to them. The outcome is a bill of which we can justly be proud. As I said, we will proceed to push forward the implementation process. Work to that end is already in hand. I am pleased to say that the mental health legislation reference group has agreed to continue to make its expertise available in the implementation phase. I am grateful to the group for its continuing commitment. I can announce today that our preliminary date for the commencement of the bill's main provisions is October 2004. Some free-standing provisions, such as the amendment to the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 to allow for the appointment of a new chief officer to the Mental Welfare Commission and the provision that was added at stage 3 concerning the burden of proof, will be brought into operation as soon as possible. However, we wish to be certain that the infrastructure is in place to ensure that this superb legislation is implemented in a way that does justice to its provisions. Presiding Officer, how long do I have? Is it five minutes or seven minutes?

Ten minutes. I have already omitted some of my speech on the assumption that I had only five minutes, but there we are. I should have found out before I started. In implementing the bill, we will work with everyone who has an interest in mental health law in Scotland to ensure that we achieve the benefits for users and carers that the bill makes possible.  We will establish a tribunal system that makes good decisions and that promotes the participation of users and carers. We will develop guidance and a code of practice on the bill to help professionals to deliver quality care. We will put in place arrangements for monitoring and evaluation to ensure that, in the future, we know how the legislation is working and why and how we can make it work as well as possible. We will work with service providers to help them to prepare to meet the responsibilities that the bill places on them. Our intentions are that, before the end of this year, we will have appointed a president of the tribunal to oversee the latter stages of preparatory work, we will have announced the location of the president's office and we will have issued a draft code of practice for formal consultation. I hope and expect that the Parliament will maintain a close interest in that important process. The amendment from the Scottish National Party is unnecessary. As it repeats what I have said on many occasions, clearly I have no reason to oppose it. On 14 November 2001, in the debate on the white paper, I made it absolutely clear that adequate resources would be made available for the implementation of the bill. I give that commitment again today. At stage 1, I said that I was "setting in train a comprehensive assessment of existing mental health service provision. That will enable us better to determine how the current range of facilities, augmented by the substantial additional resources that we are making available, will be able to meet the bill's objectives."— [ Official Report , 11 December 2002; c 16205.]  On 5 February, I duly announced that Dr Sandra Grant had agreed to carry out that assessment. I have asked her to complete her report, which will be made publicly available, by 31 August. We look forward to receiving Dr Grant's report, which will give an objective and comprehensive perspective of current service provision and will inform the steps that we are taking to ensure that the implementation of the bill is adequately resourced. The amendment would therefore be more accurate if it said that the Parliament "supports the view expressed by many giving evidence on the Bill, by three committees of the Parliament and by the Minister for Health and Community Care that the aims of the Bill will not be met unless services and facilities are adequate to meet the demands placed on them." However, we shall not quibble at this stage; we shall accept the amendment in spite of the fact that it is unnecessary. I have great pleasure in commending a bill that revolutionises mental health law in Scotland, that puts the patient at the centre of treatment and care decisions and that ensures that their well-being is and will be paramount.  I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The main elements of the e-health plan are set out in the "Partnership for Care" report and we have subsequently announced a doubling of funding for e-health over the next three years. The driving force is the urgent need for an e-health culture led by clinicians and one of the key objectives is the development of an integrated care record jointly managed by the patient and NHS staff.

Over the past year, I have seen several good examples of e-health in action in Maureen Macmillan's far-flung region. For example, in Fort William I saw the communication between GPs and hospitals with regard to appointments and discharge levels and in Shetland and the more remote bits of Argyll and Clyde, I have seen the transmission of clinical images, such as X-rays and ultrasound scans, over long distances. Remote and rural areas are already enjoying advantages because of e-health, but they will also benefit from further, more general, advantages, three of which I flagged up in my previous answer. Those advantages are first, the increase in investment; secondly, the leadership of clinicians, which is a new and emphatic feature; and thirdly, the development of an integrated care effort, which is absolutely fundamental to the more integrated health service that is outlined in the white paper and which we are determined to create.

The record growth in health funding is distributed through the Arbuthnott formula to ensure that all areas of Scotland benefit, especially areas of deprivation and remote and rural areas.

Mary Scanlon knows that the way to monitor the situation is through the performance assessment framework, of which targeting money at health inequalities is a key objective. It is also a critical objective of the health improvement challenge, which we launched on Monday. For the first time, we are developing indicators that will allow us to measure health inequalities and ensure that we close those gaps between the richest and poorest communities. Furthermore, health boards are required, for the first time, to implement health and homelessness action plans. As a result, Mary Scanlon can be assured that health boards are doing more than they have in the past about poverty and inequality. That said, I accept that there is more to do. That fundamental intention underlies all the health improvement work that we launched on Monday.

Although Glasgow has benefited from the Arbuthnott formula, I certainly recognise that city's particular health needs. Indeed, the health board in question will have to deal with such issues in the way that it spends its money. Paul Martin mentioned both heart disease and cancer. Notwithstanding some difficulties, which I am always prepared to admit, I think that we should all recognise that considerable progress has been made on the cancer strategy over the past year. Indeed, that was acknowledged at question time last Thursday when we discussed the Scotland against cancer conference. Furthermore, we have introduced a major new heart disease initiative. Glasgow, among others, will benefit from the extra investment in that respect and from the new way of delivering care through the formation of managed clinical networks for coronary heart disease in every board area.

That question raises two major issues. I realise that I have answered the question about Arbuthnott before; however, perhaps I should put the matter in another way. In the last year before the Arbuthnott formula was implemented, Grampian received an increase of 5.5 per cent. This April, under Arbuthnott, Grampian will receive an increase of 7.4 per cent. I accept that the increase is not quite as large as that in Glasgow. However, Richard Lochhead will have heard Paul Martin's comments about Glasgow's particular needs, with which I entirely agree. We have to keep the matter in perspective. Is Richard Lochhead really saying that he wants Grampian to get exactly the same funding per head as Glasgow? More fundamentally, does the SNP health spokesperson feel the same way? On the second point, there are still issues to be  resolved around the GP contract, but there has been a lot of misinformation about that. Only about 60 per cent of the money is distributed under the formula. It may be that it appears that there are losses there. However, they will be made up for—and in most cases more than made up for—by all the other new parts of the contract, such as the quality payments, which are an important feature of the new contract in relation to the modernisation and the improvement of services.

Amendment 736 would add "psychological intervention" to the definition of medical treatment in the bill. The amendment is not strictly necessary, because there is no real doubt that psychological therapies are included in the current definition, but we are happy to take the opportunity to put the matter beyond doubt by accepting the amendment. I will say a couple of things on the subjects that have been raised. First, I stress that we fully expect that psychologists will play an important role in assessment, care planning and the delivery of care to people with mental disorders under the bill. The role of psychological therapies, such as cognitive behavioural therapy, in the care and treatment of mental illness and learning disability is increasingly recognised. We have already emphasised the importance of psychological intervention in guidance to the field. More than a year ago, I was pleased to launch circular HDL(2001)75, "Framework for Mental Health Services in Scotland: (A) Psychological Interventions (B) Eating Disorders". Psychological therapy is an important new area—or rather, an increasingly important area—for mental health services. Members might wish to read the core  service elements that are referred to in the document, which highlight some of the key themes of mental health policy. The document refers to the views of "users of services (including advocates), carers of people with mental health problems, and partner agencies", and emphasises strongly the importance of "collaborative working with social work departments and voluntary organisations". Members who are interested in the subject may wish to read another document, "Psychological Interventions Pilot Implementation Projects", which came out in April 2002. It is interesting to read some of the key issues in relation to mental health services that are highlighted in that report, such as the need to take a "whole systems" approach and to "Identify the different interfaces of the system (eg between Primary and Secondary Care ... and Voluntary Sector providers) and improve communication and the person's journey across them." That links up with some of the key themes of the recent white paper.

I congratulate Richard Simpson on the two longest interventions of recent times. I also acknowledge that he made interesting and important points, to which there are several responses. In summary, I agree entirely with everything he said. There has been development in a variety of forms. In its report, the primary care modernisation group flagged up mental health as a key area for development in primary care. In our recent work involving stakeholders, which will result in a letter being sent to the stakeholders next week, we have flagged up the increasing role of primary care and local health care co-operatives, in partnership with all the other agencies. On Dr Simpson's earlier intervention, the other key area is the development of the work force. There are issues about the number of clinical psychologists. Although we have taken action to increase the number of clinical psychologists in training, I agree with Richard Simpson's more general point that the issue does not involve only clinical psychologists. As he said in his last intervention, a wide range of members of the work force—in particular the primary care team—can play an important role in mental health. The mental health work force is the pathfinder group for our new work-force arrangements, which involve the work-force unit and new structural arrangements for work-force planning and development. The first piece of work on our new work-force planning arrangements will concentrate on the mental health work force. Part of that is about people performing new roles. I agree with Richard Simpson that GPs will want to—and, in many cases, will require to—develop their skills. I recognise that there are time issues. I am sure that Richard Simpson will agree with me about the vital contribution of practitioner nurses, for example, and of many other members of the primary care work force. It has been useful to respond to the points that have been made. I reassure the psychologists and everyone else who has an interest in amendment 736 that we recognise the increasing importance of their work, not just for the people who are the main centre of attention in the bill, but far more broadly. Part of the new development in mental health policy is to ensure that appropriate services are provided to the thousands of people who suffer from what might be called milder and more  moderate forms of mental distress, such as anxiety and depression, which are an enormous issue for the health service and the general population. Psychological interventions are crucial in that area, as well as for the severe and enduring mental illness that was the main focus of the original "Framework for Mental Health Services in Scotland" of six years ago. In conclusion, I return to the wording of the bill. I ought to give my reasons for saying that amendment 736 is not strictly necessary. Although therapeutic interventions by a psychologist might not always be covered by the day-to-day use of the term "medical treatment", the term has a specialised meaning in the bill, because of section 228—it means "treatment for mental disorder". There is no reason to suppose that any psychological interventions that we would want to be included are not covered by the definition. However, we are aware that strong concerns have been expressed about the issue and it will not cause any problem to have "psychological intervention" stated explicitly in the bill.

Amendments 250 and 272 seek to make transitional amendments to the 1984 act in the light of a recent ruling by the European Court of Human Rights. The court found that the 1984 act was incompatible with the European convention on human rights because, in cases in which sheriffs were to decide whether to discharge a patient, the act did not provide that the burden of proof must be on the state rather than on the patient. In practice, that makes no difference in the vast majority of cases. Furthermore, the court's decision relates to a period prior to the commencement of the Human Rights Act 1998, which requires courts to read statutes—so far as it is possible to do so—in a manner that is compatible with the convention. We are of the view that the flaw in the 1984 act that the Strasbourg court identified has already been remedied by the 1998 act. Nevertheless, in the light of the court's decision, we have lodged  amendments that will remove all possible doubt and which will correct the position until such time as the 1984 act is replaced by the bill. I move amendment 250.

As Richard Simpson indicated, the bill does not require to be implemented in one go. However, we intend to start implementing it next year, in 2004.  Amendment 250 agreed to.

Amendment 104 will amend the criteria for appointing the third member of the tribunal. We intend that the third member should have a background in mental health, but there could be several types of relevant background, including a background as a professional, a carer or a service user. The amendment will add "skills" to the matters that can be taken into account in deciding whether an existing tribunal member is entitled to remain in post on the expiry of his or her term of office. If he or she does not possess the skills that are prescribed for original appointment, any reappointment will be discretionary rather than mandatory.  Amendment 68 is a technical amendment to clarify the position on the make-up of the tribunal when it makes decisions. The basic rule is as set out in paragraphs 6(2A) and 6(2B), which require that the tribunal consist of three members and be chaired by a legal member or the president or, in respect of restricted patients, a sheriff. However, some preliminary or urgent matters might be best dealt with by, for example, a legal member acting alone. Examples might include a decision about appointing a curator ad litem or a decision to authorise an urgent patient transfer pending an appeal. Amendment 68 provides for rules that can make exceptions to the normal composition of the tribunal in such situations. I move amendment 104.  Amendment 104 agreed to.  Amendment 68 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

As the title of the group makes clear, the amendments in this group concern minor and consequential amendments and repeals. I move amendment 742.  Amendment 742 agreed to.  Amendments 261, 262, 743, 263, 744 to 748 and 264 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendment 749 implements policy concerning the making of hospital directions. A hospital direction is a mental health disposal that allows the sentencing court, in addition to imposing a prison sentence, to direct that a person be detained in hospital to receive treatment for a mental disorder. The patient can then be transferred to prison once their mental disorder no longer requires treatment in a hospital setting. Amendment 749 will bring the provisions on hospital directions in the Criminal Procedure  (Scotland) Act 1995 into line with the rest of the bill. I move amendment 749.  Amendment 749 agreed to.  Amendments 750, 105, 265, 751, 266, 267, 13 and 268 to 271 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendments 56 and 65 are technical amendments that provide that section 193, which regulates interference with patients' correspondence, may apply both to correspondence that is delivered by the normal postal service and to any other arrangements for the collection of post. Currently, important aspects of the procedures on interference with correspondence apply only when the patient is detained in the state hospital. We indicated at stage 2 that we wished to review that and we have concluded that it might be necessary for the powers to apply to some patients in other settings. That particularly reflects  the fact that some patients who might in the past have been in the state hospital will, in future, be accommodated in regional secure facilities. Amendments 57 and 62 therefore remove the restriction to the state hospital but leave provisions that allow regulations to specify the kind of patient or the kind of situation that may justify interference with correspondence—for example, to protect other patients or members of the public. Those regulations will be subject to the affirmative procedure, so the Parliament will have a proper opportunity to consider them before they are brought into effect. The bill puts in place safeguards, including a list of people whose correspondence cannot be intercepted and powers for the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland to monitor any such action and, if necessary, to overrule the hospital managers. Amendment 58 is purely a drafting amendment. I shall not move amendment 59, as the latest advice suggests that the reference to the Scottish ministers should be retained as a fallback in cases in which letters are being received and the identity of the hospital is not known. Amendments 60 and 61 reflect commitments that were made at stage 2. A member's amendment sought to provide that correspondence between a patient and an advocate could not be interfered with. We agreed in principle, but were concerned to ensure that the drafting was tightly drawn so that the provision applied to properly authorised independent advocates and was not open to abuse. Amendment 61 provides for that. For completeness, we have also added to the list members of the National Assembly for Wales, members of the European Parliament, special health boards and NHS trusts. Amendment 63 is purely a drafting amendment. Amendment 64 makes it clear that the risk that might justify intercepting a letter that is sent by a patient may relate to the health of that patient as well as to the patient's safety. Section 197(4) provides that telephone calls by the patient to any one of a list of persons or bodies cannot be intercepted, except in limited circumstances. Amendment 66 adds to the list health boards and the bodies that are listed in amendments 60 and 61, including independent advocacy services. I move amendment 56.  Amendment 56 agreed to.  Amendments 57 and 58 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to. Amendment 59 not moved.  Amendments 60 to 65 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendment 10 is a technical amendment that makes it clear that the regulations that may be made under section 197, concerning safety and security in hospital, apply to patients who are detained under the bill or the related mental health disposals in the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. Amendment 67 is also a technical amendment. It broadens the consultation requirements in section 197(6) to any regulations that are made under section 197. I move amendment 10.  Amendment 10 agreed to.  Amendment 67 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendment 693 introduces a new section that makes provision for the transfer of patients subject to community-based compulsory treatment orders. The new section provides a regulation-making power in which a detailed framework for the transfer of such patients to destinations outside Scotland can be set out. It is important to emphasise that a patient subject to a community-based compulsory treatment order can be transferred outside Scotland only when that is in accordance with the patient's wishes or, if the patient is unable to express an opinion, when the named person considers it to be in the patient's best interests. It is envisaged that the powers provided for in the new section will be used primarily where the patient wishes to settle in another part of the United Kingdom. Amendments 694 and 695 adjust section  201(1)(c) to make it clear that, in relation to the removal of a patient from another jurisdiction to Scotland, the bill can make provision only for the reception of the patient in Scotland. The removal of the patient from foreign territory is a matter for that jurisdiction. Amendment 696 requires that regulations concerning the cross-border transfer of patients under section 201 must require the Scottish ministers to have regard to certain factors before a patient can be transferred. Those factors are the patient's best interests, the existence of suitable arrangements at the receiving end, any preference that the patient has expressed to the Scottish ministers and any risk to the safety of any person. Amendment 697 expands the list of persons to whom notice must be given of any decision that the patient be removed from Scotland under section 201. Those persons are the patient, the patient's named person, the mental health officer and the Mental Welfare Commission. Amendment 698 improves the drafting of section 201(3) by making it clearer that exceptions can be made to the requirements under paragraphs (b), (c), (d) or (f) of section 201(2). Exceptions cannot be made to paragraphs (a) and (e), which provide, respectively, that a patient's removal from Scotland must be authorised by a warrant issued by the Scottish ministers and that a patient may appeal against any decision to remove him. Amendment 699 adjusts section 201(4) to make it clear that the Scottish ministers can veto the reception in Scotland of any patient removed from another jurisdiction. However, the removal itself is a matter for that jurisdiction. Amendment 700 makes it clear that a patient whose detention is suspended by virtue of a certificate issued under the relevant part of the bill is nonetheless included within the scope of section 201, which deals primarily with detained patients. I move amendment 693.  Amendment 693 agreed to.

Amendment 708 makes provision in section 204 for patients on suspension of detention from emergency or short-term detention where that suspension of detention is subject to conditions that the patient be  accompanied or return to hospital and the patient fails to comply with those conditions. Amendment 220 extends the absconding provisions contained in section 204 to cover patients who are detained in hospital as a result of section 85(5A). Amendment 223 modifies section 205(8) so that a patient who is absent without leave and in breach of his compulsory treatment order is no longer considered to be absent without leave once taken in under section 85 for breach of the order. Amendment 225 adds a new provision to section 206 to make it clear that a patient who is subject to a compulsory treatment order and whose period of unauthorised absence has continued for longer than three months is not only no longer liable to be retaken, under section 205(4), but is no longer subject to the order. Without that provision, although the patient could not be retaken, the order would still be alive. Amendment 226 corrects the drafting of section 207(1)(b) by removing the superfluous reference to a period of two months. Section 207 applies to any patient subject to a compulsory treatment order whose period of unauthorised absence is longer than 28 days and whose unauthorised absence ceases at least 14 days before the expiry of the order. Amendments 228 and 235 prevent unnecessary duplication of section 60(3) reviews in sections 207 and 209 respectively. If it is necessary to carry out a section 60(3) review for the purposes of part 16 and the 14-day period within which the review is carried out overlaps with the two-month period within which a first or further review must be carried out, for the purposes of renewing the order it is not necessary to repeat those steps. Amendments 229, 231 and 232 are consequential on amendment 228 and improve the drafting of section 207.  Amendments 230 and 233 remove section 207(6), which was incorrect. That subsection provided that, if the patient absconded after the mandatory review procedures in part 7, chapter 2 had begun, those review procedures did not need to be repeated. That is not correct in the case of patients who have been absent without leave for a period exceeding 28 days. That is such a significant event that any such review must be started again from scratch. Amendments 236 and 239 remove the reference to section 207(6) from sections 209(2) and 210(2) respectively. Amendments 237 and 240 clarify the application of subsections (3) to (5) of section 207 to sections 209 and 210 respectively. Those subsections provide the interface with part 7, chapter 2, which  deals with the renewal of compulsory treatment orders. Amendments 238 and 241 provide that a period of unauthorised absence lasting for 28 days or less does not invalidate any of the review procedures carried out for the purposes of part 7, chapter 2 prior to the absence of the patient. Amendment 711 introduces a new section providing a regulation-making power to enable provisions equivalent to those for absconding civil patients to be drawn up for patients subject to criminal orders. Amendments 701 to 707, 221, 222, 224, 227 and 234 are technical amendments to part 16 that improve the drafting and tidy things up after amendment at stage 2. I move amendment 102.  Amendment 102 agreed to.

This important group of  amendments follows extensive discussion at committee on the right of advocacy. Indeed, amendments were lodged on the provisions on that. In response to other points that were made during the committee's consideration of the bill and amendments that were lodged by John McAllion, we have discussed the issue further with the Advocacy Safeguards Agency and the mental health legislation reference group, and I am pleased to say that we have reached agreement on the way forward. Amendment 14 deletes section 182(4)(b), which defines the term "advocacy services". As I have said, that change was proposed by John McAllion at stage 2 because of concern that the wording of the subsection gave undue emphasis to the notion that the mentally disordered person is unable to state an opinion. It is fundamental that the advocate represents their advocacy partner's views, not their own. Amendment 16 tightens up the definition of "independent advocacy" to ensure that voluntary or other organisations that provide care services to a person under arrangements with the national health service or a local authority cannot also provide that person with advocacy services. However, Enable and other members of the reference group pointed out that excluding "employees" of the NHS and local authorities from being advocates under the bill went too far. Such a provision could have excluded people who happened to work in public services but not in a way that would create a conflict of interest with an advocacy role. As a result, amendments 15 and 17 delete the provision. I move amendment 14.  Amendment 14 agreed to.  Amendments 15 to 17 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendment 756 seeks to remove a reference to section 145 from section 182(11). Because section 145 was deleted at stage 2, that reference is incorrect. Amendment 757 seeks to tidy up the drafting of section 215(1), which should now refer only to one further subsection. I move amendment 756.  Amendment 756 agreed to.

Amendments 668 and 669 are technical amendments that seek to clarify that the duties in section 185 continue to apply, even if the detention of a patient has been temporarily suspended. Amendment 670 is a drafting amendment that seeks to make it clear that the permanent copy of the information given to the patient under section 185 must be in a form that is appropriate to the patient's needs. Amendment 672 seeks to do likewise for the information that is to be provided to the named person. Amendment 671 seeks to make it clear that information on advocacy relates to the duties to secure independent advocacy services under section 182. At the moment, duties to provide information to the patient in section 185 are imposed on hospital managers for detained patients and on the mental health officer for patients in the community. After reviewing that provision, we feel that it is not the correct approach. Whether a patient is in hospital or in the community, the primary purpose of a compulsory treatment order is likely to be to ensure that the patient can receive medical treatment under the supervision of a responsible medical officer. The RMO will have a continuing involvement with the patient. That may not be the case for the mental health officer. As a result, we have concluded that it makes more sense for hospital managers to have the duty to ensure that the patient is given appropriate information—for example, where a CTO is renewed. That is the intention behind amendment 673. Amendments 674 and 675 are technical amendments that seek to make it clear that the duties in section 186 continue to apply, even if the detention of a patient has been temporarily suspended. Amendment 676 seeks to clarify that the duties also apply where the patient is subject to a review of a mental health order imposed by a criminal court. I move amendment 668.  Amendment 668 agreed to.  Amendments 669 to 673 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Sections 183 and 183A provide that a medical practitioner may examine a  patient or the patient's medical records for the purposes of advising the patient or named person in connection with an application to the tribunal, or of providing information to the patient or named person in connection with a tribunal hearing. The mental health legislation reference group expressed concerns that such a provision might mean that a named person could have access to private medical information concerning the patient, even if the patient did not agree to that. In order to ensure that that does not happen, amendments 677 to 680 provide that a competent patient can rescind any authorisation given by a named person for a doctor to carry out an examination or to examine medical records. I move amendment 677.  Amendment 677 agreed to.  Amendment 678 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

I think that we have reached a degree of consensus because there is no great difference between the original position stated by Shona Robison and my proposal. There is also an underlying agreement about the direction in which we want to travel and the intention of our policy. We have listened—I certainly have—to the serious concerns of some service users about the matter. We must concede that other service users testify to the benefits that they have received from ECT, but there is no doubt that some service users have concerns—often based on their own experience—about ECT. A significant advance in the bill is that we are saying clearly that anyone who is capable, even if they are subject to compulsory treatment in general, will not receive ECT against their wishes—not even in an emergency. That is a significant step forward in terms of the history of ECT and the rights of  service users more generally. We should acknowledge that point, because some recent reports about the matter in the media have suggested that we are turning the clock back. We have already made significant progress in the bill as drafted and in the bill as amended at stage 2. Today, we seek to push that progress further. The exemption of those who are capable from the emergency provisions is proposed in amendments 664 and 665, with which no one disagrees. That matter was discussed in general terms at committee and today we are trying to engage with the position of people who are incapable and how their objections should be dealt with. We take on board what the Health and Community Care Committee said in its stage 1 report about additional protections for patients in that particular situation. Shona Robison's comments were helpful, and I acknowledge the potential danger that the conditions we are applying could be interpreted too widely. I make it absolutely clear that the code of practice will give clear guidance on the effect of the provisions and that it will take on board the spirit of the debate in which we have agreed that, unless there are overriding reasons, if someone says no to ECT, that means no. I also assure her that there will be consultation on that guidance, and it is particularly important that we listen to service users on the subject.

Wider issues concerning advance statements, which we will revisit soon, have been partly debated. The bill says that advance statements that object to ECT have to be taken into account by both the RMO and any doctor who gives a second opinion. That is the position. I know that Mary Scanlon wants to argue another point—she will have a further opportunity to do that. Any decision not to comply with an advance statement would need to be reported to the Mental Welfare Commission. There are more complex issues surrounding advance statements, as the Health and Community Care Committee acknowledged in its stage 1 report. However, we are building so much into the matter that perhaps the question of advance statements is not quite so critical. Basically, we are saying, "If you are capable, ECT will not happen under any circumstances." We are saying today that there is also a presumption that someone who is incapable will not receive ECT, unless the clear conditions  that are stated in section 171 are met. Those conditions will be further described in the code of practice on which there will be consultation. The position reflects the clear consensus of the Parliament on the matter today, and that is the spirit in which we should advance. Most of us, including Margaret Smith, who was explicit in her comments, and me—and I am following clinical advice—do not want to go as far as Shona Robison proposes, although in many ways it is my instinct to do so. However, as a responsible health minister, I must pay heed to clinical advice and to the situations in which a difficulty would be caused by the more absolutist position proposed by Shona Robison. I admitted in my opening speech that her proposal was an attractive option, but we have to be responsible, as Margaret Smith said, and ensure that we pass a law that covers all eventualities. I understand people's concerns about the Executive's position. That is why I make it clear that a code of practice will give guidance on the effect of the provisions and that there will be consultation on that guidance. ECT is an area about which some service users feel strongly, and SAMH has reflected the concerns that are expressed to that organisation by service users.

That is a very good question, which I have also asked. There are definitions in the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, with which we are all familiar. Whichever amendments we agree to today, including the Executive's amendments, we will have to examine what is said in the 2000 act because we are extending the rights of incapable people in relation to ECT beyond what is stated in that act. I hope that there can be agreement on Executive amendment 655 and that members will accept the undertakings I have given about further work on the code of practice. I also accept what Margaret Smith said about the need to monitor the situation—along with the bill's other provisions—closely.  Amendment 655 agreed to.

This group of amendments deals with the issue of electroconvulsive therapy, which is something that the Executive and the Health and Community Care Committee have thought very carefully about. Understandably, the treatment raises strong concerns, and even fears, but some people will testify that it has helped to alleviate their terrible and crippling illness. Our concern has always been to reassure people that the necessary safeguards are in place, while not imposing restrictions that could prevent some patients from receiving treatment that they desperately need. Those safeguards have already been strengthened under the bill. Today, I propose to strengthen them further in two significant ways. The bill already provides that a patient who is liable to be treated compulsorily can be given ECT only if a second doctor authorised by the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland certifies that that is in the best interests of the patient. The only exception is where treatment is required as a matter of urgency. If a patient is capable of making a treatment choice and refuses ECT, the second doctor may not overrule that decision. That is already a major and significant advance on the current situation. Amendments 664 and 665 strengthen that provision further. Concern was expressed at stage 2 that the refusal of a competent patient could still be overruled in an emergency situation. We accepted that, as long as a patient is able to understand the implications of their decisions and to make a competent choice, that choice must be respected, and we undertook to lodge appropriate amendments at stage 3. Amendments 664 and 665 give effect to that undertaking by disapplying the emergency provisions of section 171 where  the patient is capable of consenting but does not so consent. Some of the patients for whom ECT might be considered will be incapacitated by illness, such as severe clinical depression, and will not be in a position to make an informed treatment choice. At stage 2, it was suggested that ECT should not be given to incapable patients. The committee considered the issue carefully, and concluded that that would be wrong. Amendments 216 and 217, in the name of Shona Robison, are a refinement of that approach. They provide that ECT could not be given to an incapable patient who resisted or objected to the treatment, except in an emergency. That may appear to be an attractive option, but ECT is the only treatment for some severely depressed patients, according to clinical advice. I am advised that, as a consequence of their illness, such patients may be agitated, disturbed or even delusional and may object to the treatment when they are not well enough to know what the treatment is. Amendments 216 and 217 would deny people in that desperate situation access to the very treatment that might help them to recover their capacity. It is true that the treatment could still be given if the responsible medical officer—RMO—decided that it was a matter of urgency. However, that could mean patients having to endure prolonged suffering and physical deterioration before their condition became so acute that they could be treated. We appreciate the concern that this issue causes among many service users. In its stage 1 report, the Health and Community Care Committee asked the Executive to consider ways in which it could strengthen the safeguards for incapable patients. Amendments 655, 656, and 657 respond to that request. Their effect is to tighten up the criteria for giving ECT where an incapable patient objects to or resists the treatment. Instead of it being necessary for the second doctor to certify that the treatment is in the best interests of the patient, one of the stricter tests in paragraphs (a) to (c) of section 171(3) must be met. In other words, the independent doctor must certify that the treatment is necessary for "(a) saving the patient's life; (b) preventing serious deterioration in the patient's condition" or "(c) alleviating serious suffering on the part of the patient". Those are the same grounds that would entitle a doctor to treat a patient who objected to ECT on the basis of Shona Robison's amendments, but without requiring the RMO to allow the patient to deteriorate until the situation became an  emergency. I hope that members will agree that our way forward is reasonable. I move amendment 655, and I hope that Shona Robison will agree not to move amendments 216 and 217.

The amendments in this group clarify the duties of the Scottish ministers with respect to compulsion orders and restriction orders, in part 10, and hospital directions and transfer for treatment directions, in part 11. Section 128B(3) requires the Scottish ministers to give notice only once a reference to the tribunal in respect of a patient's compulsion order and restriction order has been made. Amendment 593 will require the Scottish ministers to give notice to the relevant people before such a reference is made, where it is practicable to do so. Amendment 598 deals with the same issue in relation to section 129A. Amendment 595 is a drafting amendment to include an appropriate reference to section 128B(2)—dealing with the Scottish ministers' duty to refer a case to the tribunal if required to do so by the commission—in section 129(1). Amendment 596 clarifies the working of section 129A(2). It ensures that the Scottish ministers must make a reference to the tribunal two years after the making of the compulsion order and restriction order, if no other reference or application has been made to the tribunal in the intervening two years. It also ensures that, following that reference, the Scottish ministers must, on each anniversary, look back at the  previous two years and make another reference to the tribunal if the tribunal has not considered the order in that period. That ensures that the tribunal will consider the order at least once every two years. Amendment 634 does the same for directions in part 11. Amendment 637 is consequential on amendment 634 and removes text that is no longer required. Amendment 597 makes it clear that a prior reference under section 129A(2) does not come into consideration when determining whether a reference or application has been made in the previous two years that would preclude a reference under section 129A now. Amendment 635 has the same effect for directions in part 11. Amendment 600 is consequential on amendment 596 and removes text that is no longer required. Amendment 630 updates section 152. It adds appropriate references to the new section that is added by amendment 628 and allows the Scottish ministers the opportunity to revoke the direction if they believe it appropriate to do so before having to make a reference to the tribunal. Amendment 631 makes it clear that section 102 of the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978, which concerns the functions of the state hospital, does not affect a decision of the Scottish ministers under section 152. Amendment 633 is a technical amendment to make it clear that the Scottish ministers are under a duty to review the status of a patient who is subject to a part 11 direction in addition to their duties under other sections, as provided for in the amendment. Amendment 643 adds to subsection (1) of section 154B a necessary reference to section 152(1A), which was added to the bill by amendment 630. It means that if the Scottish ministers were to revoke a direction under section 152(1A), they would also direct the transfer of the patient to prison and the direction would cease to have effect once the patient had been admitted to prison. I move amendment 593.  Amendment 593 agreed to.

Amendments 594, 599 and 601 are drafting amendments, which will ensure that the relevant sections properly refer to the persons who are listed in section 128(2). Amendments 632 and 636 have the same effect for part 11 and ensure that the relevant part 11 sections properly refer to the persons who are listed in section 152(3). I move amendment 594.  Amendment 594 agreed to.

Amendment 603 improves the drafting of section 132(1), which makes it clear that both the patient and their named person can make applications to the tribunal under section 133 for a review of the compulsion and restriction order. Amendment 638 has the same effect for applications to review directions under section 154 in part 11. Amendment 604 removes text, with the effect that a patient or their named person cannot make an application to the tribunal under section 132 for three months after any review by the tribunal under section 133. Amendment 605 makes it clear that the three-month time bar on applications under section 132 by the patient or their named person includes cases in which the tribunal has reviewed the compulsion order and restriction order under section 133 but has decided to make no order. Amendment 621 is a drafting amendment to section 141(1), which makes it clear that both the patient and their named person can appeal to the tribunal under section 141 against the patient's recall from conditional discharge to hospital. Amendment 639 is a minor drafting amendment, which replaces the word "and" with the word "to" as a consequence of amendment 641, which inserts new subsections into section 154. Amendment 640 is required to make it clear that  an application under section 154 cannot be made in the first six months after a hospital direction has been made. Amendment 641 will allow a patient who is subject to a transfer for treatment direction to make an application under section 154 in the first 12 weeks after the direction has been made. The amendment implements a Millan recommendation that the patient and their named person should be able to appeal against the making of a transfer for treatment direction. If they do not make such an appeal, the patient and their named person cannot then make an application until six months after the making of the direction has elapsed. I move amendment 603.  Amendment 603 agreed to.  Amendments 604 and 605 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

The amendments deal with the powers of the tribunal under sections 133 in part 10 and 154A in part 11. Amendment 606 is a drafting amendment to section 133(1)(a) to insert the proper reference to section 132(1). Amendments 607, 608 and 609 are minor drafting amendments that reflect the fact that when the tribunal revokes a compulsion order or restriction order under section 133, it does so by making an order. Amendment 610 makes it clear that the tribunal can make an order conditionally discharging a patient only where it is not satisfied that it is necessary for the patient to be detained in hospital. Amendment 612 is a technical amendment that will change the text in section 133 (8) to read "Before making a decision under this section the Tribunal shall—". That reflects the fact that the tribunal may not make any order under section 133—the amendment leaves the status of the patient unchanged. Amendment 642 brings section 154A in part 11 into line with section 133 in part 10. It ensures that before the tribunal makes any decision under section 154A in relation to patients who are subject to a direction, it must have afforded the persons listed in the new subsection (5B) that is proposed by the amendment the opportunity to make representations or to give evidence to the tribunal on the patient's case.  I move amendment 606.  Amendment 606 agreed to.  Amendments 607 to 610 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

I can certainly assure Margaret Jamieson that we are determined that health services and the police will act together. We will ensure that that happens.  Amendment 447 agreed to.  Amendment 146 moved—[Mrs Mary Mulligan]—and agreed to.

Amendment 474 is a minor technical amendment that makes it clear that the definition of a prisoner "serving a sentence of imprisonment" used in section 97 does not include a person subject to an assessment order, a treatment order, an interim compulsion order, a temporary  compulsion order, an insanity disposal or a compulsion order. I move amendment 474.  Amendment 474 agreed to.  Amendment 475 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendment 692 seeks to consolidate the provisions concerning the Scottish ministers' power to require RMOs to provide information into one section that covers all the relevant orders and directions in parts 8, 10 and 11. The section is necessary to ensure that the Scottish ministers can obtain access to up-to-date information on patients. Amendments 179, 189, 195 and 649 seek to delete sections that are no longer required if amendment 692 is agreed to. I move amendment 179.  Amendment 179 agreed to.

Amendment 480 is a technical amendment to make it clear that section 101A applies once a compulsion order without a restriction order is made in respect of a patient. Amendments 484, 487, 488, 561 and 575 are minor drafting amendments that insert text to ensure that the relevant sections refer to a relevant compulsion order, as defined by amendment 480. Amendment 587 corrects an error in section 121B to change the reference to section 101(1) to section 101A(1). I move amendment 480.  Amendment 480 agreed to.  Amendments 481 and 482 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendment 497 is a minor drafting amendment that corrects a mistake in section 105A(2), in which the reference to section 104(2) should have been to 104(1). Amendment 498 is a technical amendment to the same subsection, to add in a reference to section 108A(2), which refers to the duty to consider from time to time whether to vary the order. I move amendment 497.  Amendment 497 agreed to.  Amendment 498 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendment 566 adds the mental health officer and the patient's RMO to the list of people in section 110B(3) who must be afforded the opportunity to give evidence to the  tribunal following a review of a determination under section 110A. Amendment 572 is a technical drafting amendment to section 110E(3)(a), to remove an unnecessary reference to the specific paragraphs of section 110B(3). I move amendment 566.  Amendment 566 agreed to.  Amendment 567 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendments 133, 138 and 139 delete sections 86A, 86B and 86C from the bill. Section 86A is no longer necessary as the link between detention following breach and an application for variation of the order has been made explicit in section 86(1) by amendment 117. Section 86B has been superseded by the two new sections introduced by amendments 134 and 135, which place a duty on the responsible medical officer to revoke the detention certificates when certain conditions are met. Amendment 137 inserts a new section into the bill, which replaces section 86C, and deals with the patient and the patient's named person's right to apply to the tribunal for revocation of a detention certificate following breach. Amendment 137 clarifies the application procedure, following the splitting of section 86 into two sections to deal with compulsory treatment orders and interim compulsory treatment orders separately. I move amendment 133.  Amendment 133 agreed to.

Amendment 35 removes section 88(1)(b) and amendment 36 removes section 89(1)(b). Those provisions qualified the appeal right of a patient who was being transferred, so that the patient could not appeal if the hospital was one specified in the compulsory treatment order. Those provisions are redundant, as it is not competent to specify a transfer in a compulsory treatment order as one of the compulsory measures. Therefore, the patient may appeal against any transfer to any hospital. I move amendment 35.  Amendment 35 agreed to.

Amendments 442, 443, 449, 450, 458, 459, 464 and 465 change the structure of the relevant sections to make it clear that ministers can apply to the court for an assessment or treatment order if a person is in custody, has been charged with an offence, has yet to be sentenced and appears to have a mental disorder. Amendments 444 and 460 amend subsection (4A) of new sections 52B and 52K respectively of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. They ensure that ministers must inform the prosecutor that they are applying for an assessment or treatment order if the prosecutor still has a role to play in the proceedings—that is, if the relevant disposal set out in new section 52A(3) of the 1995 act has not been made. Amendment 445 is consequential on amendment 444 and amendment 461 is consequential on amendment 460. As the term "relevant disposal" has been introduced into sections 52B and 52K of the 1995 act, it requires definition. The amendments do that by referring back to the definition given in section 52A. Amendments 451 and 466 make it clear that the court can make an assessment order under section 52D or a treatment order under section 52M only if it would have made one under section 52C or 52L following an application by the prosecutor or the Scottish ministers. Amendments 452 and 467 clarify that an assessment order that has been made under section 52D or a treatment order that has been made under section 52M would have the same effect as an order made under sections 52C or 52L. Amendment 455 makes it clear that the court can make a treatment order after reviewing an assessment order under section 52F only if it would have done so under section 52L. Amendment 454 paves the way for amendment 455. Amendment 456 clarifies that, if a treatment order is made under section 52F, it would have the same effect as if the treatment order had been made under section 52L. I move amendment 442.  Amendment 442 agreed to.  Amendments 443 to 445 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendments 446 and 462  are minor drafting amendments. They ensure that the court can specify a person to escort the person to hospital once the assessment or treatment order has been made. I move amendment 446.  Amendment 446 agreed to.  Amendments 143 to 145 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendments 447 and 463 delete a subsection from new sections 52C and 52L of the 1995 act as the required references to section 65 of that act are contained within the new section added to the bill by amendment 469. Amendment 469 inserts a new section concerning the prevention of delay in trials to clarify the position concerning assessment and treatment orders. The effect of the amendment is that the time limits of 40, 80 and 110 days, which are set out in sections 65 and 147 of the 1995 act, apply both to assessment and to treatment orders. That ensures that the making of those orders would not delay the start of the trial and that the Crown must adhere to the same time limits as other persons involved in criminal proceedings. I move amendment 447.

As the Presiding Officer has said, there are quite a few amendments in the group, but I promise to get through them within five minutes. We have lodged amendments to part 7, chapter 2 that will enable the responsible medical officer to carry out more of the duties in respect of mandatory reviews on the same occasion, thereby reducing the burden of those reviews. Amendments 367, 375, 380, 388, 399 and 412 will remove the word "after" from sections 64(2), 63(2), 66(2), 66B(2), 68(2) and 68B(2). Amendment 378 will remove the absolute requirement to consult again the persons who are mentioned in section 60 after having completed the steps in section 63 in relation to the mandatory reviews of a compulsory treatment order. Amendment 381 will remove from section 66(2) the reference to the responsible medical officer consulting under section 63(3)(c). The remaining amendments to part 7, chapter 2 are primarily technical amendments. Amendments 366, 373, 374, 379, 397, 398 and 426 will clarify that the compulsory treatment order that is being  reviewed is the compulsory treatment order to which the patient in question is subject. Amendment 369 will make it clear that the duty on the responsible medical officer to consider from time to time whether to revoke the compulsory treatment order is without prejudice to the duty to consider from time to time whether to vary the compulsory treatment order. Amendment 377 will require that, where the responsible medical officer considers that it might be necessary to vary the compulsory treatment order at section 63 (3) (b), he will also consider what modifications are required. Amendments 383, 384, 402, 403, 404, 420, 421 and 424 will remove unnecessary words from various sections in part 7, chapter 2. Amendments 387 and 411 will remove section 66B(1) and section 68B(1), which are no longer necessary. Amendments 414, 417, 419, 422 and 423 will make sections 68B, 72 and 73 more concise. Amendments 389 to 392, 400, 413, 415, 416, 418 and 420 will tidy up the cross-references within part 7, chapter 2. The remaining amendments concern part 9, chapter 2. We have lodged amendments to part 9, chapter 2 that parallel those to part 7, which will enable the responsible medical officer to carry out his duties in respect of mandatory reviews in a more streamlined fashion. Amendments 496, 501, 508, 513, 521 and 526 will remove the word "after" from sections 105, 105D, 106, 106B, 106D and 106F and amendment 506 will simplify the process of consultation that is required under section 105D. The bill currently requires the RMO to consult the relevant persons twice, under sections 104(2) and 105D(3). Amendment 506 will change section 105D(3)(d) so that the RMO must consider the view that has been expressed by the persons consulted under section 104(2). Amendments 491, 519 and 550 will harmonise part 9 with part 7, as amended at stage 2. More substantively, amendment 556 will bring section 108 into line with the equivalent part 7 section. It will make it clear that the application to the tribunal following the first review must state whether the mental health officer who was consulted agrees or disagrees that the application should be made or has failed to inform the RMO of their views. Amendments 562 and 565 will modify section 108F to make it clear that a patient or their named person cannot make more than two applications to the tribunal under that section in the six months after the order is first renewed, or in any subsequent period of 12 months. Any application under section 108E will count as one of the permitted applications. That gives the same effect as under the equivalent section in part 7. The remaining amendments to part 9, chapter 2  are primarily technical amendments. Amendments 494, 495, 499, 500, 507, 510, 512, 520, 524, 525, 533, 534, 538 and 540 will clarify that the compulsion order that is being reviewed is the compulsion order to which the patient in question is subject. Amendments 490, 535, 548, 552 and 559 will remove unnecessary words from various sections in part 9, chapter 2. Amendment 547 will remove section 107B(1), which is unnecessary. Amendments 492, 502, 503, 504, 509, 515, 523, 528, 536, 537, 539, 558 and 563 will improve the words that are used in various sections of part 9. Amendment 505 will make it clear that if, following consideration of whether an order should be varied, the RMO believes that it should be varied, he or she should also consider what modifications to the order would be appropriate. Amendments 514, 516, 517, 518, 522, 527, 529, 530, 546, 549, 551, 553, 554, 555, 557 and 560 will tidy up the cross-references within part 9, chapter 2. I am glad to say that I will have completed my speech within five minutes, although I realise that some members will think that it is the best speech that I have ever made in the Scottish Parliament. I move amendment 366.

Amendment 115 will introduce a new section that will apply chapter 1 of part 7 to patients who are subject to hospital directions or transfer for treatment directions in accordance with a new schedule that will be introduced by amendment 251. I move amendment 115.

Amendments 349 and 350 will bring section 56C, which requires the responsible medical officer to revoke an interim compulsory treatment order where the criteria are no longer met, into line with the wording that is used in section 64A, which makes a similar provision for compulsory treatment orders. Amendment 351 will remove section 56D, and amendments 352 to 356 will modify section 56F. Amendment 352 will place a duty on the responsible medical officer to notify certain persons when he makes a determination to revoke an interim compulsory treatment order by replacing provision at section 56D that will have  been removed by amendment 351. Amendment 353 will tidy up the drafting of section 56F. Amendment 354 will require the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland to provide to certain persons a statement of the reasons for its decision to revoke an interim compulsory treatment order. Amendment 355 will require that any guardian of the patient and any welfare attorney of the patient be notified of the responsible medical officer's, or the commission's, decision to revoke an interim compulsory treatment order. Amendment 356 will remove the requirement on the commission to notify hospital managers of the decision to revoke an interim compulsory treatment order. I move amendment 349.  Amendment 349 agreed to.  Amendment 350 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendments 362 and 363 will make minor technical drafting improvements to section 60 and amendment 364 will modify section 60(3A) in recognition of the fact that the care plan will not necessarily include any reference to community care services, relevant services or other treatment, care or service. Amendment 365 will remove the reference to section 66B from section 61(3)(a) because it is unnecessary, having been specified in subsection (1). Amendment 485 is a minor drafting amendment that will remove some unnecessary text from section 104. Amendment 486 will bring part 9 of the bill into line with the changes that have been made to part 7. It makes it clearer whom the RMO should consult on a review of the compulsion order. I move amendment 362.  Amendment 362 agreed to.  Amendments 363 and 364 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

I will start with Richard Simpson's last point. I assure him that we have established a research programme that will monitor the bill's operation, including community-based compulsory treatment orders. I agree with Richard Simpson entirely and made clear in my opening speech that it is very important to research the effectiveness of the orders and monitor their implementation. I understand fully—and have done from the  beginning—the concerns that some service users have. I note and understand the comments of Maggie Keppie, who is a member of the Edinburgh users forum. I have discussed the matter with her. I am honoured to be the forum's honorary president, so I hope that it does not throw me out of office if I do not entirely support the views that it has put forward. Adam Ingram also reflected those fears that compulsion will increase as a result of the CTO. That is precisely what, in various ways, we must and shall avoid. Richard Simpson referred to how CTOs will be managed by the tribunal and to the fact that each individual should have a care plan. That is an important part of the bill's provisions. Research and monitoring have been referred to. Amendments 342 and 344 provide a further avenue for the Parliament to take action if it starts to have concerns about the operation of community-based compulsory treatment orders. That is the right way to do it. We should let the orders start and watch them carefully. If there are problems, we should act, which amendments 342 and 344 will enable us to do. That is the right way. If we go down the route that Shona Robison proposes in different ways in her amendments 74, 75 and 343, we shall put at risk the flexibility that is potentially a positive feature of community-based compulsory treatment orders. Members have spoken about service users wanting to be in hospital rather than the community when they are under compulsion. In a way, that has happened, because part of the response to Maggie Keppie's evidence is that the bill explicitly provides that forcible treatment can be administered in a hospital only. There is no question of that taking place in the patient's home. However, we should also reflect on the opposite situation: someone who would prefer to have the compulsory treatment in the community rather than the hospital if the choice had to be made. The danger of Shona Robison's amendments is that we will disadvantage those people by removing the flexibility that the bill contains. Although I acknowledge all the understandable concerns of members and service users—I share those concerns, which is why I will be watchful of how the community-based CTOs work—I strongly urge members to support amendments 342 and 344, which I lodged to address those concerns, rather than support the ultimately inflexible approach that Shona Robison recommends.

This group of amendments deals with one of the issues that has caused the most controversy during the bill's passage and during the wide consultation that took place prior to its introduction. That subject is, of course, compulsory treatment in the community. The Executive amendments do not seek to rule out the possibility of community-based compulsory treatment, but seek to impose limitations on its use. We are satisfied that Millan was right to recommend that it should no longer be necessary in every case to detain in hospital a person who requires compulsory treatment. That view was endorsed by the Health and Community Care Committee in its stage 1 report and during stage 2 consideration. However, we know that there are still fears that the new provisions might be misused. Amendments 74 and 75 seek to limit  community-based orders to a particular kind of patient. They are similar to amendments that were lodged at stage 2 and that were not accepted by the committee. Those amendments seek to identify the kind of patient for whom a community-based order might be appropriate and to limit the orders to them. The situation envisaged under amendment 75 covers the sort of case where community-based orders might be particularly appropriate, but we cannot say that that situation is the only one where such an order might be the best option. For example, a person with learning disabilities might be involved in dangerous or inappropriate behaviour. They might be able to be given a structured programme of support and treatment in the community, backed up by a residence requirement imposed under a CTO. If that were to be provided, that would surely be better than doing nothing, detaining the patient in hospital or allowing them to be dealt with under the criminal justice system. That is absolutely consistent with the Millan report. Amendment 75 is, to an extent, sourced from paragraph 36 of the Millan report, but the examples that it outlines are prefaced by the words "The kind of patients for whom such an order would be particularly relevant might include". It goes on to give illustrative examples, which have now become the exclusive subject matter of amendment 75. I have referred to one example relating to learning disabilities, but there could well be others. One of the fundamental aims of the Millan report and of the bill is to provide for flexible orders, based on the needs of the patient, and to respect the principle of the least restrictive alternative. Shona Robison's amendments could work against that. They could mean that a tribunal could not make a community-based order, even if an order was necessary and if the patient preferred an order in the community to detention.  It is important to remember that the bill contains comprehensive safeguards. The mental health tribunal for Scotland has to be persuaded that the criteria for making an order are met and that the order is necessary. It will consider the specific terms of the order against the background of the care plan, and it must exercise its powers in the way that appears to it to involve the minimum restriction on the freedom of the patient that is necessary in the circumstances. Those are stringent tests, but they allow the tribunal the flexibility to ensure that the order is truly based on the needs of the individual patient.  We must be careful not to remove that flexibility. It is one of the fundamental aims of Millan to move away from a one-size-fits-all model of detention to a patient-centred model of care and treatment. Amendment 343 is set out in more general terms. It would require regulations to specify further conditions that must be met before a community-based order could be imposed. That clearly allows more scope for flexibility, but we cannot be sure at this stage that it would be possible to draft regulations that would improve on the safeguards in the bill but that would not have unintended adverse consequences for some service users. However, we have listened carefully to the concerns and fears expressed by some service users, and we have concluded that we should not reject such regulations out of hand. Executive amendments 342 and 344 allow—but do not require—further regulations to be made. Such regulations would set out further conditions to be met before a compulsory treatment order that does not involve detention is authorised. As we prepare for implementation, we will consult further on the possible content of any such regulations. I apologise that the Executive amendments were submitted late, but I was personally involved in discussions with the Scottish Association for Mental Health. I am not saying that its members support my amendments, but I understood SAMH's concerns, and I wanted to make some movement on this issue. The provisions in this area of the bill are not the only way in which we are approaching this issue. I said during the stage 1 debate that we would be monitoring carefully the overall numbers of community-based compulsory treatment orders. I am mindful of what Shona Robison said about the increasing number of compulsory orders now, although those are hospital-based orders. The issue needs to be kept under review and, among its other responsibilities, the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland has a specific remit to do that. The commission will fulfil that role under the bill, and research will be carried out. We will be monitoring the situation very closely because I understand the concerns that people have. The controversies around community treatment orders suggest that they could be used wrongly. The safeguards in the bill are strong, but I am happy to move my amendments in this group in order to allow the Parliament at a future date, very easily and without recourse to primary legislation, to require that more specific restrictions be placed on the way in which the important new orders are used. The Health and Community Care Committee agreed that that the orders represent a  progressive move, although I know that others do not agree. The committee took the view that, in principle, community-based orders are in the interest of patients. Through my amendments in the group, I hope to reassure the Parliament, services users and the voluntary organisations that raised the issue that we have provided for another way to ensure that the orders are used for their intended purposes. There are also all the additional ways in which we shall ensure that we keep a very close watch on the orders, and that we use them only where they are the least restrictive alternative and are in the interest of the patient. I hope that members agree that that is a reasonable compromise. That is the basis on which I will move my amendments and ask Shona Robison not to press her amendments.

Amendment 297 will introduce a new section that will place a duty on the approved medical practitioner to revoke an emergency detention certificate if he or she is not satisfied that the criteria for emergency detention are met. The new section will replace section 33(3), which will be removed by amendment 290. Amendment 298 will remove section 34A, which gave the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland power to revoke an emergency detention certificate. The commission has advised us that, because it requires a full meeting of the commission to approve such an intervention, it would never be practical for such a power to be used within the 72-hour time limit that is set for  emergency detention. Accordingly, that power is not required. Amendment 299 will, as a consequence of amendments 297 and 298, revise section 34B, which will, if amended, provide a duty on the approved medical practitioner to notify the patient and the managers of the hospital if he or she decides to revoke an emergency detention certificate. I move amendment 290.  Amendment 290 agreed to.

Amendment 291 will provide that hospital managers should "inform" rather than "give notice" to certain persons of the granting of an emergency detention certificate. That will mean that notice does not have to be in writing and it will enable managers to do so faster. Amendment 292 will clarify the start and end point of the period of seven days in which hospital managers must pass on the information that has been provided to them by the medical practitioner as per section 32(2), concerning emergency detention. Amendment 316 will clarify the start and end point of the period of seven days within which the managers of the hospital must inform the tribunal and the Mental Welfare Commission of the granting of a short-term detention certificate. The period will begin at the start of the day on which the hospital managers receive the information or on which the certificate is granted, so that that full day counts towards the seven-day period. Amendment 293 will tidy up the drafting of section 33(4)(b)(i) and amendments 294, 295 and 296 will tidy up the drafting of sections 33(5) and 33(5A). Amendment 300 will revise section 34(B) to place a duty on the approved medical practitioner to notify the patient and the managers of the hospital if he or she decides to revoke an emergency detention certificate. The hospital managers are then required to inform the persons who are mentioned in sections 33(5) and 33(5A). Amendments 315, 324, 325 and 328 will ensure that any guardian and any welfare attorney of a patient are informed of the granting of a short-term detention certificate, the granting of an extension certificate and revocation of short-term detention or its extension by the responsible medical officer or the Mental Welfare Commission. Amendments 323 and 324 will require the approved medical practitioner who grants an extension certificate to give the certificate to the managers of the hospital in which the patient is  detained, and to give notice to the mental health officer who has responsibility for the patient's case. Amendment 324 will also remove local authorities from that list. Amendment 326 will add a guardian or welfare attorney of the patient to the list of persons who are entitled to make representations, or to lead or produce evidence to the tribunal, when the patient or named person applies to the tribunal for revocation of a short-term detention or extension certificate. Amendment 329 will require the Mental Welfare Commission to inform the tribunal when it revokes a short-term detention or extension certificate. I move amendment 291.  Amendment 291 agreed to.  Amendments 292 to 296 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendments 301 and 330 will introduce new sections that will enable a responsible medical officer to grant a suspension of the detention requirement in respect of a patient who is subject to emergency detention or short-term detention. The amendments will enable the responsible medical officer to set conditions in relation to the suspension and are broadly in line with provision that was made in the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 regarding leave of absence. Amendments 302 and 331 will provide the responsible medical officer with a power to revoke a suspension certificate that is granted in respect of emergency or short-term detention. Amendment  302 will provide notification requirements that are similar to those for the revocation of emergency detention. Amendment 331 will require the responsible medical officer to give notice of revocation of a suspension certificate in respect of short-term detention to the patient, the named person, the mental health officer, any person who is empowered to escort the patient while on suspension and the Mental Welfare Commission. Amendments 709 and 710 will authorise any person who accompanies a patient as a condition of suspension of emergency or short-term detention to take into custody or resume the charge of that patient if he absconds. The amendments will modify sections 205(2)(a) and 205(3)(b) and are consequential on amendment 708. On 29 January, during stage 2 consideration of the bill, the Health and Community Care Committee voted in favour of amendments 257 and 258, which were lodged by Mary Scanlon and which sought to adjust section 83. However, section 83 was deleted following a vote in favour of Executive amendment 604, which replaced section 83 with section 90A. The Executive undertook to lodge amendments at stage 3 to take account of the views that lay behind amendments 257 and 258. We have therefore lodged amendments to sections 90A and 91 that will implement the spirit of amendments 257 and 258. I note in passing that those are the kind of amendments to which I referred earlier—they are responsive to the will of the committees, as is our custom in the Scottish Parliament. In particular, amendment 49 will require the responsible medical officer to inform the patient, the named person and the mental health officer of the measures that are to be suspended and the period for which the responsible medical officer proposes to suspend them. Amendment 49 will also require the responsible medical officer to give his reasons. Amendment 50 will ensure that the Mental Welfare Commission is also made aware of those matters. At stage 2, amendment 258 proposed that the responsible medical officer should specify in advance any circumstances that would be likely to lead to the premature end of the period of suspension. Through amendment 55, which will amend section 91, we will provide that the responsible medical officer should inform the patient, named person and mental health officer of the reasons for ending the period of suspension, if and when he does so. That is because we do not think that it is possible for the responsible medical officer to predict every scenario in which he might wish to end the period of suspension. Amendment 54 is consequential on amendment 55. Certain other matters that were raised at stage 2 in  amendments 257 and 258, such as the period of notice that should be given, were tightened up by Executive amendments at stage 2. Amendments 41 and 42 will enable a suspension of detention under section 90 to be granted for a series of events, whether or not they include travel, and will implement the spirit of amendment 510, which Shona Robison lodged at stage 2. Amendments 38 and 40 will remove section 90(3A) because the provision that the suspension of detention cannot exceed the period for which detention is authorised is no longer believed to be necessary. Amendments 45 and 46 will modify section 90(6) to implement the policy that notice should be given to the persons who are listed in section 90(6) where successive periods of suspension of detention exceed 28 days. The bill already provides a similar provision for cases in which a single period of suspension of detention exceeds 28 days. Amendment 168 will insert text, the consequence of which is that all persons who are subject to an assessment order cannot be granted a suspension of detention without prior authorisation by Scottish ministers. That will ensure that better risk assessment is undertaken for patients whose risk to others has perhaps not been quantified. Amendment 169 will remove section 99B(3). We do not now consider it necessary to state that the period for which the person can be granted a suspension of detention cannot be longer than the period for which the assessment order would exist. Amendment 166, which is consequential on amendments 168 and 169, will remove text that is no longer necessary. Amendment 170 will change section 99B to make it consistent with the civil provisions in the bill and will enable a suspension of detention to be granted for an event or a series of events. Amendments 171, 178 and 478 will move the relevant sections to a more appropriate place in the bill. They will move the provisions on suspension of detention in parts 8A to 11 to one location. Amendment 144 will remove section 52C(9), which will no longer be necessary because of the changes that amendment 168 will make to section 99B. If all assessment orders require the consent of the Scottish ministers prior to the granting of a suspension of detention, the court does not need the power to make an order under section 52C(9). Amendment 145 is consequential on amendment 144, as are amendments 147 and 148. Amendment 147 will ensure that the Scottish ministers will receive from the RMO the report on  the review of the assessment order after 28 days and amendment 148 will ensure that the court will tell the Scottish ministers if it extends the order by seven days. Amendments 151 and 152 will have the same effect for treatment orders as amendments 144 and 145 will have for assessment orders. Amendment 180 will delete section 99E(1) and follows from amendment 168, which will insert a new subsection into section 99C to reflect the policy that suspension of detention certificates for persons who are subject to an assessment order should be granted only with the prior consent of the Scottish ministers. Amendments 187, 188, 190, 193, 194 and 196 will delete sections in parts 8B and 8C that relate to suspension of detention for persons who are subject to treatment orders or interim compulsion orders. Those sections will not be required following amendment 197, which will add treatment orders and interim compulsion orders to section 160D. That will have the effect that sections 160D to 160F will apply to those orders in the same way as they apply to compulsion orders with a restriction order, hospital directions and transfer for treatment directions. Essentially, that means that suspensions of detention for persons who are subject to those orders and directions can be granted only with the consent of the Scottish ministers; that the total duration of a suspension cannot exceed nine months in a 12 month period and that the Scottish ministers, as well as the RMO, can recall a patient to hospital from suspension. Amendment 202 will make it clear that the notification requirements in section 160D(9) apply when suspension of detention that would total more than 28 days has been granted to a patient. The remaining amendments in the group are technical and will improve drafting of relevant sections. I move amendment 301.  Amendment 301 agreed to.  Amendment 302 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

I am repeating myself to some extent, but what I will say is important with respect to the amendment and making laws in general. The matter must be focused on. I want to ensure that reciprocity is at the heart of the bill in the many ways that I have described. However, amendment 69 has no meaning in respect of being a duty that can be implemented clearly by boards and local authorities or that the courts can clearly interpret. We have a duty to pass laws that make legal sense. We all agree on the objectives, but we must take our duties seriously and pass clear legislation.

As Shona Robison and others have said, one of the key Millan principles, which I strongly support, is the principle of reciprocity. Where society imposes an obligation on an individual to comply with a programme of treatment and care, it should impose a parallel obligation on health and social care authorities to provide appropriate services. We have stressed repeatedly that we fully accept that as a general principle, but there is a vast difference between stating a general principle and setting it out as a series of coherent, legal propositions in primary legislation. That is an important point to make about amendment 69 and, possibly, about other amendments. As Nicola Sturgeon said, we must enshrine the principle of reciprocity in a meaningful way. Mary Scanlon put it in a negative way, saying that we must not make vague and meaningless statements. The fundamental problem with amendment 69 is that it contains no definition of what is meant by "appropriate services". If a duty to provide services is to be imposed, as distinct from a need to "have regard to" such provision, there must be absolute clarity about what "appropriate" means. Otherwise, it will not be possible for health boards and local authorities to implement the duty or for the courts to say whether the duty has been fulfilled. I ask members to reflect very carefully on amendment 69, because we must pass clear legislation, which can be followed—in this case by health boards and local authorities—without ambiguity and without having frequent recourse to the courts for an interpretation of what is meant and intended.

That is a fair point but, with respect, I have already answered it. There is all the difference in the world between imposing a duty on someone, which then has to be carried out, and failing to clarify what is meant, so that the duty cannot be performed. The phrase "appropriate services" that is in the bill at present refers to existing duties. I was going to go on to raise the question whether the term "appropriate" in the amendment refers to existing duties or to services that are somehow different from the services that health boards and local authorities are already under duties to provide. The drafting seems to imply that that is the case, but it is hard to see what new services are meant. There is no clarity in the definition about what exactly is referred to. Local authorities and NHS boards already have a plethora of legal duties towards people who may be subject to compulsory measures, apart from the new duties that are being imposed in the bill. I will go on to list those duties in a moment.

There are duties, which I will go on to describe. I will allow Richard Simpson to intervene once I have described them. As I have already said, if there is a duty, we must know exactly what "appropriate" means. I am not a lawyer, but it may well be that a board or local authority could say that, in its opinion, services were appropriate. That is precisely the legal problem that we must have regard to when passing legislation. Local authorities have duties to provide community care services under the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 and services for children under the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. They also have various specific duties to disabled people, which apply to people with mental disorder, and other duties in respect of matters such as education, housing and transport. NHS boards have wide-ranging duties under the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978. As I have indicated, it is impossible to be clear about what impact, if any, amendment 69 would have on those various duties. We certainly have no reason to suppose that whatever legal effect it might have  would benefit people who use mental health services.

I am happy to agree with Richard Simpson, because the principle of reciprocity is absolutely at the heart of what Millan proposed. I will go on to describe the ways in which we will ensure that that principle is implemented in mental health services in Scotland, but before I do so, I would like to make one final point, which is perhaps at the heart of members' concerns. At stage 2, members expressed concern that duties on public bodies might not have the intended effect if those bodies simply do not have the resources to implement them. I can fully understand that concern, but amendment 69 would not solve the problem, either in a practical or in a legal sense. In so far as existing duties can be constrained by limitations on resources, the same would apply to amendments 69 and 70. Having described why the amendments would not work, I shall turn to why I do not believe that they are necessary. They are not necessary both because the bill contains measures to implement the reciprocity principle and because we are taking steps to ensure that services are available on the ground. At the heart of the new procedures for compulsory treatment orders is the plan of care. Any application for a compulsory treatment order must include a detailed and multidisciplinary plan of care. If the care and support set out in the plan are not adequate to underpin the compulsory measures, the tribunal would be within its rights not to approve the order. Furthermore, if there are aspects of the plan of care that the tribunal regards as particularly important, the tribunal can specify in the compulsory treatment order that they cannot be dropped without the matter being referred back to the tribunal for a review of the order. The bill also contains a duty on anyone  exercising functions under it to have regard to the importance of providing appropriate services to people who are or have been subject to compulsion, and I have already discussed that in response to Mary Scanlon's intervention. Moreover, part 4 provides clearer and stronger duties on local authorities towards all mental health service users. That is an important feature of the bill that has perhaps not attracted the attention and publicity that it deserves. The duties under that part of the bill include duties towards service users who are subject to compulsory measures, but are not restricted to them.

I hope that I gave a reassurance in response to Richard Simpson's helpful intervention on that point. My fundamental point is that amendments 69 and 70 would not solve that problem. I accept that there is always a problem with resources, which we must deal with in different ways—including, if necessary, being more directive from the centre. However, an amendment that talks about a duty to provide appropriate services does not get round the problem. The fundamental issue is that there is absolutely no clarity about what "appropriate services" means, and we cannot pass laws that are not clear in their intention and effect. I will go on to describe how we are dealing with the serious issue of reciprocity.

The reality is that an amendment such as Shona Robison's amendment 69 would have to define absolutely what the term means. I am sure that Mr Sheridan will understand that it is quite difficult to say in detail what "appropriate" might mean for any one of the many individuals who might be involved. There is a fundamental problem, which is why I am arguing that the way to deal with the issue is by a series of other measures. I am in the middle of describing what those measures are, but they include the powers of the tribunal to which I have already referred. The bill is a huge step forward in strengthening  the rights of mental health service users, and we are ensuring that the resources are available to deliver those rights. As a result of the spending review, we have made significant additional resources available to NHS boards and local authorities to enable services to meet the demands identified in the financial memorandum to the bill. That includes an additional £14.5 million of expenditure per annum on improved services. Concern was expressed in the stage 1 debate about the capacity of services to meet the demands of the legislation, even with those significant additional resources being made available. I announced then that we intended to set in train an assessment of existing mental health service provision, to consider how current facilities, augmented by the additional resources that are coming on stream, could best meet the objectives of the bill. On 5 February, I announced in answer to a parliamentary question that Dr Sandra Grant, the former chief executive of the Scottish Health Advisory Service, has agreed to lead that work. The aim is to complete that work by 31 August, and a report of the outcome will be published. I have the highest regard for Sandra Grant. I knew her when she served on the care development group and I assure members that she will take a robust and independent approach to the important work that she has been given. The assessment will play an important role in helping services to develop and to adapt to meet the demands of the new legislation. It will be carried out in consultation with all the key interests, including service users and carers. I apologise for speaking at length, but I am totally at one with Shona Robison in feeling that the aim of delivering on the reciprocity principle lies at the heart of the bill. I hope that she will accept that we have done all that we can to make that aim a reality and will feel able to withdraw her amendment.

These amendments illustrate the point that I made a moment ago. They also show the importance that we attach to involving carers as well as, more fundamentally, users in relation to mental health and other health policies. The amendments were lodged in response to another amendment that was brought to the Health and Community Care Committee by Adam Ingram. One of the points that Mary Mulligan made at the time was that, in certain situations, there could be conflict between the interests and wishes of users and those of carers. The amendments seek to address those dilemmas. Amendment 31 will strengthen the bill's duties towards carers. We have lodged it in response to a series of stage 2 amendments by Adam Ingram. Those amendments would have imposed various duties to provide carers with specific information on the mentally disordered person. We were concerned that that might cause problems, particularly where the patient wished to keep certain information private, or where there were difficulties in the relationship between the patient and the carer. We discussed that with the mental health legislation reference group and it was clear that it would be almost impossible to set out in primary legislation all the circumstances where it would be right or not right to provide particular information to carers. However, the National Schizophrenia Fellowship  (Scotland) gave us graphic examples of the problems that can be caused when professionals forget to involve carers or even deny them the information that they need to help their friend or loved one. Amendment 31 therefore provides that any person exercising functions under the act, such as a doctor or mental health officer, will have to pay particular attention to the importance of providing information to the carer to assist the carer to care for the mentally disordered person. That draws on one aspect of the principle of respect for carers set out in the Millan report. The bill is not the right place in which to specify the details of how that duty should be fulfilled in each and every case. The code of practice will allow us to set out guidance as to best practice. Amendments 32 and 33 illustrate the other kind of amendment, to which I referred earlier, because they are technical drafting amendments. They will tidy cross references in part 1 of the bill. If members want specific details of that, I will give them in response to comments. I move amendment 31.

Amendments 1 and 2 are further technical amendments about the Mental Welfare Commission's powers under section 6 to bring matters of concern to the attention of various persons. Because of stage 2 changes to the drafting of section 9, the cross-reference to that section is no longer quite right and the amendments would restore the original intention of section 6. Amendment 3 would add the public guardian, who has functions under the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, to the list of bodies that might  be contacted by the commission under section 6 to take steps to protect a mentally disordered person. That reflects the fact that some of the commission's powers under the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 have been consolidated into provisions in this bill. I move amendment 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  Amendments 2 and 3 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendments 4 and 5 are purely drafting amendments that pave the way for amendment 6. Amendment 6 would simplify the drafting of section 8 by inserting a cross-reference to section 7. I move amendment 4.  Amendment 4 agreed to.  Amendment 5 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Amendments 273, 274, 275 and 276 are further technical amendments. Sections 9 and 11 impose duties on the commission to investigate concerns about and to visit people who are subject to compulsory measures. As it stands, the draft bill refers to people who are detained. However, a person who is subject to various forms of detention, such as short-term detention, may have that detention suspended. It is currently called leave of absence. The amendments seek to make sure that that does not prevent the commission from carrying out its duties as intended. Amendment 8 is also a technical amendment to ensure that the commission may make payments to any person who chairs a formal inquiry on its behalf. It retains the effect of a provision in the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984. I move amendment 273.  Amendment 273 agreed to.  Amendment 274 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. Let me say briefly that I understand people's concerns about the number of amendments and I accept that, in certain respects, we need to learn lessons and do better. However, to put the matter into context, people ought to realise that many of the amendments are the result of what I would regard as our superior legislative process—I say that as someone who has been at Westminster. Most of the substantive amendments have been lodged in response to points that the committee made, on which we undertook to lodge amendments. Many consequential amendments have had to be lodged because of changes made by the committee at stage 2. The Presiding Officer has already referred to the fact that the committee changed the name of the bill, which involved 40 consequential amendments. I certainly apologise for the three amendments that were over time. However, one of those amendments was in response to an amendment that was supported by the Scottish Association for Mental Health. By lodging a further late amendment, I have tried to meet the association's concerns, which were reflected in an amendment that had been lodged by a member of the Health and Community Care Committee. I apologise for that, but in each case we tried to be responsive to the committee and the external lobbyists who had concerns about the bill. I accept that we can do better, but people should also accept that part of the explanation is due to our more responsive and—I would argue, perhaps contentiously—superior legislative process.

"Cancer in Scotland: Action for Change" sets out a variety of measures that are aimed at improving prevention, earlier detection and more rapid diagnosis and treatment for all cancers.

I agree that it is important that men take more responsibility for their health. There are various initiatives that will help in that regard. The information initiative that will be mentioned in answer to a subsequent question is part of that. It will help men to be better informed about cancer issues. Improving access is very important as well. I recently came across an example of that. A men's health clinic will soon be set up in the north-west Edinburgh local health care co-operative. It will support men from parts of my constituency and from parts of Margaret Smith's. It will be nurse led. It is an innovative example of the new kinds of services that we want to be developed in primary care. Improving access in that way is important.

I agree entirely with what Mary Scanlon said about the Presiding Officer, who gave a very informative and moving speech at the conference on Friday. The new guidance that was sent out to GPs last year included the new advice about the prostate-specific antigen test for prostate cancer. If men want that, they can certainly get it, but they must have a discussion about the complexities of the issue. We are committed to that, as is George Barlow, the GP in  Glasgow whom Mary Scanlon mentioned, who is very much involved in redesigning cancer services. There have been big reductions in the time for first appointments because of the redesigning of cancer services in south Glasgow. That is another important part of progress on earlier diagnosis.

I join Brian Fitzpatrick in paying tribute to the work of the voluntary sector in relation to cancer. I highlighted that more than once in my speech at the conference on Friday. CancerBACUP in particular makes a large contribution in the field of information. As Brian Fitzpatrick said, it is important that we ensure that men are accessing such information as well. We need to examine that issue and we will be discussing it again shortly.

"Cancer in Scotland: Action for Change: A Guide to Securing Access to Information" was launched on Friday 7 March. It offers guidance to ensure that people who are affected by cancer receive the information that they need, when they need it.

I have seen some of those one-stop clinics in Ayrshire and elsewhere and I am sure that that is an important example of redesign in the interests of patients so that diagnosis and treatment takes place more quickly. As for treatment, so for information. We want it to be in the right place at the right time and of the right quality. The work that was done in the document to which I referred was very helpful and I pay tribute to the patients and the voluntary sector groups who were also involved. It was an example of genuine partnership in action.

The first phase of the new Royal infirmary of Edinburgh opened on time and on budget in January last year. In May, all patient services will have transferred from the old Royal infirmary. In addition, a £2.6 million development to increase capacity in accident and emergency services at St John's hospital in Livingston will open later this year. When I launched the white paper "Partnership for Care" last week, I emphasised our aim to have a national health service that delivers faster and better-quality health care locally. NHS Lothian's plans include a new hospital for Midlothian residents, proposals to develop the hospital services that are currently provided on the site at Roodlands hospital, in Haddington, and community treatment centres in Leith and Musselburgh.

John Home Robertson is right. Increasing the capacity of community health services is a key feature of the white paper that was published last week, and it is beginning to feature in the plans of NHS Lothian. Some of that work is already under way—for example, in the new diagnostic services and community services that are being built at the Leith community treatment centre. I very much hope that the redevelopment of Roodlands hospital will not be far behind. The outline business case is being completed this month and will be considered by  NHS Lothian next month. I hope that the developments at Roodlands hospital will take place as quickly as possible.

There are complex issues to do with the care home sector. However, the public will acknowledge and appreciate the substantial contribution to resolving some of those issues that has been made by the Executive, which has amounted to £130 million over the past 18 months. I hope that the particular issue to which Christine Grahame refers is resolved. In relation to care home fees and the substantial investment that has been made in reducing delayed discharge, the Executive has made enormous progress over the past 18 months.

The new general medical services contract is subject to a ballot of general practitioners that will take place between mid-March and early April. During the negotiations, a working group was established to consider and assess specific remote and rural issues, including island issues. The group's findings have been reflected in the new contract, which addresses the needs of patients in remote and rural areas in a number of ways and promises to alleviate many of the pressures that currently exist in those settings.

I was sorry to hear that a further GP will leave the Lerwick practice at the end of June. I spoke to the chief executive of Shetland NHS Board about that today. She said that someone had been recruited to start in Lerwick in July. However, that will not lessen the problems that exist there. The new contract that has been agreed—subject to the ballot of GPs—will offer substantial opportunities not only for  island areas, but for areas throughout Scotland. There will be a 33 per cent increase in primary care services. That is an important development, which is consistent with the messages of the "Partnership for Care" white paper about the importance of developing more services in primary care, particularly community health partnerships, which we emphasised during last week's debate. Part of the new contract will be a statutory patient service guarantee. I am aware of the concerns about the provision of out-of-hours cover. However, other options are open to GPs, including not having to deliver that cover themselves, which are helpful in terms of GPs' work load and recruiting people into general practice. All patients will be guaranteed an out-of-hours service.

The agreed funding arrangements are responsive to the extra cost of delivering care in island areas. Indeed, the group to which I referred earlier included an Orkney GP, so particular account was taken of the islands. Funding for general practices on the islands will be increased and that will make the islands more attractive for GPs to work on in the future.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am bewildered by the fantasy that David McLetchie has created. The vast majority of people in Scotland know that the last Conservative Government was the most centralising Government in the history of this country. Anybody in local government or the health service will tell him that. If he reads the white paper on health, he will know that its central theme is decentralisation, which is the exact opposite of his caricature of our approach.

As part of the implementation of the Scottish diet action plan, wide-ranging initiatives are on-going at national and local level to improve access to and availability of fruit and vegetables in deprived communities. The Scottish community diet project has a specific remit to work with low-income communities to address the practical obstacles to healthy eating. On 19 February, we announced the introduction of nutritional standards for school meals and additional free fruit in school for all primary 1 and 2 children.

Access to fruit and vegetables and other healthy food is of great importance. That is why the Scottish community diet project initiatives are so important—I am sure that members know of and support those projects in their constituencies, for which funding has increased. The Scottish food and health co-ordinator is active in spreading information about the ways in which the problem can be dealt with and is working with manufacturers and retailers. That is fundamental to our healthy living campaign, which the First Minister launched in January, and it is another important way of increasing the consumption of fruit and vegetables in Scotland.

Today's white paper, "Partnership for Care", is about the promotion of health in the broadest possible sense, and the creation of a health service that is fit for the 21 st century. At the heart of the white paper's vision is a culture of care that is developed and fostered by a new partnership between patients, staff and Government. In the next session of Parliament, we plan to increase investment in health from £6.7 billion to £9.3 billion, which is an annual increase of 5.5 per cent in real terms. That is high by historical standards, but it will deliver the necessary improvements only if it is matched by a programme of modernisation that is based on patients' needs. Our aim is to have a national health service that delivers faster and better-quality health care and that delivers that care at local level whenever it is safe and practical to do so. We want a service that responds to patients' needs and the interests of local communities and that meets national standards of health care. Those objectives require new reforms that will streamline the NHS so that it relies on simpler structures that have stronger local roots. That will require devolution of authority to front-line units and promotion of integrated services for the convenience of patients, which is what the white paper aims to deliver. The white paper sets out radical measures to achieve those objectives. Of course, the implementation of the measures, including the legislation that is involved, must be a matter for the next session of Parliament. By redesigning services, we can deliver a new pattern of local health care services. At local level, health professionals have established local health care co-operatives to enable them to plan and manage services on behalf of their communities.  We propose to build on the LHCCs, to match them better with local authority social work services and to ensure that they have stronger roots in their communities. We will strengthen the LHCCs to become new community health partnerships, which will be based on those teams of primary care professionals, and we will empower them to serve their communities within local NHS systems, with appropriate resources and devolved authority. Our emphasis on integration and decentralisation has implications for the future of NHS trusts. The existence of separate NHS trusts that cover the same areas as NHS boards has not yielded clear benefits, but has confused accountability and obstructed the integration of services. We shall require NHS boards to submit plans to dissolve trusts and to establish decentralised operating units that have a strong role for front-line staff. By bringing together the boards and trusts, we will reduce bureaucracy and produce efficiency savings for front-line services. Within NHS boards, we shall ensure that there is a leading role for health professionals to drive forward the necessary changes in the service. We will require each NHS board to establish a service redesign committee that has the strong involvement of clinicians and other health professionals and which includes representation from each community health partnership. We will require boards to produce service redesign plans to show how they will tackle the challenge of modernising services. We will support the boards with a new change and innovation fund, which will provide an extra £26 million for NHS boards in the next financial year. The centre for change and innovation will also support boards by funding pilot projects, supporting redesign and helping to share best practice. The challenge of redesigning services will not be met by professional experts working in isolation; rather, NHS boards will need to engage better in public consultation. A new Scottish health council will promote the involvement of patients and the planning and delivery of better services. At local level, we will require community health partnerships to engage with their communities through local public partnership forums. Our first priority in improving services must be to improve waiting times, because that is what we hear patients express concern about first. Today, the latest quarterly report on the performance of the NHS in reducing waiting times is published and it shows how the service is making real progress. By the end of 2002, the NHS had met its target of ensuring that no one waits more than 12 months for in-patient treatment. The number of people who had to wait nine months before receiving treatment had fallen to the lowest level since the census began in 1992, and there was a  48 per cent reduction in those waiting more than nine months for in-patient and day-case treatment between September and December last year. Therefore, our initiatives to tackle waiting times are now bringing concrete results. A lot has been done, but there is a lot more still to do. If we look more closely, we can see actual examples of sharp cuts in waiting times that have happened through the redesign of services. For example, in Ayrshire and Arran, the development of a one-stop diagnostic clinic in urology, and the nurturing of team working have reduced waiting times from about 40 weeks in August 2002 to 12 weeks now. Major national work has been launched to reduce out-patient waiting through redesign and other changes. Earlier this month in Dundee, the First Minister announced the next stage of our approach on waiting times. For the first time, we are giving a guarantee of treatment on time. We will guarantee treatment within national waiting times—initially for coronary heart disease procedures—for all in-patient waiting by the end of this year. We will set new clinical targets for specific conditions such as hip operations or cataracts, and NHS boards will set new local targets to drive up performance ahead of the national targets. Waiting times, however, are just one element of the new emphasis on standards and quality of service in NHS Scotland. In Scotland, we have an international reputation for our work on measuring the quality of care; we are determined to sustain that. We will underpin the drive to tackle standards by ensuring that there is independent inspection and audit, as well as by publishing the findings. We will review our systems of incentives for good performance and support for weak performance, and we will ensure that we have powers to intervene effectively when there is service failure. A key theme of the white paper is the importance of partnership working among different parts of the health service, patients and social care. We believe that that approach will encourage the development of integrated services that are in line with the wants and needs of patients. We shall break down the traditional barriers between primary and secondary care and between health and social care. One important way of doing that will be through support for the development of managed clinical networks for cancer, coronary heart disease, diabetes and many other conditions. Community health partnerships will also have an important role to play; they will establish substantive partnerships with local authority services and will act as the focus for integrating local health services, both primary and specialist. Information technology, or e-health, is an important tool for change and integration. We shall  invest in clinical information systems, require the appointment of a clinician as director of clinical information in each NHS board area to champion that work, and work towards an integrated care record that is owned jointly by the patient and their health professionals. Patients must be at the centre of all this drive for reform. We have talked for some time about patient-centred services, but today we are signalling a step change so that looking at services from a patient's point of view becomes the key driver of change in the health service. That will have specific outcomes, such as a new complaints procedure, a patient information initiative and a new statement of patient rights and responsibilities. However, underlying those specific initiatives is a more fundamental culture change that involves patients at every stage as partners in care and as key contributors to quality improvement. There is also a new emphasis on the role of staff, particularly front-line staff, as leaders of change in the health service. We shall increase the capacity of the NHS work force, develop new work force planning arrangements, improve opportunities for continuing professional development and establish reformed pay systems. We shall also ensure that health care teams are given the support, the tools and the freedom to redesign services and improve patient care. All those measures will ensure the improvement and modernisation of health services, but we will never achieve the health outcomes we want unless there is parallel progress on the broader health improvement agenda. That will require a sustained effort that involves not just the Scottish Executive and NHS Scotland but local authorities, employers, trade unions, community planning partners and local communities. We will publish soon a health improvement challenge to set out in more detail how we will focus actions on four groups: children in the early years, teenagers, people at work and local communities. We are backing that up with plans on a range of measures to improve health that will cost almost £250 million over the next three years. Underpinning all that will be action to narrow the health gap between the poorest and richest communities through targeting health improvement initiatives and particular focus on community action. The NHS itself has an important role to play in promoting good health. We need to ensure that front-line NHS staff, especially the primary care teams in communities, work to promote good health. The "Partnership for Care" white paper signals a direction of travel to enable us to go forward together. It takes a broad view of health and it puts patients first. It recognises the importance of  national standards of health care and of independent inspection of performance, and it sets out specific reforms to devolve power, involve health professionals, modernise services and so reduce waiting times. It is a comprehensive but pragmatic set of reforms that address the real challenges that face the NHS in Scotland. Many of those reforms will require legislation by the next Parliament and I commend them to the Parliament.

I note with interest the fact that Nicola Sturgeon says that she had a policy in May 2002—although she has not been promoting it very widely in the past year—to strengthen LHCCs. I refer her to the debate on primary care on 25 April 2002—which, by my reckoning, was before May 2002—in which I made strong statements in favour of primary care throughout my speech. I have been consistent in advocating that more power and responsibility be devolved to primary care, not only during my time as the Minister for Health and Community Care, but for  several years before that. The main point that Nicola Sturgeon made was about waiting times. I am glad that she spared us the disgraceful misrepresentation of the issue that she gave in a press release yesterday, the most disgraceful misrepresentation that I have seen since I became an MSP. In effect, she said that everybody who has waited longer than nine or 12 months should be counted. I am quite happy to speak from experience today and advise Nicola Sturgeon that I have been on a deferred list for a minor leg operation; however, I will now be transferred to the single list, because I have abolished the deferred list. I will have a guarantee exception code, as I should have, because I have said that I do not want the operation at this time: people will understand that I am quite busy. Why should I be counted among the figures that Nicola Sturgeon cited yesterday to peddle misinformation about the state of waiting in the Scottish health service? Nicola Sturgeon says that there is nothing about waiting in the white paper; perhaps she will read it more carefully in the next hour or two. There is a major emphasis on service redesign. I admitted in the debate yesterday that we need to take more radical approaches to out-patient waiting in particular and we will do that. That is the centre for change and innovation's first priority. On in-patient waiting, Nicola Sturgeon should acknowledge the progress that is reflected in today's figures and the fact that the series of initiatives that we have taken in relation to using the private sector and the Golden Jubilee hospital has had some effect. It would be better if members took a more balanced attitude towards such problems—as they did yesterday—and recognised that what I said about a lot having been done, but there being a lot still to do is the correct approach to these matters.

We are prepared to admit that we are building on the health plan. I have talked to NHS staff over the past year, and the last thing that they want is complete structural upheaval of the health service. The white paper builds on the health plan and carries it forward in significant ways. My statement indicated the new ways in which we are carrying the initiatives forward. I highlight in particular the move towards a decentralised and integrated system that carries forward significantly what was outlined in the health plan. Everything that I mentioned in my statement is new. The community health partnerships will strengthen LHCCs and build on their good aspects. We have set up a new body to provide independent inspection, building on the health plan and carrying it forward in significant ways. Our health improvement strategy started with the £26 million health improvement fund, but we are now putting far more money into it and we are targeting our efforts to achieve the step change that is required in health improvement. I am proud to announce continuity that is balanced with significant new steps and a new emphasis on the devolution of power to front-line staff, with a more fundamental role for patients at the centre of the health service.

I agree entirely that we do not want wholesale reorganisation. That repeats the point that I made to Mary Scanlon: we want change without upheaval. What we propose for LHCCs is a good example of that. We will see the evolution of LHCCs, building on the strengths of LHCCs but using them as a basic building block for the health service. In my statement, I talked about strengthening the LHCCs. We will anchor them in legislation and, to ensure local accountability, we will set up public partnership forums for each LHCC. Therefore, we will build on the strengths of the LHCCs, which we consider to be fundamental building blocks, especially in terms of our emphasis on devolving decision making and power to front-line staff.

I am glad that Duncan McNeil welcomes our pledge to tackle bureaucracy to a greater extent. It is obvious that we have made great advances from the internal market bureaucracy that existed under the previous Administration. Argyll and Clyde NHS Board is a good example to give, because it has made the decision to go for single-system working. I know, having talked to several people in Argyll and Clyde, that the board's decision has been widely welcomed. Clinicians in particular welcome the fact that they are involved in discussing how the new forms of services will develop. Duncan McNeil made an important point in relation to his concerns about centralisation of services. A key message of the white paper is that, over time, more services will be developed in primary care settings and community settings. The fact is that upwards of 80 per cent of health service activity takes place in communities.  However, some services must be concentrated in specialist units. That is the hard issue that arises in relation to acute service reviews; it is an issue in Argyll and Clyde and in Glasgow. One of the white paper's points is that we want to, and will, involve the public far more effectively in discussions about reorganisations than we did in the past.

I am not sure what the 0.4 per cent refers to. I have been open and frank about the need for more radical solutions to tackle out-patient waiting times. That is why the issue has been at the top of my agenda and the First Minister's agenda over the past few months. We have started work on waiting times with the centre for change and innovation. I am always willing to admit failure to make progress in an area but, equally, opposition parties should acknowledge that progress has been made in some areas. That point was a key feature of a parliamentary debate yesterday. I talked to staff at Edinburgh royal infirmary today and a doctor said to me exactly what I said in the debate yesterday, which is that there is nothing more demoralising for staff than to hear relentless negativity. Let us hear about the problems, but let us also hear about the success stories. Shona Robison knows that in her part of the world, which I have visited more than once recently, Tayside NHS Board has many success stories. That health system has been turned around in the past three years and is trail-blazing in many important ways for patients. We are, of course, taking action on staff; staff numbers will be announced tomorrow. The numbers of qualified staff—nurses, doctors and other staff—are increasing. We said in the Scottish budget that there will be 600 more consultants in the next three years of the spending review period. No issue has been more important to me over the past year than recruitment and retention of nurses. The issue is partly about pay, which the agenda for change seeks to address, but many other  issues are involved in recruitment and retention of nurses, including issues around continuing professional development, which is highlighted in the white paper. We believe that, as a fundamental part of dealing with those problems, we must increase the health service's capacity. However, the difference between the Labour party and the SNP is that we realise that more is required and that we must work differently. A key message that I also got this morning at Edinburgh royal infirmary is that we need people in health-care teams—which are the basis of the white paper—to work in different ways and, in some cases, we need people to perform different roles. We are prepared to put in the money and to modernise and reform, but the SNP wants to put in money—which it does not have—and to change nothing.

I welcome the proposed community hospital to which Richard Simpson referred, which is precisely the model of care that is encapsulated in the white paper in terms of  more being done in community systems to link in an integrated way with more specialist services. Richard Simpson is right that IT—or e-health, as I prefer to call it—is fundamental to integration; it is one of the subjects about which I have listened this year. Certainly, I was no expert in IT matters a year ago. Clinicians throughout the country have told me repeatedly about the fundamental importance of e-health for developing integrated care. That is why we have such an important section on e-health in the white paper. We will require a clinician to be appointed director of clinical information to lead change in each NHS board area because one of the messages that I have heard is that e-health should be led by clinicians. However, I shall chair the e-health programme board as a mark of the importance that I attach to e-health.

Resources and decision making will be devolved; that is a fundamental message of the white paper, but trusts will be dissolved only on the condition that decentralisation schemes are in place. However, we do not believe in recreating the internal market. In fact, the abolition of trusts will get rid of the last vestiges of the internal market because the funds that primary care will have will not be for the commissioning that existed under the Tories. That is a key point, because there is no doubt that people will try to make general descriptions of what my statement proposed. What we propose is a non-market system of decentralisation that contrasts with the Tories' internal market, which was a centralising system. There was never as much command and control in the health service as there was under the most recent Conservative Government's management executive. People will try to distort what I have said today as being about centralisation, but the key or fundamental message of the white paper and of my statement today is that we will have a more  decentralised health service with more power to front-line staff.

As I indicated in my statement, there will be savings in bureaucracy. At the same time, I want to send out the strong message, which is contained in the white paper, that we attach a high importance to operational managers. It is important that we recognise that the health service has not been well enough managed. We want improved management. I want to send out a positive message about management, but I link that with the strong message that managers and clinicians must work together better, as that area has been one of the historic problems in the health service. I expect and will encourage a culture of mutual respect, in which the importance of clinicians and managers is recognised.

In-patient waiting times for cardiac surgery is one area in which we have had a significant fall, although we want to see further improvements. The median waiting time for cardiac surgery has fallen from more than 150 days at the beginning of the Parliament to fewer than 50 days now, but there is room for further improvement. I shall certainly ask questions about how that works in Grampian and I shall write to the member when I have a full response from his local trust.

Once again, I acknowledge the way in which the changes in Argyll and Clyde have been welcomed. Jackie Baillie's comments are in accord with all the conversations that I have had in that area, where the move to a single system has been welcomed. If people want to see what the white paper proposes, they should perhaps look at what is happening in Argyll and Clyde, where work is already going on to come up with more integrated arrangements at locality level. On the enhanced role of LHCCs and GPs, I said in my statement that someone from each LHCC will be on each board's service redesign committee. One problem has been that people in primary care have felt that they do not have enough influence over the rest of the health system, including acute services. Through the white paper, we are taking direct action to deal with that problem, as I know is happening in Arygll and Clyde. Finally, Jackie Baillie referred to the importance of public involvement. People should perhaps remember that there are two parts to patient/public involvement. There is the public involvement in service change—the white paper proposes that that should happen quite differently from the way it has in the past—but there is also the whole patients agenda, whereby individual patients are involved as partners in their own care. We need to listen far more carefully to what patients are telling us, as patients are a key factor in improving the quality of services. The white paper gives a good example from Ninewells hospital in Dundee, where nurses asked patients about a whole series of issues concerning their experience of care. That feedback was then used to improve services. That is an important model of how we can improve the quality of care.

The number has not been plucked from the ether. I would have expected Alex Johnstone to have some knowledge about how spending reviews are carried out and the role of Westminster in announcing spending plans. All the matters to which he referred are matters of macroeconomic policy. I have great confidence in Labour's management of the economy and that confidence is borne out by what has happened in the past six years. I am therefore confident about the figures in the white paper. It was slightly foolish of Alex Johnstone to raise the question of money given that the fundamental problem with the Conservatives' proposals at Westminster is that that money would not be available for the health service if ever the Conservatives were to come into government. Fortunately, I do not think that my spending projections are threatened by that possibility.

On John McAllion's question, my mind is certainly not closed to further local democratic accountability, but we should also acknowledge the progress that has been made. I certainly pay tribute to Susan Deacon and to the way in which she constructed the unified boards, which have given a much greater degree of local accountability both through the involvement of local authority members and through the important contribution of staff members. We have a whole agenda around patient focus and public involvement. The correct way of viewing the issue is to recognise that patients and the public can be involved in a variety of ways, so I would not say that John McAllion's proposal was the only way. Fiona McLeod and Ken Macintosh raised important points about public involvement in service change. If there is a choice between two sites for a hospital—Fife perhaps illustrates the difficulty better than Glasgow—it is not always possible to satisfy everybody. The white paper has a section about acute hospitals. We cannot avoid the fact that, in the interests of patient care, some acute hospitals must be organised differently. I accept that we have not always persuaded the public of the merits of that, which is why it is important to pursue public involvement far more effectively, although I accept that it will not always be possible to keep everyone entirely happy with what is going on. On patient involvement, I think that it is possible to be far more responsive directly to what patients are telling us about the quality of care.

Notwithstanding some initial problems with the waiting times database, Ben Wallace has described the reason for the database. Patients, with the help of their GPs, will have choice—more choice than they had in the internal market, when block contracts did not allow patients such a degree of individual choice.

We agree with the member's point about expanding the capacity of the work force, which is precisely what we are doing, including significant increases in nurses' pay under "Agenda for Change". On the member's second point—and there will be more about that tomorrow—she knows fine well that no one with a guarantee is waiting longer than guaranteed, and she has to accept that sometimes there are very good reasons why someone has a guarantee exception. The tonsillectomies that had to be postponed earlier in the year for medical reasons is a good example. If that is the line that she is going to take on waiting times tomorrow, I thank her for the advance notice of the nonsense that she is going to speak.

rose—

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the debate. Indeed, it is the first debate that an Opposition party has called on national health issues in this parliamentary session, although I accept that the SNP secured a debate on health issues in Glasgow.  However, I deplore the wording of Mary Scanlon's motion for at least three reasons. First, the Conservatives have created a fiction in order to have something to attack. For example, they talk about the Executive's centralising approach. If they had listened to anything that I had said about health over the past 15 months, they would know that that was a piece of fiction. Of course, there is a case for having such an approach, for example in relation to national standards. We are the first Government to have introduced national standards and inspections in Scotland, and are proud to have done so. That said, I have consistently believed in devolving powers to ensure that NHS staff have more say in how the health service is run. That approach has already been well demonstrated by the way in which the cancer strategy has moved forward with some success over the past year. Indeed, the cancer world has admitted as much. Mary Scanlon said that she now supports the strengthening of the primary health care sector. I refer her to the debate on primary care on 25 April last year, in which every word was about strengthening primary health care and devolving more power and resources to those services. In fact, we will talk about many of those themes tomorrow. Moreover, Mary Scanlon said that we do not put the needs and expectations of patients at the heart of the service. However, those issues are at the very foundation of our health policy. Indeed, we have already introduced a whole series of initiatives that address patient focus and public involvement. That said, I accept that more needs to be done, and that point will form an absolutely central theme tomorrow. Mary Scanlon has said that we do not support choice. If she does not listen to what I say in debates, perhaps she should read the detailed interview that I gave in The Herald on 31 January, in which I make it absolutely clear that I believe in choice. However, choice is part of a bigger picture, because what patients want at the end of the day are high-quality services. Finally, Mary Scanlon mentioned the independent sector. Perhaps she should have noticed the announcement that we made last week of £5 million for orthopaedic operations in the private sector. Five hundred and ninety patients will be grateful for that. I should also point out that that is not an about-turn; I was being criticised in my first month in office for my willingness to use the independent sector. Indeed, I can refer her to those sources.

I have already answered that point. I refer Mr Wallace to what I said in December 2001. [ Interruption. ]

The second reason why I object to the motion centres on its claim that funding for the NHS "has not led to an improvement in the service for patients, who have to wait longer for treatment". The general charge is that the funding has not led to improvements. Mary Scanlon accused me of changing my tone. I have never changed my tone; I have always said that there are problems, and I have been more willing than most politicians to face up to that fact. However, many good things and improvements are happening in the health service and I object fundamentally to the fact that, in her motion and her speech, Mary Scanlon did not acknowledge any of those. What she said does not accord with the experience of patients; I acknowledge that too many people wait too long, but the majority of patients that one speaks to have a good experience of the health service. Moreover, the relentless negativity that we have heard once again from Mary Scanlon demoralises staff.

Not at the moment. [ Interruption. ]

I want to deal with three things that Mary Scanlon mentioned. Of course we still have problems with delayed discharge, but she knows that the figures are coming down significantly. Frank McAveety will probably say more about that in his closing speech. Mary Scanlon also repeated an assertion about administration. However, she knows full well that the number of senior administrators is down because we do not have the bureaucracy of the Conservatives' internal market. The administration figures include ambulance staff and people from the blood transfusion service. Does she want to lay those people off as well? Mary Scanlon also mentioned heart bypass operations. We know that the median waiting time for those operations has fallen from more than 150 days to less than 50 days. Finally, she has the brass neck to criticise an in-patient wait of between six and 12 months when she knows that under the Conservative Government patients  waited 15 months for in-patient treatment. Obviously, I will address waiting. We must look at the long waiters. The figures will come out tomorrow and I invite Nicola Sturgeon and others to consider the long waiters, because that is who we are targeting. I have been willing to admit our failings in relation to waiting. I am the first to admit that we have not adopted radical enough solutions to out-patient waiting. That is why out-patient waiting has been my top priority over the past few months and why the first major task of the centre for change and innovation is the out-patients project, which will examine the problems in a far more radical and fundamental way. We cannot deal with the fundamental problems of waiting unless we are into redesigning services and consider how to deliver them differently. That is precisely what we are doing, but I accept that we have not dealt with the matter radically enough. I have no problem admitting that. The First Minister made a significant advance on waiting last week when he gave guarantees that go far further than the guarantee on heart surgery that has been given in England, which politicians have referred to in the media. We are saying that, by the end of this year, if someone has waited longer than nine months for their in-patient treatment, we guarantee that they will get the treatment in another hospital or in the private sector or—in extreme circumstances—somewhere else in Europe. That shows that we are confident that we can reach the targets that we have established for ourselves. There have been problems with the database. We knew that we did not have the information. That is why the system is currently being piloted; it will go fully public when all the information is up to date. The idea of the database is still to support patient choice. It is a major step forward. There are teething problems; we often get bad publicity about teething problems. An example of such problems was a certain group of patients from Glasgow at the Golden Jubilee national hospital, but the reality is that the fundamental story of the Golden Jubilee hospital is a good one. It is exceeding its targets and it is treating thousands of patients who otherwise would have had to wait longer. I admit freely that there are problems, but we are focused on dealing with them. Let us remember the success stories of the health service and take a balanced approach. Politicians will not do themselves any favours over the next two months if they take a one-sided approach to those issues. It does not surprise me that such an approach is taken by the Conservative party, which has no policies on health except to provide fewer resources and have more people paying for their own health care.  I move amendment S1M-3944.1, to leave out from "acknowledges" to end and insert: "welcomes the further increases in the Scottish Executive's investment in health and health promotion announced earlier this month; notes that these extra resources must be balanced by reform in the NHS for full benefits to flow to service users; supports the on-going work to put patients at the centre of service planning and quality improvement in the NHS; supports the strengthening of the primary healthcare sector and decentralisation of decision-making; is concerned about waiting times for some out-patients; agrees with the priority given to tackling unacceptably long waits; commends the new maximum hospital waiting times guarantees for NHS patients given by the Executive; looks forward to further reductions in the number of patients waiting longest for treatment; welcomes the recent reduction in the number of delayed discharges from Scottish hospitals and the active collaboration between health and community care services in achieving this, and congratulates staff across the NHS in Scotland on their hard work and dedication to a highly regarded public service."

We expect NHS boards and trusts to meet the waiting-time guarantees that the First Minister announced last week, with the vast majority of patients being treated by NHS Scotland. There may be a few occasions where a local health system is unable to provide treatment within the guaranteed period. In such cases, the patients will be offered treatment elsewhere in the NHS, in the private sector in Scotland or England, or, in very exceptional circumstances, overseas.

As I said, patients would be treated in other countries only in exceptional  circumstances. The important thing that the First Minister said last week was that patients will get the operation that they need and will get it on time. That was a significant step forward. The number of people waiting for a long time is coming down. That is what the policy is targeting, and all the indications are that the number of long waiters is coming down. Today's announcement, with £5 million to book up all the spare capacity in the private sector for hip and knee operations next year, will also help. That is not the only feature of our strategy. By early summer we will quadruple the number of people getting orthopaedic operations in the Golden jubilee national hospital. The third and most important prong of the strategy is building up the capacity of the NHS itself. Action is being taken, and a guarantee underpins that action.

If it is accepted, the modernised pay system—set out in "Agenda for Change: Modernising the NHS Pay System" — will introduce harmonised terms and conditions for all NHS non-medical staff.

One of the many changes from "Agenda for Change" will be that sick pay will start from day 1 of employment, unlike the present situation. Pauline McNeill raises wider issues, some of which relate to differences between staff who are employed on NHS conditions and those who are employed by private contractors. At the recent staff partnership forum, I said that the new minimum health service wage of £5.18 hour—an 11 per cent increase on the previous rate—should be paid by all employers in the health service, including private contractors. There are other issues relating to pension and sick-pay rights, which are sometimes different for contracted-out staff, and the same principle ought to apply there too.

The Food Standards Agency has represented the United Kingdom in negotiations on the EU directive on food supplements, which came into force on 12 July 2002. The Food Standards Agency Scotland is currently consulting with stakeholders on the implementation of the directive into domestic legislation. The FSA has negotiated hard in Europe and will continue to press for maximum limits for individual vitamins and minerals in food supplements to be based on thorough, scientific risk assessment.

The reality is that the EU directive now exists. The UK, through the Food Standards Agency, argued harder than any other member state to ensure that the interests of consumers were protected, but that is in the past. The issue is how to implement the directive. On the permitted list of sources for vitamins and minerals, we shall take and use the maximum derogation for which the FSA argued. There is no question of any products being outlawed in the immediate future.

I am certainly keen to hear people's representations, but I have explained the context. We have a directive to implement and we will do so by using the maximum derogation, for which we successfully argued. There are still issues to be resolved on the maximum limits, but I described in my first answer the principles that will be followed in giving our views on that.

Again, Mary Scanlon is arguing against the directive per se. There is no point in going down that route because we have a directive to implement. We must use the derogation that we have secured and argue on issues such as the maximum limits, which have not yet been resolved. That is certainly what we intend to do.

New technologies,  including the internet, provide a significant and increasing number of patients with access to an ever-expanding body of information about health care and healthy living.

I congratulate the practice to which Irene Oldfather alludes, which is clearly at the cutting edge of information technology development. E-health, as I prefer to call it, is absolutely fundamental to the modernisation of the health service, which is why we give it priority. E-health empowers patients and gives them more control over their care, while creating linkages between patients and general practitioners. There is also a wider e-health agenda: it enables clinicians to relate better to one another and allows a single patient record and more integrated services. E-health can also improve the quality of care because information is essential to auditing and improving quality.

The Committee on Safety of Medicines has advised that, with the exception of hypersensitivity reactions, which typically include skin rashes or local swelling at the site of injection, there is no evidence of harm from the levels of thiomersal contained in some vaccines. That view is shared by the World Health Organisation and by the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, which advises the Executive on immunisation policy.

The reality is that the compound is being phased out. I think that the story started because of an entry on a website, which caused a lot of publicity last week. That entry was changed because it was contrary to the best scientific evidence. I quoted three reputable sources in my answer. My duty in such matters is to follow the best scientific evidence. That is precisely what the Executive is doing.

As I indicated, there is a commitment to find an alternative, but that alternative must be effective. Members will have read the letter from the deputy chief medical officer in The Scotsman earlier this week. He pointed out: "UK experts have advised us that preparations containing thiomersal offer better protection against whooping cough  than preparations not containing thiomersal." Action is being taken to find an alternative to thiomersal, but the key issue—aside from the fact that I must follow the scientific advice that is given to me—must be that we use the most effective protection against life-threatening diseases.

They can do so, but we have to be clear about the scientific evidence on the matter. The message from the Parliament on that must be clear. I have referred to the Committee on Safety of Medicines and to the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation and I will close by referring to the WHO global advisory committee on vaccine safety, which concluded: "there is no evidence of toxicity in infants, children or adults exposed to thiomersal (containing ethyl mercury) in vaccines. Based on these considerations, the committee has concluded and advises accordingly that there is no reason on grounds of safety to change current immunization practices with thiomersal-containing vaccines." As a precautionary measure, thiomersal will be phased out, but people have to heed the scientific advice and evidence and not spread unnecessary alarm.

The priorities for improving the NHS are set out in the local health plan guidance that was issued to the NHS in October 2002. Among the priorities are service redesign, patient and public involvement, work force development, waiting times and health care- acquired infection.

One principle to which I referred in my previous answer was patient and public involvement, which has two parts: engaging with and responding to patients; and involving the wider public. So far, NHS Forth Valley has had a good consultation process that has gone beyond the old definition of consultation, because it has involved the public more widely and earlier. I am confident that the organisation will continue in that spirit as it proceeds towards a decision. The decision is for NHS Forth Valley and it would be wrong for me to pre-empt that decision. I look forward to receiving the organisation's view in due course.

It is regrettable that the report was leaked, but I am sure that NHS Forth Valley will give the report full consideration when it meets next week. I am sure that the Forth valley public want to know about the report in detail, rather than to read leaks in the newspaper.

The selective use of statistics is also highly regrettable. In the past year, I have been very committed to the recruitment and retention of nurses. I am the first person in the chamber to admit that we want to and shall recruit more nurses. We will do more than we have done, and we have taken many initiatives this year to retain nurses. It is not right to quote the figure for one grade when the number of staff in all the grades above it is increasing. We must consider the overall number of qualified nurses, which has increased in the past three years. I want that number to increase more, so I am not saying that everything is fine. However, it is wrong to pluck out one figure that does not give the total picture. Under the agenda for change proposals on pay, the grade-D nurses to whom Shona Robison referred will benefit substantially in their starting salary. Shona Robison should also remember the 250 extra nurses who are starting training this year and the first-ever, one-year guarantee of work in the NHS for all nurses who complete their training.

The Scottish Executive is planning to provide patients on long-term oxygen therapy with portable oxygen equipment through NHS prescriptions where it is evident that they would benefit from such a service. Consideration is being given to the necessary clinical assessment criteria and associated supply and safety issues.

Like Karen Whitefield, I have listened carefully to the breathe easy groups. I met members of the groups on two occasions and attended a balloon launch that was held in Edinburgh Castle in the summer, so I was aware of their views and was persuaded by them. That is why we are taking the issue forward as quickly as possible. We need to do some work on a scoping study to examine distribution and supply and we need to examine the assessment criteria, but we hope to complete that work by the end of February and consult—mainly patient groups—at that point. We want that process to be thorough, but to be done as quickly as possible.

I agree with Margaret Jamieson. The clinical assessment is important, but people's ability to go out is absolutely fundamental as well. That will be at the heart of any criteria for providing portable oxygen.

The Scottish Executive is working with the British Medical Association Scotland to develop a new set of terms and conditions for Scotland's consultants. We have both indicated that, subject to the satisfactory outcome of that work, we will implement the new contract across Scotland as soon as possible.

We have progressed the matter with the BMA as quickly as possible, so I did not understand why Nicola Sturgeon suggested last week that we were not getting ahead. The second stage, at which terms and conditions must be negotiated, was always planned. I hope that the heads of agreement will be published jointly soon. We have worked hard on that. Of course I am concerned about the vacancies. We are actively involved in dealing with vacancies, particularly in some specialties. However, Nicola Sturgeon should acknowledge that, in the past five years, the number of consultants in Scotland has increased by 18 per cent and that a further 600 consultants are in the Scottish budget plans for the next three years.

As with all the new health service contracts, the basis of the GP contracts is to deliver better, more patient-responsive services for the extra money. That is the objective in the GP contract negotiations, which are at an advanced stage and are being conducted on a UK basis, as GPs in Scotland wish them to be. A key part of the GP contract is delivering money in return for quality improvements. I cannot announce final details, because they are still being negotiated, but I think that patients will widely welcome that.

As Dennis Canavan knows, there are procedures to deal with that. It is up to NHS Forth Valley to produce proposals for our agreement. It is important, as I am sure that  the Parliament agrees, to perform public consultation in new and more effective ways. That is why we issued new guidance recently that talks about involving people much earlier and more comprehensively than in the past. We all want decisions to be made about provision in Forth valley, but we want to ensure the fullest involvement of local people. I will consider those matters when they are presented to me, but I will also meet the chair and chief executive of the NHS board soon to discuss those matters.

All NHS Scotland staff have received above-inflation increases in each of the past four years, with the highest awards targeted at the lowest paid. A new contract for doctors in training has been implemented and we are working with the British Medical Association to take forward the new consultant contract. Talks on a new pay system for all non-medical national health service staff throughout the United Kingdom have also been concluded and the Executive is fully involved in UK talks on a new general medical service contract for general practitioners.

We have a particular commitment to increasing the lowest levels of pay in the health service. While the agenda for change should, in general, start in 2004—although it will be subject to the agreement of the unions following a ballot—we are keen to start the new minimum wage before that. That, too, will require the support and approval of the unions, but if they agree to it—the next key meeting is in January—that crucial step can be taken without further delay.

I am certainly committed to increasing the pay of nurses, which is exactly what has been proposed under the agenda for change. Recently, I heard one nursing leader praise the agenda for change and its emphasis on rewarding skills and new ways of working in particular. Substantial increases are on offer for nurses if they accept the agenda for change proposals, such as an increase of 6 per cent for a nurse who is starting out. If we compare the agenda for change proposals for a nurse at the end of his or her first year with what she or he gets now, the increase is of almost 9 per cent over and above the annual rate of inflation. It is up to individual nurses to decide whether they wish to accept that substantial offer. I believe that that is the best way forward, and I note that the majority of nurses, as represented by their unions, support a continuing UK agenda for pay. That is exactly what the agenda for change delivers.

Staff in managed clinical networks will still be employed by a board or trust. They may now be appointed to a managed clinical network, which is a significant change, but their terms and conditions will be similar to those of other staff in the health service. I think that that is right and proper.

There is a range of initiatives to turn good practice into common practice and support front-line staff as they lead change. That will be given renewed impetus through the recent establishment of the centre for change and innovation.

There are, of course, two kinds of prevention: there is primary prevention, which involves issues such as diet; and there is the secondary prevention to which Brian Fitzpatrick referred. More of that is being done in primary care and that is a key feature of the change agenda that we see before us in the health service. We want to encourage more to be done in primary care and to develop better links between general practitioners and other primary workers and hospitals and the rest of the health system. That is exactly what will happen over the next year through the creation in every area of Scotland of managed clinical networks for coronary heart disease. We will certainly support those developments. Some of that is about resources, as there has been a lot of extra investment in primary care, but some of it is about working with primary care workers so that they can learn from each other and lead the changes that everybody wants to see.

I am certainly concerned to see that the number of agency nurses is rising in certain parts of Scotland, although I point out that, in the member's area of Tayside NHS Board, the amount of money spent on agency nurses is 34 per cent less than it was a year ago. That is a good example, which other boards in Scotland should follow. The other thing that should be said in relation to that and to today's Audit Scotland report is that, although bank and agency nurses are put together in today's report, there is a clear distinction between them. Bank nursing is a good thing. Bank nurses are NHS employees who want to work in a bank, because they want to work flexibly. That must be distinguished from agency nursing, which we are doing everything we can to reduce.

The bill represents the most fundamental review of mental health law in Scotland for 40 years. At its core is a new framework for compulsory care and treatment that sets out much more clearly than currently the circumstances in which compulsory care is justified. The bill replaces one-size-fits-all detention with a flexible regime of orders that are based on the individual patient's needs and with a mental health tribunal that will scrutinise applications for compulsory powers and ensure that proper care and support are in place. The bill is not only about compulsory care. It strengthens the duties on local authorities to provide a range of support services for all people with mental disorder and creates a new duty on local authorities and the national health service to support advocacy services. It also updates the legislation protecting people with mental disorders from neglect and abuse, including sexual exploitation. The Health and Community Care Committee took evidence from a wide range of interests including, crucially, mental health service users. I want to thank the committee for its work in the production of its report. I welcome the committee's support for the general principles of the bill. I want also to thank the mental health legislation reference group, which has provided challenging opinions and helpful assistance in the development of the policy and the bill since the publication of the Millan committee report. I also wish, last but by no means least, to pay tribute again to the work of Bruce Millan and his committee, whose landmark report has been our touchstone throughout the preparation of the bill. This is the largest bill ever brought before the Parliament. It covers areas of huge importance, sensitivity and complexity. It is not surprising therefore that there will be a large number of technical amendments to tidy up the drafting in addition to other amendments that will be lodged in response to the committee's recommendations. Moreover, the policy memorandum for the bill identified certain areas where further amendments would be proposed in order to implement the  policies we have set out.

There is no truth whatsoever in that suggestion. The number of amendments was thought to be newsworthy but, as someone who spent nine years at Westminster, I should point out that it is entirely normal to have a large number of amendments after stage 1 of a bill. It is regrettable that, once again, the number of amendments becomes an issue of controversy in the Scottish Parliament when it is normal practice for that to happen in the other place. We will do all that we can to assist the committee in understanding our proposed amendments. I will discuss with Margaret Smith how that can best be done. In the course of my opening statement I will tackle the main issues that were raised by the committee. Given that the bill is a complex bill of some 231 sections, it is obvious that I do not have time to deal with every topic. If members raise other points, Mary Mulligan will cover what she can in her closing remarks. I hope to provide reassurances that will enable the Parliament to support confidently the general principles of the bill. We remain fully committed to ensuring that the Bill delivers on our stated aims. Those are: to help deliver the best possible support and protection for patients and their families; to equip professionals with the legal tools to be able to do their jobs properly; and to provide clearer, fairer and safer mental health legislation that underpins modern ways of delivering mental health care. Integral to those aims, and the basis on which the bill has been drafted, are the 10 principles that were laid out in the Millan committee's report. The Health and Community Care Committee has asked that all the Millan principles appear, in full, on the face of the bill. I am happy to confirm that we accept all the Millan principles, without reservation, as the basis upon which the bill has been drafted and should be implemented. Our only concern is to ensure that, in putting the principles in legislation, we do so in a way that actually works. However, we fully understand why something as close as possible to the 10 Millan principles is wanted on the face of the bill. We will lodge amendments at stage 2, which we believe will get us much closer to that position than part 1 of the bill does at the moment. The next issue to which I will turn is fundamental  to how the bill will work in practice—resources. The committee's report expresses concern that the costs of implementing the bill have been underestimated and that there may be shortfalls in key personnel, such as psychiatrists and mental health officers. I fully recognise that sufficient resources will be necessary for the successful implementation of the bill. I agree with what Margaret Smith said: "A Bill with as many good points as this one deserves to be properly funded." During the debate on the policy statement in the Parliament on 14 November last year, we gave a commitment that adequate resources would be made available for the implementation of the bill. I am happy to repeat that commitment today. The costs identified in the financial memorandum are the Executive's best estimate of the costs of implementing the bill. The estimates were informed by costings provided by the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland, the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the Association of Directors of Social Work and advocacy groups in respect of their own interests. As the committee requested, we will provide further details of the basis on which the estimates were made. Much of the concern about resources seems to relate to the general level and quality of mental health services, rather than the new arrangements that the bill will create. The financial memorandum can deal only with new costs that are a direct consequence of the bill, although Millan was right to say that "the aspirations which underlie our recommendations ... will not be fully met unless services and facilities are adequate to meet the demands placed on them". We are dealing with the wider picture in several ways, not least through substantial increases in local authority resources and record levels of investment in the national health service. The joint future agenda gives us the opportunity fundamentally to reconfigure mental health services on the ground. We have set up the mental health work force group to address work force issues such as recruitment, retention, training and development of mental health service staff. Our forthcoming white paper will set out how we will drive forward the modernisation of the NHS, including mental health services. However, in recognition of the concerns expressed about the adequacy of services, I am pleased to say that I am setting in train a comprehensive assessment of existing mental health service provision. That will enable us better to determine how the current range of facilities, augmented by the substantial additional resources that we are making available, will be able to meet the bill's objectives. I will announce shortly details  of how that work will be taken forward and the time scale for completion. I hope that that will help to reassure the Parliament that we are serious in our intent to make adequate provision to ensure the bill's success.

With respect, I think that I made it clear that we would be talking about the assessment of existing mental health services. In other words, all the mental health service provision that is relevant to the bill and, in reality, all of it is relevant. We will look across the board. I accept that there are historical issues about the funding of mental health services, which is why it has traditionally been called the cinderella service. Over the past three years, however, we have begun to make inroads, and the 8 or 9 per cent per year increases in the budgets during that time have meant significant progress. However, I accept that we still have a long way to go. The committee raised some specific concerns in its report. It sought reassurance that the close relationship between health boards and local authorities in supporting people with mental disorders, and the joint future policy, are reflected in the bill. I can confirm that the bill is entirely consistent with the joint future agenda. The bill reinforces existing duties on local authorities and health boards to co-operate. Local authorities and the NHS have also been given new freedoms in the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 to delegate functions and pool budgets. Those freedoms will apply to mental health services delivered under the bill, although we will ensure that the mental health officer service remains independent.

In a moment. One of the bill's most hotly debated aspects concerns community-based compulsory treatment orders. I welcome the fact that the committee has agreed with us and with the Millan committee that, in principle, such orders should be possible. It must be right that a person who does not need to be in hospital should be able to stay at home, even if certain aspects of their care are delivered on a compulsory basis. Having said that, I share the committee's view that resources must be in place for compulsory  treatment orders to work and that there must be adequate safeguards to ensure that the orders are not misused. The bill contains those safeguards. No compulsory treatment order, in hospital or the community, will be made unless the mental health tribunal is satisfied that that is necessary to ensure that the patient gets the treatment they need and that a compulsory treatment order is the best available way of doing so. Community-based orders will not be a cheap option. The tribunal will insist that a full care plan is in place to address the patient's need for health care, social care, and other support. It will want to be satisfied that the patient's views have been considered, and that the patient has had access to advocacy. It will also be able to identify particular services that it regards as essential for the patient and that cannot be withdrawn without reference to the tribunal. That rigorous process goes well beyond what is currently required for patients, whether they are detained in hospital, are on leave of absence or are treated informally. We have also added further safeguards to those that Millan recommended. For example, the bill ensures that, even if a patient does not appeal, the tribunal must review an order at least once every two years. Where patients subject to community-based orders are admitted to hospital, we have greatly shortened the time after which a review must take place. Concerns have been expressed that allowing for community-based orders will lead to the detention of more people. We do not believe that that will be the case. However, we have established a research programme that will monitor the operation of the new legislation, including community-based orders, to ensure that it is working as intended.

I have already taken two interventions. However, if I have time towards the end of my speech, I will take the two that have already been indicated. On advocacy, although the Health and Community Care Committee welcomed the bill's placing of a duty on NHS boards and local authorities to provide independent advocacy, it has recommended that the bill should confer a right on all people with mental disorders to obtain independent advocacy services. We are committed to the aim that anyone with a mental disorder who wants and needs advocacy should be able to obtain it. That is what the duty requires of local authorities and the NHS. A survey of advocacy organisations and commissioners by the Advocacy Safeguards Agency found that they felt strongly that local  planning partners should be allowed to develop their own models of advocacy that meet the needs of local people without too much central direction by the Executive. We believe that a general duty is more consistent with such an approach than some form of individual legal right. However, we recognise that there are situations where advocacy will be particularly crucial, for example where a person might be subject to detention proceedings. The bill contains provisions that are intended to ensure that, in such situations, people are aware of how they can access advocacy services. We are examining how to strengthen those provisions in the bill. The committee has supported the Millan recommendation that a patient should have an appeal against the level of security in which they are detained. Although we are sympathetic to the committee's concerns, we have always had doubts about the practicality of an appeal right. Having considered the matter carefully, we think that the best way to tackle the issue is in the context of the plan of care that every patient will have. That has the benefit that it will be an issue at every review that the tribunal considers and not just when a patient appeals. The tribunal has to consider whether the plan as set out for the patient is appropriate, and we intend that the level of security should be one of the matters that the tribunal takes into account. If the tribunal believes that the patient can be managed safely in a less secure environment, it can require the responsible medical officer to come back with alternatives before the tribunal will approve the continuation of the order. If need be, the tribunal could require NHS managers to appear before it to explain any problems in delivering the right package for the patient. We will need some stage 2 amendments to spell out more clearly the tribunal's powers in such a situation, for example its ability to make an interim order to allow the care services to come back with a revised care plan. However, that is what we intend to do.

I am a strong supporter of the voluntary sector in general and the mental health voluntary sector in particular. Indeed, our joint future policy certainly includes that sector. Recently, I was pleased to increase by £1 million the mental illness specific grant, which is largely delivered through the voluntary sector.  The bill defines mental disorder as including mental illness, personality disorder and learning disability. We are pleased that the committee supported that approach. It was also suggested that there should be specific exclusions for matters such as substance abuse, anti-social behaviour, and sexual behaviour and identity. We are sympathetic to the argument that those exclusions should be included in the bill, and intend to lodge amendments to that effect at stage 2. The committee has asked when we will review the position of learning disability in the legislation. We are discussing that with the "The same as you?" implementation group. It is important that the review should take account of the changing services being delivered as a consequence of "The same as you?". We hope to start work on the review of legislation early in the next round of partnership in practice agreements, which are due from April 2004. The bill includes significant reforms to the arrangements for dealing with mentally disordered offenders. We are grateful to the Justice 1 Committee for their consideration of those parts of the bill. I would like to comment briefly on a couple of them.

I mentioned the research. There is an important role to be played by the Mental Welfare Commission in the monitoring of that research and other aspects of the bill. I can only speak for myself, but I am keen to monitor the research and I am sure any subsequent Minister for Health and Community Care would be too, although I cannot speak for subsequent ministers. The committee recommended that the so-called "public safety" test, which was introduced by the Mental Health (Public Safety and Appeals) (Scotland) Act 1999, should be repealed. Members will recall that the 1999 act was introduced following the Ruddle case, when a patient deemed untreatable was discharged from the state hospital. The effect of the public safety test is that a mentally disordered offender who is subject to special restrictions cannot be discharged if their mental disorder means that they must be detained in order to protect the public from serious harm. The judicial committee of the Privy Council confirmed in 2001 that the provisions of the act were compatible with the European  convention on human rights. The committee suggested that the test could be replaced by a formal risk assessment at the time of sentencing. The bill, alongside the current Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, will strengthen the arrangements for risk assessment at the time of sentencing. The arrangements are based on the recommendations of the Millan and MacLean committees. This should make it much less likely that the situation that arose in the Ruddle case should recur. Nevertheless, there can be no absolute guarantee, and we have concluded that it is right to retain the effect of the 1999 act, as an additional safeguard, although it might only ever be relevant in a tiny number of cases. The Justice 1 Committee—apart from Lord James Douglas-Hamilton—has endorsed the Millan view that Scottish ministers should no longer have responsibility for the management and discharge of restricted patients. We agree with Millan that discharge decisions are not for politicians. The bill provides that a mental health tribunal, chaired by a sheriff, should consider when it is appropriate to discharge a restricted patient. The Justice 1 Committee proposes that we go further, and hand over from ministers to the new risk management authority—which the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill will create—the responsibility for management decisions, such as those on leave of absence. We do not rule that out at some time in the future. However, the RMA is not yet in existence, and its primary focus is not mental disorder. It would be wrong for us at this stage in its development to risk diverting the RMA from its core task of developing standards and mechanisms for the management of high-risk, violent and sexual offenders. Accordingly, we take the view—as was stated last year—that Scottish ministers should retain responsibility for authorising leave of absence and transfer to the same levels of security of restricted patients. I know that members will agree about the profound importance of the bill. Throughout the review of the legislation, service users and families have given compelling testimony of how isolated and vulnerable they can feel, particularly when detention and compulsory treatment become a possibility. The bill alone will not remove all the difficulties. However, it is a major contribution to a fundamental change in the culture of mental health services, towards greater empowerment and better protection for patients and their families. I believe that the new mental health act, as I hope it will soon be, will be something of which the  Scottish Parliament can be immensely proud. The Mental Welfare Commission said: "If the Bill's key provisions are accepted Scotland will have a statutory context for mental health services which will be one of the best in the world." There is much still to discuss, but that is the goal before us. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill.

Prescription data collected centrally are not patient-specific. Ritalin is not licensed for children under six years of age. A medicine can be used outside its licence, but that would be a clinical decision for the doctor concerned.

I have had concerns about the matter over a period of time. Constituents, including one who contacted me this morning, have expressed concerns about the prescription of Ritalin, particularly its prescription for children under the age of six. Having said that, in my current position I have to listen to clinical advice. A Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline that came out last year makes it clear that drugs such as Ritalin have a role to play. However, the guideline also states that they should be part of a multidisciplinary approach and that non-pharmacological treatments—including behaviour management—are equally, if not more, important.

In general terms, resources have been allocated, although they are not allocated specifically on the basis of each SIGN guideline that is produced. It should certainly be possible to implement the guideline—which is obviously the guideline to which clinicians should look for advice—within the overall increases in health and local authority budgets.

NHS 24 was launched in Grampian in May 2002 and in greater Glasgow in November. It now provides a 24-hour service to some 1.6 million people. The phased roll-out programme aims to provide Scotland-wide coverage by December 2004.

I pay tribute to the staff who work for NHS 24, whom I was pleased to meet in both Aberdeen and Glasgow. I am sure that all members were as appalled as I was by the senior doctor who described them as monkeys. I am sure that we all condemn that unreservedly. On the first point that Margaret Jamieson made—

I apologise. I am utterly confident that NHS 24 provides a good service because I have spoken to people in Aberdeen and Glasgow who have used it and who have benefited from an integrated service. In the past 24 hours, I have spoken to someone who phoned NHS 24 in Glasgow. The information from that call went straight through to the accident and emergency department that she then attended. Patients will benefit increasingly from integrated and seamless services.

As I said in my first answer, NHS 24 will be rolled out across Scotland by the end of 2004. It will be rolled out early in the Highland region, given that it started in the north of Scotland. Over and above the general benefits that will apply throughout Scotland, NHS 24 will have particular advantages for rural areas. For example, general practitioners in rural areas will benefit, in terms of their being on call.

No guidance has been issued to or discussions held with NHS trusts regarding car parking, television or telephone charges for PPP facilities. There is general guidance in relation to car parking charges, which is currently being revised.

Car parking charges at the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh have, in my experience as a constituency MSP in Edinburgh, been the most—indeed, so far, the only—controversial element of the new hospital that has been drawn to my attention. We need to look carefully at the new guidance on car parking charges. The existing guidance says that the charges should not be excessive, but I accept that there is an element of subjectivity in that. I think that charges were relatively expensive even at the old Royal infirmary of Edinburgh, so the increase is not all that great in Edinburgh terms. However, that does not altogether remove concerns about the charges. Television is nothing to do with the PPP contract—it is not part of the contract. I think that Ms Macdonald will find that the rate that she quoted for Dumfries is more or less the same as the rate for Edinburgh, because, after the first two hours, there is no charge at all.

I cannot talk across all the ministers' portfolios, but GATS will have no significant implications for health.

I congratulate Bill Butler on raising and pursuing this important topic. I have listened carefully to what he and others have said. I share his desire for improvements in the care and treatment of women who suffer from what is a serious condition which, unchecked, can have an adverse effect on mother and child. It is a tragic fact that the second leading cause of maternal death in the United Kingdom is mental illness that is related to motherhood. Although there is a long way to go, mental health services in Scotland are beginning to develop a systematic approach to the prevention, detection and successful treatment of the illness. Karen Whitefield gave an account of what is happening  in Lanarkshire. More generally, we are experiencing development in the use of integrated care pathways for sufferers, based on clear standards and regular audit. That is in line with clinical advice and the health department's guidance to the service. Bill Butler referred to an addition to the framework for mental health services in Scotland, which in 1999 provided a template for the best organisation of co-ordinated care to improve services and support for women who have post-natal depression. Dorothy-Grace Elder referred to "A Framework for maternity services in Scotland", which in 2000 specified work to be undertaken by NHS Scotland to address the needs of women who have, or who are at risk from, post-natal depression. Several speakers referred to the SIGN guidelines on the management of post-natal depression and puerperal psychosis that we commissioned. It was published in June 2002. We have also funded a thorough audit of service provision of primary and secondary care in Scotland against the background of the SIGN guidelines. The outcome will provide a national picture and inform future decisions on the planning and delivery of comprehensive services, support and best practice. I turn to the main subject of the debate and to a key factor that has been identified as having a bearing on the effectiveness of in-patient care; namely, joint admission of an ill mother with her baby. There is strong support among patients, professionals and the health department for units that are designed around joint admissions so that a mother can maintain contact and bonding with her child. That is an aspect of provision in which I want significance progress to be made throughout mental health services. The SIGN guidelines and their references to the proven benefits of providing a service for mother and baby suggest that about 30 to 45 beds are required in Scotland. The recent Executive guidance on regional service planning will help NHS boards in their task of providing regional services. To that end, I will ask the regional planning groups to consider the benefits of providing joint admission services for post-natal depression on a regional basis in the light of the SIGN guidelines and I shall seek a response from them. Of course specialist in-patient care needs to be complemented by a range of community and other support services being made available locally in line with the published guidance, as Mary Scanlon and others have reminded us. That is not to say that no progress is being made in addressing the needs of mothers and  babies together. As Bill Butler reminded us, Greater Glasgow NHS Board has announced that it is moving ahead to draw up detailed plans for a specialist facility for mother and baby admissions. That is fully in line with the published guidance and it is an excellent example of an NHS board responding to patients' needs in a specialised area of treatment. I was pleased last week to speak to Karen Robertson, the nurse consultant in Glasgow on perinatal mental health. I congratulate her on all the work that she has done in that area—I know that she has been a leading figure in spearheading developments in Glasgow. The NHS board there has recognised that it will take time to deliver its plans and it is therefore providing an interim arrangement for the admission of mothers and babies until the proposed specialist unit becomes available. Where Glasgow is leading, I want other areas of Scotland to follow. I believe that working on a regional basis is the way forward, which is why—as I said a minute ago—I shall ask regional planning groups specifically to pursue the matter and I shall seek a response from them. As well as supporting the development of joint admission arrangements, the department also supports and encourages the screening of new mothers using what is known as the Edinburgh scale at six to eight weeks and again at three to six months for the earliest possible detection. Women with post-natal depression can be seriously ill and yet the illness can go undetected. Like most disorders, the earliest possible identification of need and speedy interventions offer the best prognosis for improvement. Karen Whitefield and Mary Scanlon mentioned stigma. If we address that issue, sufferers are more likely to be identified early. I hope that the campaign that we are undertaking on that will be helpful. The mental health and well-being support group, in its second round of visits which finishes this month, has been paying particular attention to what local facilities are available in NHS board areas for the detection and treatment of sufferers from post-natal depression. In line with published guidance, the group looks specifically for the use of the Edinburgh scale and for developments in the creation of integrated care pathways for the best organisation of care. Its findings include a score rating of progress that has been made. That offers an at-a-glance picture in each case and links to the performance and accountability arrangements for the NHS in Scotland. I do not know whether members read the reports of the mental health and well-being support group, but they might wish to refer to a particular report on post-natal depression and the score for services in their area. The reports are an important feature of the health improvement agenda in  ensuring that key issues are addressed and improvements made. One of the key aims of the support group is to ensure that the good practice that is being followed in parts of Scotland is adopted everywhere. That is vital if sufferers are to receive the high quality care that they deserve and if we are to see improved clinical outcomes and therefore better future mental health. We agree that there should be a spectrum of care and support for the mother, the baby and the wider family. We accept, and shall promote, the merits of joint admission arrangements. We congratulate Greater Glasgow NHS Board on its announced plans and on leading the way.  I give members my personal commitment that I will do everything that I can to ensure that there are improvements in services throughout Scotland for post-natal depression in general and the development of mother and baby units in particular. I again congratulate Bill Butler on raising the issue and on making such progress on it in such a short time.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

The Scottish Executive has devolved responsibility in this area. Tommy Sheridan should be aware that the NHS minimum wage is already above the UK statutory minimum. At present, the minimum salary in the NHS is £4.47 per hour for an adult worker, based on a 39-hour week and a 52-week year. The UK statutory rate is £4.20 per hour. Today I inform the Parliament that the four UK health departments have concluded the agenda for change talks with NHS staff organisations that will lead to a new, modernised NHS pay system. We welcome the agreement that has been reached, which will now be subject to wider consultation. Details of what the package means for individual staff groups will emerge over the next month, but I can say that it will mean a new minimum NHS salary of £5.18 per hour, based on a 37.5-hour week and a 52-week year. That represents an increase of 11 per cent on today's rate.

Tommy Sheridan should have listened to my answer. He should examine his arithmetic—it is unlikely that the person about whom he spoke would be earning £8,000 if he were on the rate to which I have referred. The important point is that we said we would  make progress on low pay and today we have demonstrated that we are doing so. We want to continue making progress on low pay. However, we can do so only on the basis of realistic policies. The minimum wage that the Scottish Socialist Party proposes would cost £189 million. Because it would have many knock-on effects, it would cost a great deal more than that. Today's announcement will be welcomed across the health service. In Glasgow there are issues to do with grading. Those issues have been taken on board in the negotiations that have taken place over the past few weeks—in Scotland, as Mr Sheridan wants—between staff and management. If the agreement is accepted, progress will be made on some of the grading issues.

I published the Scottish hospital-acquired infections action plan on 23 October. All NHS boards and trusts have been asked to take urgent action to carry forward its recommendations.

Both those issues are covered in the action plan. The report by Dr Watt, who is a consultant microbiologist, fed into the action plan, which drew not only on his report but on the major convention that we held in the summer, through which we made use of a lot of expertise from Scotland and further afield. Training has been flagged up as an early priority among the large number of actions and initiatives that have been proposed. We have put those initiatives in order, but training is certainly an early priority. We are building on work that was done earlier in the year. For example, this year, we are measuring the scale of the problem for the first time. We are also setting up systems to manage the problem. The systems are being inspected by the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland and its report, which will give a national overview of the existing situation, will be published before the end of the year.

Clean hospitals are clearly a major part of reducing hospital-acquired infections. We now have the first-ever national standards for cleaning, a report on which will be published at the beginning of next year. Two years ago, we signalled in our health plan that cleaning contracts should be awarded on the basis not of cost, as in the past, but of best value. That means that quality is very much at the centre. That key idea was carried forward significantly in our action plan, in which we said that there should be a fundamental role for front-line staff—in particular, for the senior nurse in any area—in specifying the standards for the cleaning contract and in overseeing its implementation. We expect such a role to be built into all future contracts.

I am absolutely committed to reducing both the number of deaths from, and the overall incidence of, hospital-acquired infection. Throughout the year, I have given that issue a high priority. Back in January, when there was a bad outbreak at a certain hospital, I commissioned the Watt report, which underlay a lot of the action plan. I am utterly committed to tackling such infection. A series of actions are necessary and are being taken, but we have tried to prioritise those actions. Health boards and trusts are focusing on the issue as they have never done in the past.

That is another area of critical importance for infection control. I expect all the measures that we have recommended—especially the changes to what happens on the front line—to apply in the area of childbirth as much as, if not more than, in other areas. The action plan contains a raft of practical measures. Simple measures such as having sufficient hand-washing facilities and ensuring that good practice is followed in that regard are at the heart of the action plan.

Our cancer strategy acknowledges the importance of providing holistic care, which includes information and support for people who have cancer. Each Maggie's Centre is created in partnership with the national health service but operates as a separate organisation with charitable status. The Executive provides a grant of £15,000 a year towards the administrative costs of developing Maggie's Centres.

I pay tribute to the work of Maggie's Centres. I was pleased to visit the Maggie's Centre at the Western general hospital in Edinburgh two weeks ago. Providing information and support is an important part of an holistic approach to cancer care. I am pleased that new opportunities fund money has been awarded for Maggie's Centres in Highland and Fife. Some of that work is mainstreamed and a small proportion of the cancer strategy money has been allocated to information and support initiatives. We must acknowledge and pay tribute to the superb efforts of Maggie's Centre and all the people who help it to raise money.

I join Dorothy-Grace Elder in paying tribute to Glasgow's Evening Times and its readers for their superb efforts to raise funds for the Maggie's Centre in Glasgow. Dorothy-Grace Elder makes an important point about care for teenage cancer sufferers. Adolescent care in general was discussed at the Health and Community Care Committee's meeting yesterday. We must make progress on that, to ensure that the needs of teenage sufferers of cancer or other diseases are taken into account.

The first "Cancer in Scotland: Action for Change—Annual Report 2002" was launched on 24 October. The report sets out the action and achievements to date. Copies have been placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre. The report is also available from the Scottish Executive website and from the Scotland's health on the web—or SHOW—website.

I strongly support the approach to holistic care that is embodied by Maggie's centre. Last week, I visited the Maggie's centre at Edinburgh's Western general hospital, where I was pleased to hear about the developments in services for breast cancer patients, for whom extra theatre sessions and extra specialist breast cancer clinics will be provided as a result of the latest round of cancer investment.  Progress is certainly being made, but we have a long way to go. We are combining investment with new ways of working. The redesign of breast cancer services is also important. Earlier in the summer, I was pleased to see Wishaw general hospital's redesigned breast cancer clinic, which is one of many throughout Scotland.

Like Margaret Smith, I was pleased to hear about the new MRI scanner, which will reduce waiting times. The issue of staff recruitment and retention for cancer services is centre stage. At last week's cancer forum, I was pleased to be able to announce some money in relation to skill mix to enable us to deal with some of the shortages in radiography. I fully accept Margaret Smith's point about the physicists. Clearly, the issues are not only about recruitment, but about getting the right skill mix so that people can combine different roles to deliver the service.

Draft interim guidance that was issued recently to the national health service requires a thorough and rigorous approach to public involvement and consultation when any substantial development or variation in health services is proposed. Moreover, the Scottish capital investment manual requires NHS bodies to appraise a range of feasible options when selecting sites for new health care facilities in order to enable operational suitability and value for money to be examined and compared before final decisions are made. That guidance is currently being revised.

That certainly would be unacceptable if that was what had happened. However, both Paul Martin and I heard Tim Davison, chief executive of the Greater Glasgow Primary Care NHS Trust, say to the Health and Community Care Committee that that was not the case. Although someone might have made such a statement at an NHS board meeting, Tim Davison  said that the reason that Paul Martin cited for the site's selection was not the case. The trust examined many site options, but one factor that had to be considered was the need to get the medium-secure unit built as quickly as possible. Tim Davison also said that, although receipts from other sites were a relevant and legitimate factor in terms of value for money, it was not the overriding factor that influenced the decision.

That is a crucial issue. As I said in the debate in the Parliament on 12 September, an important report on that will be published this month, which I know MSPs are waiting for. I certainly hope that the report will give impetus to the issue although, as Sandra White knows, we have a considerable amount of time before the changes will be implemented in full.

As all members will know, we are keen to have a medium-secure unit for Glasgow NHS Board as well as for the other west of Scotland NHS boards. I held a meeting about that with NHS board chairs a few weeks ago, so I know that work is being carried forward on the matter. It is clear that it is important that such units are built as soon as possible so that we can, among other things, deal with people being in Carstairs for longer than they ought to be, which Mary Scanlon referred to.

Absolutely not. We would never disregard the democracy of the Scottish Parliament. I expressed a view on ACADs in August; it was therefore not surprising that a letter expressing that view should have been sent. However, it is important that information on the wide range of services to be offered in those ACADs is made available. Many people in Glasgow say that they do not yet know what new services will be offered. The principle is that as many services as possible will be provided locally and 85 per cent of the services will be. As Dr Tim Parke—the leading accident and emergency consultant in south Glasgow—said in his recent letter to The Herald , the arguments for some centralisation of specialist services are overwhelming. I hope that everybody will read that letter, which was in The Herald on 8 October.

I raised that question at the Western general hospital this morning. The answer is that many more angioplasties are being done. It was explained to me that many people who would have had heart bypasses in the past are now more appropriately treated by angioplasty.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I just want Nicola Sturgeon to reflect on the fact that the 10 additional specialist registrars would not be a one-off. Thirty consultants is an overall figure and 10 specialist registrars a year would add up to 30 quite quickly.

The incidence of deaths from coronary heart disease and stroke has declined over the past few years. Progress has been made through service developments and health improvement initiatives in equal measure, but it has been much too slow. Today we seek a step change in both the health care and health improvement sides. Mary Mulligan will speak in more detail about the health improvement agenda later. I emphasise at the start the strong health inequalities dimension to our agenda. In our most disadvantaged communities, people over the age of 65 are three and a half times more likely to die from coronary heart disease than those in the most affluent areas are. A key focus of the strategy for improvement and care must be to deal with that shocking manifestation of the opportunity gap. With our national demonstration project—Have a Heart Paisley—we have made a good start. It is acting as a test-bed for action that will reduce the impact of CHD on the population of Paisley. I have been pleased to visit the project on two occasions. I know that the lessons learned from it will be rolled out through the CHD learning network, which will be headed by Professor Phil Hanlon of the Public Health Institute of Scotland. We owe it to those who have CHD or have had a stroke to ensure that they receive treatment of the highest quality. That means ensuring that new, effective treatments come on stream as soon as possible. It means treating people earlier, with the better outcomes that result from that. It means ensuring that people who have had a stroke are cared for in a specialist stroke unit, which will result in reductions in the number of deaths and admissions to long-term care. Our overall targets are to halve deaths from CHD and stroke among the under-75s over 15 years and to reduce waiting times for procedures such as angioplasty and heart-bypass surgery. We have no difficulty in accepting the SNP amendment. Median waiting times for bypass surgery have already fallen from 152 days in 1999  to 50 days today. However, we seek a maximum wait of 18 weeks by 2004 from angiogram diagnosis to angioplasty or bypass surgery. The basis of our strategy is to provide more integrated care, particularly across primary and secondary care. We seek the empowerment of patients and front-line staff in the managed clinical networks, which I shall describe in a moment, to deliver services, lead change and make spending decisions. I am entirely in agreement with the first part of the Conservative amendment, which refers to "a reformed health service that empowers patients". However, the second part of the amendment, which refers to "the number of providers", is inappropriate as a blanket statement, particularly in the context of today's debate. We want and shall have more staff to provide care. It is definitely our objective to have more health care teams. However, sometimes it is better to concentrate staff. It is always better for staff to work together in new, integrated ways across primary and secondary care. Our agenda of modernisation and reform is rooted in integration, decentralisation and empowerment. It is not to be measured by the simplistic numerical barometer of how many providers exist. For that reason, we must oppose the Conservative amendment. The strategy takes the model of managed clinical networks as the method for delivering cardiac and stroke services in future. The networks involve all the people who provide a service, alongside patients. They integrate services by eliminating traditional boundaries between primary and secondary care, between different health professions and between one national health service board and another. I have mentioned more than once before the highly successful cardiac services managed clinical network in Dumfries and Galloway. This morning I was pleased to hear from two patients from the area who have benefited from that network. They talked about thrombolysis and clot-busting drugs delivered in the community. They talked about the service that they have received from cardiac nurses, the rehabilitation services that they have had and the new ways in which they have been involved in the planning of care in Dumfries and Galloway. Through the strategy, we intend to roll out that model across Scotland. Local cardiac services managed clinical networks will have to address a wide range of issues. Those include developing prevention strategies based on the lessons learned by have a heart Paisley; setting targets for secondary prevention and rehabilitation; helping to develop rapid-access chest-pain clinics, which the First Minister and I heard about at the Western general  hospital in Edinburgh this morning; conducting needs assessments for CHD services in deprived and remote communities; and considering new, extended roles for health professionals in the network. Each of the local networks will link to the Scottish cardiac intervention network. That Scotland-wide network will link the five existing cardiac surgery centres, including the national waiting times centre. It will also cover the 11 hospitals in which angioplasty is currently carried out. Along with regional planning groups, the Scottish cardiac intervention network will be responsible for the commissioning of all revascularisation in Scotland. It will develop guidelines and protocols so that all patients get the treatment that they need. The network should become operational by January 2004. The network will be part of the national standards agenda. There is a balance to be struck: the strategy is a national strategy with national standards and national funding, but delivery will be at local level through the managed clinical networks, in which clinicians will be on the front line with patients, where they can deliver services and lead change.

For managed clinical networks to employ people directly is a good development. Part of the strategy will mean that every managed clinical network will certainly have a dedicated manager as well as a lead clinician. The employment of people by managed clinical networks is an example of the new integrated, decentralised health care that we will develop. That will be described in more detail in the forthcoming white paper. Managed clinical networks are also the model for stroke services. Each NHS board is to have a stroke network in place by April 2004. Those stroke networks will build not only on the generic lessons from Dumfries and Galloway, but on Lanarkshire's demonstration stroke network and Highland's reconfiguration of stroke services. We believe that managed clinical networks are the way ahead because they are about integrated working between primary and secondary care. They put patients and clinicians in the lead in driving service development. The key role for patients means that we can be sure that, as with  clinical standards, we deliver the services that patients really want. The strategy also has important recommendations about setting up national databases for both CHD and stroke. That may sound rather dull, but it is absolutely fundamental. The huge gap in data for primary care makes the proper planning of services difficult. Moreover, we cannot be sure that services are of the proper quality unless data are available. We cannot give optimum care to individuals unless the full patient record is available and up to date in every care setting.

If I have time, I shall give way after I have finished the next bit of my speech, which is about staff. The strategy also highlights the need for additional staff in the medical, nursing and allied health professions to make the strategy work. It is most explicit about the need for more cardiologists and stroke specialists. I fully acknowledge that need. The strategy also recognises the need to develop multidisciplinary team working with new and extended roles. I acknowledge that as well. We are all keen to move directly into the implementation phase. I am setting up a project group to take forward the detailed planning of the Scottish cardiac intervention network. I am pleased to be able to announce that Dr Nick Boon, who is a consultant cardiologist at Edinburgh royal infirmary, will chair the network. The project group will act as our national advisory body on CHD issues. Its immediate tasks will include developing the thinking on the integration of the national waiting times centre with other cardiac surgery centres and the planning of a national heart failure centre in Glasgow. I am also pleased to announce that Professor Martin Dennis, who is a consultant stroke physician at Edinburgh's Western general hospital, has accepted my invitation to chair the national advisory committee on stroke that we are setting up. The committee will provide advice on all aspects of stroke services. NHS boards are already devoting considerable resources to CHD and stroke. Those resources will continue but, to help with the implementation of the strategy's key recommendations, I can today announce that an additional £40 million is being set aside over the next three years. The advisory bodies that we are setting up will help to ensure that resources are allocated to the aspects of the strategy that patients and clinicians consider should have priority. However, many of the spending decisions will be made in the managed clinical networks.  I will now give way, if the Presiding Officer allows me.

Yes, some funds will go directly to the managed clinical networks, although clearly some of the money, as I have just described, will have to be spent on important infrastructure, particularly information technology. That is a bit like the cancer strategy, where we have given money to cancer groups—involving clinicians on the front line and patients—which make the decisions about spending priorities. I was pleased that one of the leading cancer experts in the UK yesterday praised our approach to cancer in Scotland and said that it was the best model in the United Kingdom. By giving patients and health professionals a strong voice in the way in which services are managed and developed, we can bring about huge improvements. I firmly believe that today marks the start of a new era in our struggle against the twin scourges of CHD and stroke, which have taken an unacceptable toll on our families and communities for far too long. I move, That the Parliament recognises the unacceptable toll which coronary heart disease and stroke continue to take on Scottish families and communities; acknowledges the role of front-line staff in delivering and developing services for the thousands of people affected each year; supports health improvement initiatives to reduce the incidence of the diseases and the disproportionate burden suffered by the most disadvantaged communities, and looks forward to the development of more integrated services that are backed up by significant and dedicated resources.

I agree that waiting times for hospital appointments are often too long. That is why systematic work to reduce out-patient waiting times will be at the heart of the Executive's health agenda. I disagree with many of the other comments.

I cannot believe what I hear. That question comes from a member of a party which, in the mid-1990s, reduced the cash increase in Grampian to 2.6 per cent. For him to complain about a 6.8 per cent cash increase this year shows a brass neck, to put it mildly. The reality is that Grampian is receiving funding increases that it has not had before. Obviously there are issues with the Arbuthnott formula, but the cash difficulties in Grampian are being resolved. Grampian NHS Board has a financial recovery plan. It will be in recurring financial balance next year. A more balanced view would be appropriate from Alex Johnstone.

A standing committee continually reviews the Arbuthnott formula. A sub-group of that committee, chaired by Sir John Arbuthnott, is considering the additional costs of teaching hospitals. Work is being done on that,  and the technical issues that surround rurality can be considered in due course as part of that review.

The figure of £7 million is inaccurate. As I said, Grampian NHS Board will be in recurring balance by next year. Brian Adam should know from my previous answer that a standing committee is reviewing the formula. It is an on-going process, so it will not have an end point. It will go on, and if new evidence is presented, that can be considered. Brian Adam should check with his health spokesperson, who represents Glasgow, whether it is Scottish National Party policy to shift money from Glasgow to Grampian.

Mental health is one of our clinical priorities for the development of services in NHS Scotland. We have commissioned a review by the Scottish needs assessment programme of current provision of child and adolescent mental health services. A report is due by the end of this year. In the meantime, steps are being taken to increase the available number of clinical psychologists and to review the training needs of other relevant professionals.

In my answer to Adam Ingram's initial question, I acknowledged that problems exist. That is why we have commissioned a major review by SNAP and why we are very active in work force planning for mental health services. We have increased the number of those who are training to be clinical psychologists, but we know that that is not enough. We are examining the whole mental  health work force to see whether people in other dispositions can be skilled up to perform a wider range of tasks. That is how to deal with the problem that the member has identified. We need more clinical psychologists, but we also need to train people from other professional groups to work in this area. We are seeking to have more mental health services provided in the primary care sector, which will help to solve some of the problems that we face.

I am aware of the controversies surrounding Ritalin. Last year, the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network produced a guideline on the use of Ritalin. It is important that clinicians follow that. The guideline recognised that Ritalin was not to be used on its own and that other interventions were important. I support on-going research into the issue.

It is very important to ensure that the additional pressures that winter brings to health and social care services do not disrupt care for patients and clients. The NHS and its planning partners are now finalising plans that build upon the experience of previous winters. Those plans include extra staff, more beds, increased critical care capacity, additional nursing home places and co-ordinated action on delayed discharge. The measures are supported by a significant investment of £12 million specifically for winter pressures, which comes on top of £20 million specifically for the reduction of delayed discharge.

The advantage of allocating the money at this time is that it can be targeted on winter pressures. I am often criticised for allocating money to health boards in a general way and we cannot then guarantee that that money will be used for a specific purpose. Allocating the money now has been done deliberately so that the winter plans, which have been worked on thoroughly using lessons learnt in previous years, will have the resources ready to be implemented. The extra money for winter pressures is on top of the campaign that we launched on Monday to encourage all older people over the age of 65, and younger at-risk people, to have the flu vaccination. That is not only critical to people's health, which is the main issue, but to reducing avoidable hospital admissions in winter.

Over the past year, I have been very concerned about hospital-acquired infections. That is why we are going to produce an action plan on that in October, which will be based on the national convention that we held at the end of June. At that convention, we took ideas from experts in the field in order to drive forward work in that area. The member will also know that, for the first time, we have national standards in that field and inspections against those standards are being carried out by the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland. A report is expected in December.

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the debate. It is right that the Parliament recognises "the vital role" that GPs and primary care teams play "in managing 90% of patient contact with the NHS in Scotland". As I said in the debate on primary care on 25 April: "I have a passionate commitment to primary care, which is at the heart of my vision for the future of health care in Scotland. Our test for new and existing NHS services will be this: 'If it can be done in primary care, it should be done in primary care.'"— [ Official Report , 25 April 2002; c 11239.]  Mary Scanlon referred to the GP contract and the negotiations that are under way. I emphasise the importance of the GP contract, which reinforces the idea of the primary care team as a whole. The contract gives renewed focus to quality and outcomes, and recognises that special arrangements are needed for remote and rural areas. A working group, led by Scots, is currently considering the issues in remote and rural areas. I am confident that its proposals, on top of our recruitment and retention measures, the work of the remote and rural areas resource initiative and our new work force planning arrangements, will lead to progress being made on that important matter.

Not at the moment—I will give way if I have time at the end of my speech. Mary Scanlon referred to the number of GPs, in the context of different roles in primary care teams. We need more GPs. During the first two years following the establishment of the Parliament, there was a 2.5 per cent increase in the number of GPs, but I accept that more is needed. It will be delivered on the back of the Temple report. Mary Scanlon asked me to speak to GPs. I assure her that I do so regularly. The week after next, I will once again meet the Scottish General Practitioners Committee. The health department engages in dialogue with the SGPC on ways in  which we can more effectively retain GPs. The GP retainer scheme is included in those discussions. That relates to Margaret Smith's question. I assure David Davidson that we are discussing a raft of measures to reduce bureaucracy.

In a moment. Last week I spoke to the conference of the Association of Local Health Care Co-operatives. I assure members such as Pauline McNeill who expressed views about LHCCs that LHCCs will be revitalised. They already play a major role and are improving the quality of care in many ways, some of which I will describe in a moment. The motion refers to the need for support. In the interests of brevity, I will not list all the primary care funding initiatives that have been taken. However, I must refer in passing to the significant funding of £48 million over three years that has been provided for 100 community-based health premises. I have been pleased to open several of those, including Blantyre health centre in the summer and Rutherglen primary care centre last week. We have also invested £18.5 million in the development of personal medical services. I do not recognise the description of such developments as soviet. It certainly does not apply to the Edinburgh homeless practice, which I visited in August. We are investing £30 million in expanding the capacity of LHCCs. We have invested £17.5 million in modernising IT infrastructure in GP practices and community nursing. There is more to come on that front. There will be a major drive to cut the traditional bureaucratic paper chase between primary and secondary care. Related developments are taking place in telemedicine and teleradiology, which I was pleased to see in various rural and remote areas during the summer. As investment is stepped up, the drive to reform will be intensified.

Mary Scanlon makes a good point when she refers to health funding as a whole. As I said in the debate on primary care, I am determined that resources should reach the front line. Primary care has a central role in driving change, and in transforming the NHS and patients' experience of it. Through the LHCCs, local primary care teams are leading the way in providing services that are designed around the needs of individuals and communities. They are providing not just more and different health care services—often provided by nurse practitioners and pharmacists, as David Davidson reminded us—but services to improve and protect health, and to narrow the health gap. We are providing £3.6 million from the health improvement fund, so that every LHCC in Scotland can have a public health practitioner to spearhead and co-ordinate local health improvement initiatives. However, the development of primary care cannot be considered in isolation. There has to be more integration—vertically with specialist services and horizontally with services provided through local government and the voluntary sector.

I will give way if I have time, but I must get through this next bit. Integration and decentralisation are at the heart of our reform programme. Professionals from different sectors must come together at the front line to drive forward change in partnership with patients and the wider public. There have been important public-involvement initiatives in primary care, spearheaded by our designed-to-involve initiative. We can already see the benefits of that approach through redesigned projects and the managed clinical network approach's addressing our major clinical priorities of coronary heart disease and stroke, cancer and mental health. Implementing our approach requires crossing professional and organisational boundaries and involving different settings, including acute services, local community hospitals and home-based services. A good example of that is the managed clinical network in Dumfries and Galloway, which provides care pathways for all health professionals and identifies what is required at each stage of a patient's care. The coronary heart disease network has been driven by primary care. The project manager is a GP and all the LHCCs in the area have been enthusiastic supporters. The lessons from our working across primary and secondary care have been fed into our CHD/stroke strategy, which will be launched and debated in the Parliament next week. We are determined that best practice will become  common practice and that mechanisms are established for sharing developments on the widest possible basis. I am sure that members will think it remiss of me not to discuss access. If the Presiding Officer reminds me how long I have left, I will know what to do.

The comments about dentistry were covered when I referred to our specific initiatives and Mike Rumbles knows about the specific initiative that Mary Mulligan announced on 25 April. As part of work force planning, we will consider the issue to which Mike Rumbles referred. Everybody is rightly concerned about waiting, not just for in-patient treatment, but for out-patient treatment. Changes in primary care are vital to our making progress on out-patient waiting, because we will not make the radical progress that we are looking for unless the systems to which I referred are redesigned. The third part of the waiting journey is the initial stage of waiting to see a primary health-care worker. We have set a target of 48 hours for access to the right professional at the right time and in the right place. Last week I received action plans to ensure that patients in every part of Scotland have access to the appropriate member of the primary care team within 48 hours. That is an important development. Margaret Smith mentioned patients who do not appear. We have a group that is considering that aspect of missed appointments. Recommendations will be coming to me quickly, because that is an important issue both in primary care and in relation to what are in many cases unacceptable waiting times for out-patient appointments. It is appropriate that I end with waiting, because I acknowledge the concerns that the public have about that, but I hope that the public and members will acknowledge the many other developments that are taking place in the health service. Today I have referred to infrastructure, the quality of care and staffing. I hope that we will think about those alongside the waiting time problems that I acknowledge freely  and on which I am determined to make progress.  Meeting closed at 17:54.

Last week, I announced £4 million to speed up treatment for hip and knee surgery. That funding will afford 500 patients with the longest waits the opportunity to have their operations carried out in the private sector.

We are taking action on the longest waiting times. There is a problem with orthopaedics across the United Kingdom. The number of orthopaedic procedures is increasing, but demand is increasing even more. That is why we need to have specific initiatives for orthopaedics. We injected extra money from the waiting times money earlier in the year. We are building up the capacity at the national waiting  times centre, which was formerly HCI. We now have a further initiative, which uses spare capacity in the private sector. At the end of August, I attended a meeting with orthopaedic surgeons and others to discuss the general problem and new proposals arose from that meeting. We are dealing with the issue on a range of fronts.

I acknowledge that there is a particular problem in Glasgow. That is why, out of the sum of almost £4 million that was announced last week, Glasgow received almost £1.5 million. We are conscious of the issues in Glasgow. Patients in Glasgow who are waiting for orthopaedic procedures and other operations will benefit from the spare capacity in the private sector and from the increasing use of the national waiting times centre. Dorothy-Grace Elder has highlighted out-patient waiting times. Members will have noticed that in our spending review last week we included an ambitious target of a maximum out-patient waiting time of six months by 2006. Much work will be necessary to make progress on the longest waiting times. We have already drawn up action plans with every board in Scotland, which will mean that they target immediately the out-patients who have been waiting the longest. We are determined to achieve the new target as well as to achieve the targets that have already been set for in-patient waiting.

I have already discussed the rising demand for orthopaedic procedures, which is an issue throughout the United Kingdom. On her second point, Mary Scanlon should look back at the press cuttings. I think that I became Minister for Health and Community Care on 27 November last year. Within about three weeks, I was accused in the Sunday Herald of wanting to privatise the health service. I actually said that I  was going to take a pragmatic view of the use of spare capacity in the private sector. That is exactly what we did last year. We bought the national waiting times centre—formerly HCI—because it would have gone out of business and that would have been a loss to the people of Scotland. As I have said since my first week in office, we will use spare capacity in the private sector to reduce the longest waiting times. That is pragmatic, unlike the ideological approach of the Conservative party.

Access to accident and emergency services that are safe and appropriate to local needs is important for any community. National health service boards are responsible for ensuring that they balance local access, safety, and quality factors in planning healthcare services. I expect Highland NHS Board to take those fully into account in its current consideration of future accident and emergency services in Thurso.

I discussed the issue when I visited Caithness and Sutherland NHS services during the summer. I know that there was an issue with one of the general practices, which withdrew from the contract. That is how the circumstance arose. I also know that Highland Primary Care NHS Trust is working actively at present with the local health care co-operative, the GPs, the nurses and the ambulance service to see how a service can be restored. Obviously, the key issue is that any such service should be safe and appropriate.

The regular reviews and reports of the mental health and well being support group show significant improvements in services, and the spread of good practice in many areas. However, a great deal remains to be done. We are in the process of giving renewed impetus to that important priority.

Johann Lamont is absolutely right. We are taking a broader than ever view of mental health. One of the features of the new health improvement fund is that a considerable amount of money is being invested in mental health promotion. That initiative affects all parts of the Executive. The member's first point was about services. I was pleased to visit Greater Glasgow Primary Care NHS Trust in the summer, where I saw some of the excellent community services that are being developed in Glasgow. More generally, we are insisting that mental health is prioritised far more than it was in the past. When I went to Lanarkshire three weeks ago, I was pleased to discover that Lanarkshire NHS Board, which used to have the lowest spend on mental health in the health service, is undertaking a very ambitious programme to ensure that that problem is put right in the most effective way.

Adam Ingram is right and I am conscious of the issue that he raised. The issue of clinical psychologists has previously come up at question time and we acted immediately to boost the numbers who are trained. There is a wider issue of involving more people in mental health care teams. I mentioned in my general answer the initiatives that are under way at present to boost mental health services, particularly in primary care. That is one of the areas about which we will say more quite soon.

Child and adolescent mental health care more generally is an area in which there have been deficiencies. We have produced an interim report on the matter and a full report will come out very soon. Secure care is an important part of child and adolescent mental health and I accept that action is required on it.

The provision of eating disorder services is very much a matter for local NHS systems. We issued new guidance on such services a few months ago—when we issue guidance now we certainly monitor it and ensure that it is taken account of in our performance management. Local health systems are aware that progress has to be made in that area.

During the nine months for which I have been the Minister for Health and Community Care, I have devoted a great deal of thought to the matters before us today. I have discussed them many times with MSPs of all parties and others in Glasgow, including local campaigners at Stobhill and in the south-east health forum. I recognise the strength of feeling around particular services in particular hospitals, but I have to take a view about what is right for greater Glasgow as a whole. My conclusion, which is shared by many but by no means all in Glasgow, is that we should press ahead with the necessary and long overdue process of modernisation and investment while at the same time setting in place a continuing process of monitoring and review. I remind members that the investment is £700 million—the largest ever in the history of the health service in Glasgow—and it comes on top of the  £75 million that I announced earlier this year for the new Beatson. The status quo is not an option, but the SNP motion before us today asks us to freeze the status quo for another half year or so. It sounded from Nicola Sturgeon's speech as though she wants to freeze it forever. The motion asks us to consider yet again the issue of three in-patient sites, when groups as diverse as the area medical committee and the Greater Glasgow Health Council tell us that three hospitals will be best for improving the quality of care. Increased specialisation has clinical benefits for patients and such specialisation requires larger clinical teams and fewer in-patient sites. It will also mean more one-stop access and more consultant-delivered care, including, crucially, consultants on the floor of accident and emergency departments 24 hours a day. However, it is not just three in-patient sites that are proposed but £120 million of investment in a new Victoria and a new Stobhill, which will carry out 85 per cent of current activity. There will be local access in every case where that is best, but there will be a better environment for a redesigned, more patient-friendly service. The hospitals will carry out all out-patient services, radiology and one-stop diagnosis, medical day care, day surgery, ophthalmology, renal dialysis, elderly day care, cardiac rehabilitation, dental services, treatment of minor injuries, medical oncology and so on. I want to do everything to accelerate the development of those ambulatory care and diagnostic units with the full involvement of local people at every stage. However, even with that acceleration, the plan is long term and it must be flexible enough to take account of changing service demands and developing medical practice. That is why I support a continuing process of monitoring and review that creates a check at every stage to ensure that service moves are wise.

I will describe the role of Audit Scotland in a minute. My amendment states that local people must have a role in continuing monitoring and review at Stobhill and Victoria hospitals and that any changes over the next five years will have to be monitored by them.  I think that Paul Martin will accept that changes that were made for clinical safety reasons would be acceptable to local people. I give him my assurance that in no other circumstances should the services that Greater Glasgow NHS Board has already named be moved in the next five years.

I do not have time to take another intervention at present. I continue with the theme of monitoring and review. Greater Glasgow NHS Board is already committed to an annual review mechanism that will allow the board to see whether the key assumptions that underpin the strategy are valid each year or whether material changes are occurring that might require an overhaul of the planned strategy. I hope that members will welcome the role that Audit Scotland will play as an external independent auditor in that process. Over and above the local monitoring that I described to Paul Martin, I also support a strong role for patient and community groups in the review of accident and emergency services, which I propose should take place in two years' time.

If I have time, I will take an intervention from Bill Butler, but I must continue for a moment. The decision about whether there should be two or three accident and emergency departments was the hardest for Glasgow and the most difficult for me. It is right that the assumptions that underpinned that decision should be looked at again when we are a bit nearer any changes to accident and emergency services. However, in the overall context of new developments in emergency care, the proposal to have two accident and emergency departments is reasonable. I will describe those developments after I take a brief intervention from Bill Butler.

I am certainly open-minded about that. As I said, that decision was the most difficult to take. Obviously, I would have to listen carefully if a review process produced the  outcome suggested by Bill Butler. That is why we have set in place that further check.

I am answering the point raised by Bill Butler. I would certainly pay close heed to a review that said that there should be three accident and emergency departments. There will be no changes to accident and emergency services in the next two years. That is why it is far more important to have the review at a more appropriate time that is closer to the introduction of the proposed changes. I will have to curtail my comments on new developments in emergency care. In the Glasgow proposals, emergency care is separated into different elements. The 90,000 people who attend accident and emergency departments with minor injuries will be dealt with in dedicated minor injuries units that will have shorter waiting times. There will be three new rapid access services for general practitioners to make emergency referrals to hospital, which will streamline arrangements for managing tens of thousands of patients. The new proposals will allow patients who have already been assessed by a GP to bypass accident and emergency departments entirely and get faster access to appropriate specialist teams.

I am afraid that I am out of time as far as taking interventions is concerned. I have a lot to cover and I think that I have about one minute left.

I will have to curtail a lot of my material. Under the proposals for Glasgow, we will have two accident and emergency departments, three acute receiving units, five minor injuries units and one children's accident and emergency department. That is the full picture of emergency care, but it is often not described. Changes in the way in which ambulance services are delivered are also fundamental to the proposed configuration. I will have to cut my comments drastically, but I point out that by 2005, the number of paramedics working on front-line ambulances in Glasgow will almost double from the current 78 to 147, with a paramedic in each front-line ambulance crew. I refer in passing to the work that has been commissioned to assess the broader transport implications of the proposals for staff, patients and visitors, about which members have asked questions. The results of that work will be  available by mid-October. Local people will have to be involved in the necessary changes to transport arrangements. More generally, I have made it clear to Greater Glasgow NHS Board that I expect local people and local representatives to be fully involved in the detailed planning that will be required to turn all these proposals into reality. This is not the end of the debate, but it is time to move on and make change happen. Glasgow cannot wait any longer. I move amendment S1M-3375.1, to leave out from "considers" to end and insert: "accepts that the status quo is not an option and that improvements and modernisation must be progressed as soon as possible in order to enhance the quality of care; recognises that this is a long-term plan which must be flexible enough to take account of changing service demands and developing medical practice; supports an on-going monitoring and review process that includes external independent audit by Audit Scotland on an annual basis; endorses a commitment to keep named services at Stobhill and Victoria over the next five years and to have this locally monitored; gives high priority to the acceleration of ambulatory care and diagnostics developments in consultation with local communities; recognises the particular concern over the number of accident and emergency departments and supports a review of this in two years time that involves staff, patient and community groups, Glasgow Health Council and the Scottish Royal Colleges, and welcomes current developments in the Scottish Ambulance Service which will include the near doubling of paramedics in Glasgow by 2005 and one paramedic in the crew of each front-line ambulance."

NHS 24 is rolling out throughout Scotland as part of a phased programme over the next two years. It is currently available in Grampian and will cover the rest of Scotland by the end of 2004.

NHS 24 is an important part of redesigning services from the patients' point of view in order to provide right time, right place care. However, John Farquhar Munro is right to say that the service has particular advantages for members of the public and health care staff in rural areas. Last week, when I launched NHS 24 officially in Aberdeen, I was pleased to talk about the people who are already benefiting from the service. I know that it will be rolled out across the Highlands very soon, which will be of great help to members of the public who are concerned about that. For example, 30 per cent of calls are being dealt with appropriately  through nurse advice. However, rolling out the service will also help GPs in the Highlands, who will not have to take so many out-of-hours calls, but instead will have that work done for them by the NHS 24 staff in Aberdeen.

Last week, I also spoke to a large number of NHS 24 staff. It is clearly a nurse-based service and the nurses involved come from a variety of places. For example, I was pleased to speak to a nurse who was previously employed in Germany. I also know that many nurses are working flexibly at call centres, which means that they might be working part-time there in the evenings and part-time in the NHS. However, we are very aware of the potential for nurse displacement, which is why we are rolling out the service carefully. For example, in the west of Scotland, we have set up a forum that involves human resources directors and others from trusts in the area to ensure that the roll-out is carried out with minimal damage to other health care institutions. That said, the matter has to be governed by our overall programme to increase both the recruitment and retention of nurses, which is why that is currently a key priority for us.

I certainly agree with the idea of learning lessons, because I support a culture of continuous improvement in the health service. I should say that, during my previous visit to Aberdeen, I was pleased to speak to some GPs who welcomed the service. However, I notice that two individuals were recently quoted in a newspaper and accept that one or two GPs have concerns. I will certainly be pleased to listen to the issues that they raise. That said, the fact of the matter is that a great deal of work has been done with GPs in the Grampian area and a vast majority of them welcome the service. The service has been improved and is different from the English service, partly because it is very  much integrated and involves GPs. With our service, calls can go straight through to GPs, whereas in England people have to put down the phone and make another call.

The draft guidance on violence and aggression covers the threat of violence and intimidation towards NHS staff.

The question is not a matter for me as Minister for Health and Community Care. However, having spoken to the Lord Advocate, I know that violence against NHS staff is taken seriously. I was pleased to launch the guidance last week; it was part of the larger guidance on health at work, which covers many issues. The guidance was developed in partnership, which is a strong feature of the way in which the NHS is run in Scotland. A key point is that, in the last resort, the right to withhold treatment is available, following warnings in most cases. Obviously, exceptions can be made for people who are not capable or who have serious mental health problems. The last resort measure is to withhold treatment. The announcement last week was widely welcomed.

The difference between the SNP and the Scottish Executive is that we accept the Audit Scotland report and its detail in full. The report says that the ISD should conduct a review of the rationale of deferred waiting lists. That is precisely what we will get the ISD to do.

Will Ben Wallace give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The code 9 patients were removed from the waiting lists for tonsillectomies for very good reasons on the advice of the chief medical officer.

Tricia Marwick may wish to reflect on what she said. I am sure she knows, or she ought to know, that the appointment of Audit Scotland has nothing whatsoever to do with the Scottish Executive. Audit Scotland is an independent body.

Of course, that wait is totally unacceptable. The whole objective of our waiting policy is to target those long waits. The waiting times unit has spoken to Fife NHS Board and every other NHS board in Scotland precisely to ask them to work up action plans to deal with those unacceptable waits.

She is an out-patient.

rose—

I could not mention certain things in the motion because it had to be lodged before the Audit Scotland report came out. The Audit Scotland report says that reclassification reflects developing medical practice that brings benefits to patients. The report points out certain local irregularities, which we will act on. That is why I have made it clear that I will accept the recommendations of the report. What Mary Scanlon and Nicola Sturgeon fail to grasp is the central message of the report, which is that there is "no evidence of systematic or deliberate irregularities in the management of waiting lists." That central conclusion is rejected by both Opposition parties.

The member has woefully misunderstood what I said. Of course anyone who does not have a reason for wanting their treatment to be delayed or for having to have their treatment delayed should have a waiting time guarantee. I will act on that recommendation, just as I will act on all the other recommendations in the Audit Scotland report.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I have already explained the situation. Given the fact that there is a certain degree of exchange between hospitals in all parts of the United Kingdom, some might find it rather offensive that Nicola Sturgeon wants HCI to be used exclusively for people in Scotland. However, the fundamental point is that HCI will be like every other NHS hospital in Scotland, after we have dealt with the temporary and short-term issue of the existing contracts, which are a matter of law. As a lawyer, Nicola Sturgeon might have been thought to have some understanding of that.

If previous patterns are anything to go by, I would stand in the chamber selecting the good waiting statistics, the Opposition parties would throw back the bad waiting statistics and nobody who is listening to the debate would be much the wiser. By contrast, I will face up to the bad as well as the good, as that is an essential part of a culture of improvement. I hope that the opposition will be equally balanced, as nothing is more demoralising for staff in the national health service than relentless, one-sided negativity. I begin by praising staff and thanking them for their superb efforts, in particular over the winter, when so many extra procedures were carried out. That resulted in a substantial drop in the number of people on the waiting list at the end of March and, more important, a drop in the number who wait longer than six months for in-patient or day care treatment. Nothing matters more to patients than the length of time that they have to wait for treatment. That is why we have refocused the NHS on reducing waiting times rather than waiting lists, starting with those at the end of the queue who have waited longest. That is because it is at the end of the queue for treatment that the real problems with NHS waiting lie. The NHS in Scotland has an excellent record in dealing with those who are in urgent and serious need. Members should remember that more than half of patients in Scotland never even need to go on to a waiting list, because they are treated immediately. For those who do enter a list, about eight out of 10 are treated within three months. The problem that we have identified applies to those at the end of the queue, whose conditions may not be quite so acute, but who are still in need—the two out of 10 who wait longer than three months and up to 12 months for in-patient and day-case treatment. We have started to tackle the long waiters, and have reduced the number of those who wait more than six months by 6 per cent in the past year. Our existing target is for no patient with a guarantee to wait longer than nine months for in- patient or day-case treatment by 2003. That compares with a period of 12 months at present. We are 90 per cent of the way towards achieving that target. We are ambitious for the NHS and for what it can achieve. Improving that target further needs increased investment, improved co-ordination and more capacity in terms of staff and equipment. In the first six months of this year, we have announced a near 50 per cent increase in health spending over the next five years and we have created a national waiting times unit to bring new focus to waiting times activity and to ensure better use of available capacity inside and outside the NHS. Last week, we entered into advanced negotiations to buy the Health Care International hospital for the NHS for £37.5 million and transform it into a national waiting times centre.

I will do so in a minute. The key elements have been put in place to significantly step up NHS performance on waiting. That is why now is the right time to set still more ambitious targets, to slash the long waits and to improve the experience for those patients at the end of the queue. I can announce today the first new national waiting targets to be set for the NHS since the Scottish health plan of December 2000. By 2005, the maximum time a patient with a guarantee waits for NHS in-patient or day-case treatment will be six months, which is half what patients can experience today and 30 per cent better than our existing target. Hand in hand with tackling long waits, we will ensure that those waiting for treatment for priority conditions such as cancer and heart disease are treated even more quickly. Significant progress is being made in those areas. For example, away from the headlines, waiting times for radiotherapy at Glasgow's Beatson centre are half what they were a year ago. Nationally, we can do better. By the end of this year, our existing target is for no patient waiting for a heart bypass operation to wait longer than six months. Most patients wait for a much shorter time than that, and more than four out of five patients already get treatment within a shorter time. With the additional cardiac treatment capacity that we are securing by bringing the HCI hospital into the NHS, we now expect the NHS to ensure that everyone needing a bypass or angioplasty is treated within 18 weeks by 2004. Those are ambitious targets for a service that is ready, willing and, increasingly, able to deliver improvements. There are still deep-rooted problems and issues around NHS waiting, which we must tackle. I am  very aware of and concerned by the increases in out-patient waiting times, which can often have just as significant an effect on patients' experience as their experience at other stages. Before that stage, I am also aware of issues around waiting to see a general practitioner or another member of the primary care team. I give way to John Swinney.

Part of the change from waiting lists to waiting times is a focus on every stage of the patient's journey. I will talk now about the stage up to seeing a member of the primary care team, and then about the stage up to seeing a consultant or someone else for an out-patient consultation. Every part of the journey matters, and we need to focus on all the stages. I know that John Swinney wants to add them all together, but most people will want to make progress on each of them. Whether or not we add them all together is not the key issue; what matters is reducing waits at every stage of the patient journey.

I have only four more minutes in which to speak and I have a great deal to cover. I cannot give way again, and I will have to cut what I was going to say on that last point. I turn to GPs and the primary care team more generally. By October there will be an action plan and timetable in every NHS board area for the delivery of a 48-hour maximum wait to see the right member of the primary care team. That means the right time, the right place and the right quality of care, which is the objective of NHS reform. We have made tackling out-patient waits a major priority for the national waiting times unit. It is working with NHS boards to develop local waiting times standards that focus on tackling the longest waits for out-patient appointments and for diagnostic tests. It is also working to address the problem of DNAs—people who do not attend appointments—who account for 11 per cent of out-patient appointments. Progress on that issue would have a significant impact on waiting times.  We have also announced the establishment of a national waiting times database. The database is already in existence on a pilot basis. By the end of this year, it will be available publicly and will provide information on out-patient waiting times in all NHS board areas throughout Scotland to increase patient choice. Patients will then be able to choose to go somewhere where there is a shorter waiting time.

I have only three minutes left and I will have to collapse a lot of the points that I wanted to make.

Thank you very much for the extra minute. Many out-patient clinics are now led by nurses or other health care professionals. That is pertinent to Mary Scanlon's amendment, which talks about activity. That activity—at present and historically—has never been counted: only consultant-led activity has been counted. That fact must be taken into account in considering activity levels. Work is under way to count that important activity and to develop new ways of working throughout Scotland. The very impressive conference entitled "Good Practice in Action in the NHS", which took place earlier this month, was a tremendously encouraging demonstration of the progress that has been made in streamlining and redesigning services around the needs of the patient. I cannot go into the many examples of that, but I shall give three examples. In Fife, the waiting time for an endoscopy has fallen from 16 weeks to four weeks, because of the work of nurse endoscopists. In the Western Isles, the use of a unique teledermatology system has resulted in waiting times being cut from up to seven months to between two and four weeks. In Dumfries and Galloway, the average waiting time at the one-stop lung cancer investigation clinic has been reduced from 12 days to four days. The redesign agenda is important for waiting times. Dennis Canavan referred to delayed discharge. Frank McAveety will speak about that in more detail. I remind members of the £20 million that is attached to the action plan to ensure that 1,000 extra people will be transferred out of hospital and into more appropriate care settings during the coming year. That is an example of partnership working. We have distributed the remaining £15 million of the £20 million that was announced last year on the basis of the action plans and we will monitor the situation closely.  In my last two minutes, I must address the amendments. Both refer to increasing in-patient waiting times. I have already said that we are right to target our efforts on those who wait longest, rather than seeking to achieve movements of a day or two at the median or middle of the list. That is where we can make the biggest impact for patients. The example that came up at First Minister's questions two weeks ago was a good one. In Lanarkshire and Tayside, the waiting times of people who waited longer than six months were reduced by 24 per cent and 18 per cent, respectively, while the median waiting time increased. I am sure that people in those areas welcomed the priority that we attached to that policy. The SNP amendment talks about the Health Care International hospital being used "exclusively for NHS patients in Scotland". Like other NHS hospitals, the HCI hospital will be used overwhelmingly for NHS patients; however, there is no reason why NHS patients should be different from other patients. This year only, some existing contracts will have to be honoured as well. The SNP amendment also refers to the abolition of deferred lists and the introduction of maximum waiting time guarantees for all. I am certainly open-minded on the issue of deferred lists, but I want to follow all the recommendations of the Audit Scotland report. It asks the information and statistics division of the Common Services Agency to review the rationale of deferred lists. Let us have that review before we make final and detailed decisions. The SNP fails to understand anything about deferred lists if it thinks that the maximum waiting time guarantee should apply to all. Some people on the waiting list may want to delay their treatment or may have to do so for clinical reasons.

I do not have time to give way. I have time only to deal with the Tory amendment, which raises two important points. I have referred to activity. It takes some brass neck for the Conservative party to say that activity levels have fallen when, since 1997, we have had 58,000 more in-patient and day-case episodes in spite of the fact that a lot of the activity is not counted—as I have mentioned—and in spite of the major advances on working times and the reduction in junior doctors' hours, which have been good for patient care but have obviously had an effect on activity levels. If I do not describe the Conservative party's accusation of political interference as their having a brass neck, I do not know what words I can find  to describe it. No party ever interfered more in the health service than the last Conservative Government. The Audit Scotland report makes it clear that there is no evidence of systematic or deliberate irregularities in the management of waiting lists. There has been no political interference. We know what the role of Government is. Our role is to provide funding, to set priorities and to establish national standards. We are the Government that bases its policy on empowering front-line staff. I move, That the Parliament applauds the outstanding commitment and work of NHS staff in delivering reductions in waiting lists and the longest waiting times; recognises that more needs to be done, particularly for those patients experiencing the longest waits; welcomes the work of the National Waiting Times Unit and the proposed use of HCI as a national waiting times centre; notes the outcome of the Audit Scotland report on the management of waiting lists and that the Health Department will be working with others to implement its recommendations, and supports vigorous action on a range of fronts to reduce waiting times and the delays experienced by patients awaiting discharge from hospital.

Since 1999, the Executive has worked in partnership with national health service staff to improve health and health services for all the people of Scotland, ending the internal market, supporting front-line staff, and increasing investment after years of neglect. Over the next five years, we will increase investment in health and health services by a further 50 per cent. Our task now is to make best use of those extra resources to speed up the reform of the NHS in Scotland and to turn it into a modern, patient-focused service that achieves world-class standards of care. The drive to tackle waiting and reduce delays has been top of our priorities. Nothing is more important to the patient, and nothing impacts more on their experience of the health service. We have made progress in equipping the NHS to reduce waiting. Extra doctors and nurses have been recruited, and next year capital investment in buildings and equipment will be double that invested in 1997. Seven out of our eight new hospital developments—the largest building programme in the history of NHS Scotland—are open in full or in part. In January, I announced the creation of the first-ever national waiting times unit. The new unit is at the heart of the health department and was created to bring added focus and central co-ordination to our drive to tackle waiting. The unit's task is to identify spare capacity in the public and private sectors that could be used more effectively to tackle unacceptably long waiting times. As a result, in the past year we have reduced by more than 10,000 the number of patients across Scotland who are waiting for in-patient treatment, concentrating on those who have waited longest. The number of patients who waited more than six months for in-patient treatment has been reduced by 6 per cent in the last year. We have made real progress, but that progress has been neither universal nor as fast as either the public or we would like. Too many patients are still waiting too long for treatment. Maximum waiting times, especially for priority conditions such as heart disease and cancer, must be cut, not just in  some but in all parts of the country. Today, I can announce a proposal for one of the most significant new developments in the recent history of the NHS in Scotland. That development will boost the capacity of the NHS to tackle long waiting times; step up the reform and redesign of services; strengthen the NHS work force with additional experienced staff; and bring another world-class health care facility into the NHS family. Earlier this year, we were approached by the Abu Dhabi Investment Company, which owns the private HCI hospital. Despite the hospital's world-class facilities, the original intention for the hospital has not been commercially realised and its current owners do not wish to continue the business. Quite simply, without a change of ownership and direction, the hospital would face closure. Clearly the loss of the facility would be a major blow to the economy in Clydebank and surrounding areas. It would also put the jobs of many health care professionals in jeopardy and it could remove a valuable source of additional capacity for the NHS. I can announce to Parliament today that we have entered into detailed negotiations to purchase the entire HCI hospital facility for the national health service in Scotland. That pragmatic decision has been taken to step up investment and reform, to support patient care and to protect Scottish jobs. It is not an attack on the private sector. As we have consistently stated, the private sector has been, and will continue to be, a partner of the NHS in delivering patient care. Our decision to buy the hospital is about saving services for Scotland and opening up new opportunities for the development of patient care in the NHS. We propose to transform the HCI facility into Scotland's national waiting times centre. We plan to use its world-class facilities to help drive down waiting times, not just for one part of the country but for all parts of the country, particularly targeting those waiting longest for treatment. An early initiative will involve HCI working closely with cardiac centres across Scotland to ensure that cardiac surgery waiting times continue to show significant reductions. The centre will also focus its resources on reducing maximum waiting times for hip-and-knee replacement, cataract surgery, general surgery, plastic surgery and diagnostics. As well as the additional activity in elective surgery, we will use the diagnostic capacity available within the facility to complement local action plans to reduce waiting times—for example, through the use of the extensive endoscopy and investigative facilities. Last year, HCI carried out some 2,500 procedures for patients. It is our intention to double that figure to 5,000 within the first year of operation for the NHS. Working alongside and complementing existing NHS services, the centre will help us to sustain  Scotland's performance at the head of the UK league table for waiting times. Of course, acquiring such a high quality asset comes at a price. I can confirm today that, subject to the finalisation of details, we will acquire the whole of the facility, including a fully functioning, 52-bed acute elective facility; six functioning operating theatres; magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography scanning; an on-site hotel for patients and relatives, and space for expansion. Today I can confirm to Parliament that we have agreed a price of £37.5 million for the land, building and its equipment, subject to the completion of the necessary due diligence. The cost of building a 60,000 sq m hospital, including equipment, at today's prices would be four or five times as much as the agreed price. We have tested the financial case for the investment and it represents exceptional value for money for the NHS. In addition to acquiring world-class facilities, we want to retain the services of the highly skilled staff who work within the HCI facility, including around 10 consultant doctors and over 100 nurses. I want to send a strong message to those staff today that we want them to join—in many cases to rejoin—the NHS family. I want to take the opportunity to make it absolutely clear that we see the proposed purchase of the HCI facility in a national rather than a west of Scotland context. The purchase of the HCI facility for the NHS will not be a factor in Greater Glasgow's review of acute health services for the city. Similarly, it will be for those running the NHS in Argyll and Clyde, in partnership with local people, to decide the best structure for the delivery of acute health services in their future plans. On completion of a deal, it is our intention to create a special health board to ensure proper management of and accountability for the facility. Interim management arrangements and a project management team will also be put in place, as soon as a deal is completed, to oversee the transformation from a private hospital to a national NHS resource. Our vision for the long-term development of the HCI facility does not end there. The purchase of the HCI facility gives us the potential for developments in a range of other areas in addition to reducing waiting times. For example, the spare capacity within the facility will be an invaluable additional safety net for the NHS in terms of planning and preparing for winter pressures. In addition, alongside the range of health organisations that already rent space within the facility, including NHS 24's west of Scotland call  centre, we will explore the scope for other health projects to use the facility as a high-technology proving ground for innovative ways of working. The need to reduce maximum waiting times, however, is the driving force of our national effort and the new centre at Clydebank will be in the vanguard of that effort. It will be an exemplar facility that the people of Scotland can be proud of. The facility will also require a new name, in keeping with its new role as a truly national asset. Before a final name is chosen, we will seek the input of staff and the public during the coming weeks. This is a hugely important development for the NHS and for patients in Scotland. I am convinced that it will be warmly welcomed, not just in Clydebank and the surrounding area because of the obvious economic benefits, but right across the country and throughout the chamber. This is a good deal for the NHS, for the taxpayer and for all the members of the health care team at HCI whose jobs were under threat. This is a deal that will help to keep us at the forefront of waiting times performance in the UK. Above all, it is a great deal for patients and for Scotland.

Nicola Sturgeon should discuss beds with clinicians and front-line staff because I do not think that they share her analysis of the situation. Where numbers of beds have been cut—and acute beds have not been cut dramatically—it is as a result of changes in clinical practice, shifts to day surgery and the movement of long-stay patients into the community, which I  hope Nicola Sturgeon supports. The key issue is to have the right beds in the right place—Nicola Sturgeon should reflect that we are not only buying beds, we are buying a hospital with all its equipment and facilities. She should also reflect that 52 will be the starting number of beds. There will be no break in treatment provision. We will double the number of patients who will receive care in the first year. The member knows full well that there is far more space in that hospital than the 52 beds to which she refers. Even those 52 beds, without the rest of the building, pass the economic evaluation test to which I referred.

There were a lot of issues there. I will start by making it clear that there is no ideological opposition to the private sector. Indeed, since we took over at the end of November last year, in the first three months of  this year, 2,000 operations were carried out there on the private sector. That gives the lie to that notion. This is not an ideological decision; it is a pragmatic one. We believe that what matters is what works. If we had not acted in this way, it is clear that HCI would not have been working—because it would have been closed. The subject of waiting was central to Mary Scanlon's contribution. She said that waiting lists have increased, although all of Scotland knows that they came down to a record extent at the end of May. She said that the incidence of long waits for treatment was up, but the number is down over the past year. There is an issue about the median waiting time, which we will discuss during next week's debate. We have taken a whole series of actions in order to increase staff capacity. In the first instance, it will be the existing staff who will work at the facility and, now that it is an NHS facility, we will be very careful about where any additional staff come from. The number of staff will grow up gradually, and the increase in the number of staff coming on stream will help to deal with that. On cancer, I think that Mary Scanlon should, in the interests of balance, also report all the many positive comments that have been made to the Health and Community Care Committee during its last two meetings about both the investment in and implementation of the cancer strategy.

On the latter point, let me make it clear that the existing capacity can deal with the 5,000 operations to which I referred—in other words, the number of operations can be doubled with the existing staff. Beyond that, and in time, extra staff would be required. A hundred nurses are working at the hospital already, and they can certainly cope with the  5,000 operations. Aside from that, we have an action plan for nurses, which has been widely welcomed and which is being implemented now. Members will know about the various actions being taken. I will not go through them all now, but I remind members of the return-to-practice courses and of the 250 extra nurses—over and above the additional number that has already been factored in—who are starting training this year. There is a lot of activity around the training of more nurses. On Robert Brown's earlier point, we will not have residual liabilities, and I do not envisage there being very much of an issue of redundancy payments, given that staff will be coming to the facility.

I was going to say that I would begin with the last point, but I meant to refer to the penultimate point. The hospital is definitely an investment for the long term. As I made clear, the starting point will be 52 beds running at full capacity. There is a lot of scope to extend the capacity way beyond that in years to come. I welcome Des McNulty's comments. I am sure that he is speaking for his constituents for whom  the project started as an employment issue, which is an important dimension. The key issue is that it will, as Des McNulty said, affect the speed of diagnosis and treatment. I will leave the people of Scotland to make their own judgment about the SNP's response.

There are two important financial issues in that. Public assistance was provided in various forms, not to the sum that Dennis Canavan mentioned—

I do not want to go into the details of that. Let us accept that public money was provided, without disagreeing about the details of it. The important point to make is that the company that received that money originally went into receivership within three months. People should understand that the Abu Dhabi Investment Company, the current owners, did not receive the public money to which Dennis Canavan referred. I want to make it clear that buying the hospital will not be a call on the extra money from the budget, for the simple reason that that money does not come on stream until next April. I am sure that members realise that. I was berated last week for not spending that money before next April, but it will not come on stream before then. The cost will be met from end-year flexibility. It will not be a call on other services; other services will not be affected. Andy Kerr will make a detailed announcement about the use of EYF next week.

On the first point, I envisage that the capacity will increase steadily rather than suddenly. In that sense there will not be any immediate effect on surrounding health care facilities. I envisage that the expansion will take place in tandem with the planned expansion of the medical work force. I understand Jackie Baillie's concerns about the situation in Argyll and Clyde NHS Board and as I indicated, it is up to the local health system, in full consultation with local people, to make their proposals on that.

Things will happen gradually. I am not going to say that every bit of space in HCI will be used for beds. Of course, NHS 24 is already using the hospital for its very important new service. Clearly, there is potential for more elective surgery, in particular, to be done. I have also indicated the possibility of innovative health projects as part of our redesign work in the delivery of health care. Things will build up incrementally and members would not expect me to have a blueprint for exactly what will happen in every year over the next 10 years. That is not the way in which health planning and redesign happen. There has been a significant increase this year and there is potential for a great deal more. Others have come up with ideas that I am quite sympathetic to—for example, if teams of clinicians come from other countries, HCI could be an ideal site for them to work. That possibility can certainly be explored. There has been an immediate gain and there will be many more exciting possibilities over the next few years.

I congratulate Ken Macintosh on getting in a question about his local hospitals, about which he is rightly concerned and interested. I am sure that he will know that any  proposals on the issue that he raises are matters in the first instance for Greater Glasgow Health Board. I know that it will reach its conclusions soon. Mr Macintosh would not expect me to pre-empt its recommendations this afternoon.

Ben Wallace should know a little bit about commercial transactions—or perhaps not. If he reflects, he will realise that the question of whether there were any other bidders is one for the investment company and not for me. Obviously, that company will know whether there were other bidders or not. We knew that the hospital was going to close. Everybody in Scotland should be clear that the hospital was going to close unless we tried to buy it. We will not have to deal with £82 million of debt: the money that we will have to pay is the money that I have indicated today. The staff will transfer with their existing terms and conditions. Their conditions may improve because they will move to NHS terms and conditions. However, there will be no detriment in that change.

Brian Fitzpatrick's point illustrates what I was saying about changes in clinical practice and shifts to day surgery. Obviously he realises how an ambulatory care and diagnostic unit in north-east Glasgow could have a beneficial effect on diagnostic outcomes and the speed of treatment. I shall be considering that in the round when I receive the greater Glasgow proposals. I have a positive attitude to the  proposal for an ACAD unit at Stobhill, because I know what benefit it would bring to local people.

That was the jobs question from a different angle, but it still requires an answer. Everyone will welcome the fact that in the first instance the jobs will be preserved. If I were not standing here making this announcement, many people in Clydebank would be receiving redundancy notices very soon. That is the main point on jobs. I also hold out the prospect of an increase in the number of jobs in due course. That is good news for Clydebank today and good news for Clydebank tomorrow.

The medical director post will be advertised in due course, but Adam Bryson will stay there for a little longer. I recognise the problem of consultant work load. Last week, I probably spoke to the same consultant who spoke to Nicola Sturgeon. Clearly, some action has been taken through the reorganisation of clinics—which, I add, Nicola Sturgeon opposed—and that has helped the work load to some extent but, clearly, more action is needed. The recruitment of extra consultants and the money that we have provided for medical oncologists will be particularly helpful.

The cancer strategy is a major programme of investment and reform that covers staffing, diagnosis, treatment and palliative care, prevention, screening, information technology and research. Its starting point is a recognition of problems, since we cannot fix what we do not acknowledge. The strategy targets those problems through a combination of substantial investment and new ways of working. The first £10 million of additional investment announced last November was earmarked for more than 130 extra staff and for investment in vital equipment such as scanners. In February, I announced £2 million extra specifically for the Beatson. Last week, I gave details of a further £13 million of dedicated investment across Scotland. That is £25 million for the cancer strategy, monitored and reported on at regular intervals, over and above the mainstream cancer budgets and the cancer equipment programmes that have been running through the lifetime of the Scottish Parliament. That investment has been welcomed widely, beyond the shores of Scotland as well as within Scotland. It has been welcomed because the money is ring fenced and because decisions about the investment priorities are being made by front-line staff. This year's investment will result in 17 more consultants, 50 more nurses, 37 cancer nurse specialists, 14 more radiographers and 84 further dedicated staff, including pharmacists, technicians and other support staff. There will also be additional investment in vital cancer equipment across the country. For example, in Grampian, there will be endoscopy equipment to develop an outreach colorectal diagnostic service. In Edinburgh there will be a magnetic resonance imaging scanner, which will increase the capacity of the service and so reduce waiting times. In the west of Scotland there will be equipment for the provision of photodynamic therapy to improve equity of access for patients and to provide an alternative to surgery.

We have not only asked the service what it wants—the service has decided what it wants. If Brian Adam had been listening, he would know that we are making the investment in a completely new way, which is why it has been welcomed not just in Scotland but in England and further afield. I also point out that running costs of the MRI scanner are included in the investment. I announced money for the Beatson earlier in the year in order that extra staff could be recruited as quickly as possible. Last week I paid a visit to the Beatson six months after my initial visit. Members will know of the action that we took in December and that we have invested £500,000 in improving the buildings and in securing more space at Gartnavel. I hope that members also know that we have announced funding for the new west of Scotland cancer centre at Gartnavel.

I agree with Pauline McNeill. Indeed, at a conference that I attended in Aberdeen this morning, Jim Cassidy spoke very highly of what was happening, despite having been until recently a critic of cancer services in Scotland. Pauline McNeill mentioned the Beatson nurses. We have recruited 35 additional nurses for the Beatson. The sceptics said that it was all very well for us to announce posts, but asked how we were going to fill them. I can tell members that most of those posts have been filled already. We also announced posts for medical oncologists, radiographers and other support staff and we believe that we will be able to recruit them at the Beatson. Just as we faced up to the problems at the Beatson, so we are willing to face up to the wider problems that have been highlighted by the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland's reports on cancer services. We are committed to transparency and a culture of improvement. That is why we decided to obtain information about cancer services everywhere in Scotland and it is why we shall act on the reports. Patients are involved all the way in the reports of the Clinical Standards Board. Patients are also involved in the  planning groups, making decisions about investment and the reorganisation of services. I cannot go over everything that the Clinical Standards Board's reports mentioned, but one recommendation was that we need to have better referral protocols to ensure consistency of referral patterns and patient pathways. That would avoid delays in patients being seen for the first time or on subsequent occasions. I am pleased to confirm that referral guidance prepared by a multidisciplinary working group of the Scottish Cancer Group has been published today and can be found on the "Cancer in Scotland" website. All of the information about last week's investment decisions can be found on that website and it is worth reading. This morning I was pleased to visit the north-east Scotland cancer co-ordinating and advisory group conference. I was also pleased that Shona Robison and Nicola Sturgeon were there, although they heard a slightly different part of the programme. At the conference, we saw front-line staff leading change. That is the way in which the cancer strategy is being carried out in Scotland. There was a lot of information at the conference about the development of tumour-specific groups in the north-east, managed clinical networks, redesign of services and the development of outreach services, as well as about the increase in capacity because of the recent investment. There was also a lot of emphasis on the importance of IT, which is something that I have highlighted in recent debates on investment and reform in health. I was pleased that the north cancer group decided to invest some of the new money in clinical audit IT. It is a challenge to recruit staff in the face of UK and international shortages in some specialist fields such as radiology and pathology as well as diagnostic and therapeutic radiography. The Executive acknowledges that challenge and is planning to set up three regional work force planning and development centres to work with the NHS to help maximise the use of resources across health care services, and to plan better in order to meet demands across regional areas and networks, not just within specific hospitals or other health care settings—[ Interruption. ] I will not have time to take an intervention because I have only three minutes left. That will be part of a wider action plan on work force planning and development that we will bring out in a few weeks' time. The Temple report, to which I referred at question time, will drive work forward on increasing the medical work force. That will include an international dimension. I suspect that Nicola Sturgeon might mention that in her speech. I am pleased to see the way in which the money announced in last week's plans is being used to  develop innovative ways of maximising the available resource. For example, Grampian plans to pilot extending the role of biomedical scientists into pathology so that the best use can be made of a scarce resource. There is also an excellent example in Aberdeen and North of Scotland of a diagnostic facility for rural Grampian that will allow patients to be diagnosed earlier and closer to home. We are seeing services being redesigned in various parts of Scotland. That is also part of the answer to staffing difficulties, particularly in specialties, which is something that I certainly recognise and on which we are acting. I shall not be accepting the Scottish National Party's amendment. I do not believe that the staffing difficulties stop front-line staff from being involved in deciding investment priorities and from leading change. As I have indicated, I have specific initiatives in train and others will follow the Temple report and the action plan on work force planning and development that will come out next month. However, I can assure members that we will not include the SNP policy of enhanced pay for one particular specialty or location. That would create new recruitment difficulties by draining staff from other services or parts of the country. That SNP core policy on staff is not in the interests of either staff or patients. I am into the last minute of my speech so I cannot say as much about screening, prevention and research as I wanted to do. I remind members of the recent announcement of £2.75 million for liquid-based cytology for cervical screening. The breast screening age is being extended to 70 in the next couple of years. Here in Grampian and elsewhere in Scotland there is a colorectal screening pilot. The final evaluation will be next year, but early indications are that that is proving to be successful. Prevention will involve action on smoking and diet. That action is being taken, and more will be announced soon. It will also involve physical activity. Next week will see the publication of the important report from the physical activity task force. Because my time is almost up, I mention in passing the £1 million we have put into clinical trials this year. That has been widely welcomed by the cancer world and by patients. I have indicated how even previous critics of the Government are welcoming the approach that we are adopting to cancer in Scotland. Professor Gordon McVie, who has been extremely critical of cancer strategy in Scotland and England, said at a recent conference on cancer and diet that we were now making significant progress and going about it in the right way. I do not say that in any way to be complacent—I end where I began, by acknowledging the problems that we have—but we have set in train the action and the processes  that can deal with those problems in a sustained and sustainable manner. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the problems highlighted by the recent Clinical Standards Board for Scotland reports on cancer services; welcomes the Cancer Strategy and the significant and dedicated resources that have been allocated for its implementation; supports the key role of front-line staff in deciding investment priorities and leading service change, and looks forward to sustained progress in implementing the strategy and reaching all the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland standards.

The negotiations are being taken forward by the NHS Confederation on behalf of the four health departments in the UK and the UK general practitioners committee. The contractual framework has been agreed by the two sides and the four UK health ministers have agreed to the principles on which it is based. It is proposed that GPs could opt out of providing out-of-hours cover after a preparatory period during which primary care trusts would ensure that alternative arrangements are in place. The confederation and the GPC are setting up a working group to work on how the new contract would operate in remote and rural areas. The working group will meet in, and be run from, Scotland.

I assure George Lyon that  there is no question of the scenario that he outlined taking place. Everyone is agreed that there have to be special arrangements in remote and rural areas. Indeed, no opt-outs will take place anywhere until alternative arrangements are in place. Notwithstanding that, there has been a wide welcome for the proposed new contract in terms of its emphasis on quality and outcomes, its increased focus on primary care teams, and the reduction in bureaucracy that it will bring about. Of course, it will feature in the white paper to which the First Minister referred this morning.

I paid a visit to NHS 24 here in Aberdeen yesterday and I was pleased to hear how the GPs in Grampian have very much welcomed, even in these early days, the effect of NHS 24. It is in its first month, but already it is having a beneficial effect on their patients and on their work loads. As NHS 24 is rolled out into the Highlands and other remote and rural areas, it will be of considerable help to GPs in dealing with some of the problems that George Lyon highlighted.

In the near future, we will receive the report from Professor John Temple, the president of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, on medical work force planning. That is part of the much wider work on work force planning that we are doing, and which will feature in the debate at 3.30. I assure Christine Grahame that having the right number of doctors, including GPs, is at the centre of that agenda.

There are no plans to create NHS foundation trusts in Scotland.

I am sure that Mary Scanlon realises that foundation trusts do not exist in England, although there is a proposal to develop them. We believe in empowering front-line staff, but we also believe in more integrated single-system working. Our priorities are to bridge the gap between primary and acute care and to develop primary care services. It is not consistent with those priorities to have more independent acute hospitals that do their own thing.

Members will have noticed that David McLetchie tried to suggest this morning that we are reintroducing the internal market in the form of general practitioner fundholding. He would not take an intervention because he knew that that is not true. Of course, we would like to have more services in primary care and we wish to empower primary care teams. However, we do not want to recreate the internal market with all its  bureaucracy. Therefore, we will certainly not go down that route.

Will Mr McLetchie give way?

Cleaning and catering arrangements at Hairmyres hospital are matters for Lanarkshire Acute Hospitals NHS Trust in the first instance. I am told that meetings have been held with the private sector consortium to discuss various problems.

Ensuring that we have the clean hospitals to which patients have the right is a top priority for the Executive. I am interested in hearing any views that are expressed on the issue. However, this year, for the first time, national standards for cleaning have been established by the Clinical Standards Board of Scotland. The board is working with Audit Scotland to visit every hospital in Scotland to check performance against those cleaning standards. I will receive reports from those two bodies in the near future. I hear what Alex Neil is  saying, but I hope that everybody will welcome that development.

In the health plan, we said that the contracting out of cleaning services should no longer be regarded as the norm. There was a problem in the late 1980s and the early 1990s because services were contracted out for ideological reasons and quality went out of the window. We are saying that the criteria must be quality and value for money. Fife Acute Hospitals NHS Trust has obviously decided to return the services in-house. I am not aware of the detail of the circumstances, but I acknowledge what Helen Eadie is saying about the terms and conditions going back to the Whitley Council's terms and conditions after a year. I am sure that she and everyone else welcomes that. I thank her for drawing the matter to my attention and I shall look into it.

The Clinical Standards Board for Scotland team has already started a programme of visits to every national health service trust to check performance against the standard. That will be completed by the autumn. We shall be holding an HAI convention on 28 June to help drive forward action and spread best practice on this key issue.

I hope that we will be judged not by the difficulties that we face, but by the way in which we respond to them. HAI has been a key issue for me. In January, I asked the Clinical Standards Board to accelerate its visits. We should be pleased that we have national standards for the first time, but every trust needs to be checked. The Clinical Standards Board is doing so as quickly as possible. We have done more. The convention will be an important event at which we will collect expertise and best practice, not just from Scotland but from further afield. We will ensure that we drive forward action and spread best practice to every hospital in Scotland.

Escalating intervention is a part of the whole performance management process. If standards are not met, more and more will be done. If action by the Clinical Standards Board is not adequate, at a certain point the Health and Safety Executive can intervene. At the moment, that may be happening in a hospital. We might hear about that in due course. There is a system to ensure that standards are in force. I welcome the nurses in the gallery. Nurses are pivotal to our agenda. We have significantly increased the number of infection control nurses, but we are also taking a proposal to the convention that there should be a nurse cleanliness champion on each ward. Obviously, we will consult the nursing bodies on that matter.

I dealt with the issue of clean hospitals in answering question 1. I repeat the general message that quality is the key issue, along with value for money. Quality is up there as a key criterion—it was not in the late 1980s and early 1990s when contracts went to the private  sector, not because that was good for quality but for ideological reasons. The criteria for us are quality and best value. That means that it is no longer the norm for services to be contracted out.

The reality is that standards must be met. If there are issues, whether an in-house or a privatised contract is involved, it is up to the trust to ensure that standards are applied. If standards are not applied, action will be taken, whether or not the service is contracted out.

I will make the same point that I made to Nicola Sturgeon and Ben Wallace. I made it absolutely clear that we believe that information about surgeons' performance should be available, but the fact remains that that information has to be meaningful rather than meaningless. Anybody who knows anything about the issue agrees with us.

I have admitted in my speech and in every statement that I make on the subject that hospital acquired infection is a serious problem, as is delayed discharge. We should be judged not by the problem but by how we are responding to it. Ben Wallace should address that rather then delivering a history lesson.

Ben Wallace knows full well that I used the word "meaningful" in connection with the performance of surgeons. In other regards, we are absolutely clear—and I made it clear in my speech—that we want more information to be made available. On the subject of meaningful information on surgeons, is Ben Wallace saying that he wants information that is not meaningful to be made available?

John McAllion is giving an extremely interesting speech. The issue is balance. When I go to the Health and Community Care Committee, the main message that comes across to me is, "Why don't you exert more control over the local health systems?" I say that we should strike the right balance and know what the Government's role is in matters such as national standards, but ensure that change comes up from below. Does John McAllion agree that, if accountability is only local and not to the Parliament and the Executive, it will not deal with the issues about which he is concerned, such as postcode care and variations in priorities in different parts of Scotland?

Just because I go to Dundee, it does not mean that I do not visit the Highland area. Indeed, last Friday, I visited Nairn and spoke to Highland NHS Primary Care Trust about the problems to which Mary Scanlon has referred. I assure her that I am concerned about those problems and that I am giving them great attention.

Mary Scanlon will remember that I also said that examining health inequalities is a very important part of the performance assessment framework. We are urgently developing health inequality indicators. Although I accept that that has been a problem, I can assure Mary Scanlon that we will have those indicators soon.

I thank Nicola Sturgeon for giving way. If she had read the motion or had listened to my speech she would know that my main emphasis was on the fact that improvement is required. The motion acknowledges progress, because it is an undisputed fact that there has been extra activity in the past three months; if Nicola Sturgeon had spoken to hospital workers she would know that. We are keen to have transparency, which is why we commissioned the Audit Scotland report that will be published next month.

Will the member give way?

Once again I thank Nicola Sturgeon for giving way, but I say again that she has neither read the motion nor listened to the speech. The motion does not display any sense of complacency about either delayed discharge or hospital acquired infection. It says that we have given priority to dealing with those, which is evident from the way in which we are dealing with delayed discharge, including the unprecedented amounts of money that we are making available. The range of actions that I described with regard to hospital acquired infections show that I acknowledge that there is a problem. This year we will have the first national standards and inspections, which I have introduced because I wanted them to be carried out as quickly as possible. The other actions that I described will culminate in the convention on 28 June, to which I hope Nicola Sturgeon will come.

Once again, Nicola Sturgeon has not listened to what I have said. I explained our position on that very clearly to Ben Wallace. I know what our position is, what is Nicola Sturgeon's?

Nothing is more important to the people of Scotland than health and the health service. It is therefore right that we should turn our attention once again to investment and reform in health. I make no apology for the fact that we will return to the subject in Aberdeen, with a debate on investment and reform in cancer services. At the end of April, we debated investment in primary care and I stressed the central role of primary care in transforming the national health service into a right time, right place, right quality care service. Last week, I emphasised the importance of investment in staff and the crucial role of front-line staff in leading change. Today I shall pick up on those themes and describe some other key aspects of the reform agenda and the change process in the NHS, in community care and in the wider arenas of improving health and tackling health inequalities. First, I shall say what reform is not. Reform is not a top-down imposition, although Government has an important role. Reform is not about structural upheaval, although structures might evolve and change. Reform is not driven by ideology, unless a belief in the founding principles of the NHS and in patient-focused care can be given that name. For us, reform is a collaborative venture with patients and front-line staff to develop and deliver the services that people need in the way that they need them, and to find new ways of improving health and tackling health inequalities. Reform is about making services more accessible and responsive. It is about establishing a culture of continuous improvement that is grounded in evidence and explicit quality standards. I shall talk about the role of national standards in the reform agenda and the best way in which we can ensure that those standards are implemented  throughout Scotland. The Clinical Standards Board for Scotland has been a good example of positive change. I shall refer in a future debate to the board's extremely important cancer reports and in this debate to its crucial work on hospital acquired infections. Nonetheless, we recognised some time ago that we needed to look again at the range and complexity of clinical effectiveness organisations, because their multiplicity had led to confusion and lack of clarity. We are now in the final stages of an extensive consultation on our proposal to establish a new quality and standards board for health in Scotland. That board will build on and develop the role of the existing organisations and it will have new and challenging responsibilities and powers. The development of the quality and standards board for health in Scotland will be an important driver for change and for ensuring change. The reform of clinical effectiveness bodies will give a new focus on ensuring the delivery of quality services and will provide an independent mechanism for regulating the quality of care. The new body will not be part of the Executive; it will operate independently and its actions, findings and reports will be independent. As such, the quality and standards board will be a key factor in strengthening public accountability. As a body that will have independent mechanisms for regulating the quality of health care, it will provide much more than an inspectorate, because inspection alone does not ensure quality. The board will provide clarity about expectations through standards and guides for best practice; it will be responsible for assuring the patients' safety agenda; and it will provide a focus for national clinical audit. It will have powers to ensure that action is taken when organisations are found wanting, with agreed escalation procedures. It is important that it will have the power to investigate serious failures in clinical service delivery. Those are new and important areas of responsibility, although the new body will also continue the excellent work of the Clinical Standards Board.

Its members will be appointed in the same way as those of any other public body in Scotland. However, the new board will function completely independently of the Scottish Executive. The Clinical Standards Board is doing a great deal of important work and is going round all the NHS trusts in Scotland to check their performance against the standards on hospital acquired infection. I asked the board earlier this year to bring forward and accelerate those visits, and I thank it for doing so. Reducing the incidence of  infections that are picked up by patients in hospitals is a big health care issue worldwide. We need better ways of tackling the problem and we are supporting the NHS in finding those through the external standards and inspections that I have mentioned. We are doing that by introducing new surveillance systems throughout Scotland, by investing in more training for infection control nurses and by promoting the concept of a cleanliness champion in hospital wards, who will take responsibility for, and offer leadership on, good infection control practice. The planned infection control convention, which I announced in April, will take place on 28 June and will enable us to gather more ideas, spread best practice and drive forward action in an area that is extremely important to us and—I know—to patients. The reduction of waiting times for patients is also extremely important. Yesterday, I was able to announce that since January, the national waiting times unit had purchased an additional 2,100 cases from spare NHS capacity that had been identified in eight NHS trusts, and that it had facilitated an estimated 2,000 operations from spare private sector health care capacity on behalf of the NHS. That has resulted in a significant reduction in the number of patients who are waiting more than six months for acute in-patient and day-care treatment. I cannot understand why the Scottish National Party, in its amendment, should regard that as undermining the principle of a universal service that is free at the point of use, to which I and the Executive are passionately committed. The national waiting times unit is also working on out-patient waiting times—an issue that is of concern to me—and on reducing waiting times for diagnostic tests and for therapies that are provided in out-patient settings. The unit is visiting every NHS board in Scotland to ensure that action plans to reduce the longest of those waits are completed by June. We will also work to ensure that patients and the public have readily accessible, high-quality information about waiting times in every Scottish NHS hospital. That is the aim of the new waiting times database that is being developed. The objective of the database is to provide general practitioners, patients and members of the public with readily accessible, accurate and up-to-date information about waiting times throughout Scotland, so that patients can, if they wish, choose to be treated at a hospital where they will have a shorter wait.

Other bodies are involved as well. Nicola Sturgeon has talked before about prosecution. The Health and Safety Executive already has that role, so there is no need for a power of prosecution. The new body will have a power of escalating intervention to ensure that the new standards are implemented. If matters arise in the territory in which I know Nicola Sturgeon is interested, those will be dealt with by the Health and Safety Executive. Patient choice—the last topic that I mentioned in relation to the new waiting times database—is part of a much wider agenda that has been gathering pace since we published "Patient Focus and Public Involvement" in December. The challenge and the aim of our extensive underpinning programme is to have an NHS in which people are treated as individuals and with respect; in which they are listened to and involved in their care; in which they can improve the quality of care through the feedback that they give and in which they can become involved in monitoring and development of services.

I have a lot to get through. I will give way later, if I have time. An extensive body of work is being done on that agenda. For example, NHS boards have established some 90 partners-in-change projects, which work with patients and the public. We are developing a public information strategy and we have funded the establishment of an advocacy safeguards agency and an independent alliance of advocacy projects. We have developed much more detailed guidance on public involvement, which has been published in the form of a toolkit. Last week, we issued specific new guidance on consultation in relation to service change, and we will consult soon on new public involvement structures, including a Scottish health council that will be independent of the NHS. We must also address the concerns of those who feel that they have not received the service that they expected from their national health service. That is why we will consult soon on a new NHS complaints procedure that will be credible, easy to use, demonstrably independent and effective. If the aim of reform is patient-focused care and designing services around the needs of patients, and if the involvement of patients and the wider public is central to the reform process, it is self- evident that the other key agents of change are front-line staff, because only they can deliver more patient-focused care. Those staff are in the best position to design and lead the necessary service changes. We recognise, however, that work must be done to enable staff to deliver reform. This is about making the NHS a good employer in ways that impact directly on staff. It is about creating the environment that supports innovation and personal development. It is about developing career pathways that are attractive to staff at all stages of their working lives. It is about staff joining the NHS because it delivers the flexibility that they need, rather than their leaving because the NHS cannot deliver. Finally, it is about partnership working in practice. I remind members that we must apply all that to all members of the health care team. On Friday, I shall be pleased to launch NHS Education for Scotland, which is a new body that will look, for the first time, at the continuous professional development needs of every member of every health care team in Scotland. We must target investment at the right staff.

If I have time, I will give way in a moment. However, I have a lot to get through. We must equip staff with the right skills not only for today, but for five, 10 and 15 years' time. That means looking ahead at what kind of work force Scottish health services will need in 2020 and beyond. We must therefore ensure that everyone inside and outside the NHS who will have a role in the delivery of that work force works together, with determination and focus, to make that happen. We will publish an action plan in June about what needs to be done, which will be the first national action plan on work force planning and development. A main theme that I covered in the primary care debate three weeks ago was the need for more integrated care across the primary and acute sectors, so that the patient's journey of care is smooth and seamless. That is critical to the reform process. In that debate, I mentioned examples of new services in primary and acute care, such as the managed clinical network for cardiac services in Dumfries and Galloway. I know that, in the recent asthma debate earlier this week, Margaret Jamieson mentioned a managed clinical network for asthma in her part of Scotland. Yesterday, I met the respiratory alliance and we discussed the development of such networks for other respiratory diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In the primary care debate, I also said that work  will go ahead throughout Scotland to change diabetes services by collaboratives of primary and acute care to redesign those services. We need to give local heath care co-operatives and primary care teams the authority and resources to develop and manage enhanced local services, as well as give them real influence over the shape of the whole system. Those issues will be at the heart of our current review of management and decision making in the NHS. However, I am sure that we need to make the necessary developments without reintroducing the bureaucratic systems of the past, although last week the SNP proposed, in its small health document, to reintroduce such systems. The reduction of bureaucracy is a key part of the reform agenda because it will free up front-line staff. It is also an important reason why investment in information technology is such an important part of the reform agenda. IT is the key to providing better services in line with what patients need and want; it is also the key to improving the quality of health services by allowing better audit of activity and improving access to treatment through telemedicine, electronic booking and faster transmission of information. In the current year, we will spend £50 million on national IT programmes of work in support of the national information strategy that I launched in February. That covers important national programmes including NHS 24, which uses sophisticated IT and telecom systems, and several other initiatives that I do not have time to detail. They can be mentioned later, if required. I have emphasised reform because nobody is unaware of the unprecedented, sustained investment in health that was given such a boost by the recent budget. I am also, of course, going to talk about investment and reform in community care. I am sure that we all know about the money that is already going into developments in community care. There is the learning disability review, £20 million for the delayed discharge action plan, £24 million—rising to £48 million next year—to expand home care, over £50 million of extra investment for the care home sector and, of course, £250 million during this Parliament for free personal care. I do not have time to cover the whole reform agenda in community care, but I think that members will agree that the joint working agenda, backed up the Community Care and Health Act 2002, is key to the development and redesign of services in the area. Our early analysis of initial local partnership agreements that were submitted by local partners in April shows that much has been achieved in establishing joint resourcing and joint management arrangements, but there is still a lot to do. Trust and transparency must replace  tribalism and tradition. The framework of joint budgeting and joint management that we seek to achieve can drive the reform of services from the individual's perspective rather than from the organisation's perspective. We do not want more of the same for our investment. We have no intention of pouring new money into old silos. We want to see more and better joint services and new routes to community care. We also want to see progress on the acid test of delayed discharge. Of course, members will know of the new way in which we are distributing the £20 million to address the critical issue of delayed discharge. We are examining the action plans that were drawn up by local partnerships and will distribute money only when we are convinced that those plans will deliver. In a sense, dealing with the delayed discharge is the key to the beds issue that the SNP amendment raises. Investment and reform are also key parts of the health improvement agenda, with particular focus on tackling health inequalities. We are determined to step up our efforts across the Executive this year on that important agenda. I want to mention a particular demonstration project in a little more detail, because it has attracted media comment this week. However, I will take an intervention from Tommy Sheridan before I do that.

The quality standards board will not look particularly at that issue, but other bodies are obviously doing so. As I said last week, we are deep into the agenda for change in negotiations that will cover the work force members to whom Tommy Sheridan referred. There has been progress on that issue, but we want more. We also, as I said last week, want progress on the nursing agenda. The Starting Well project is an example of the new ways of working in health improvement to which I want to refer. David Olds, an international expert in intensive support for vulnerable families, is addressing a conference about that issue in Glasgow today. The conference is led by the Glasgow health city partnership, with partner organisations that represent a range of statutory, voluntary and academic interests. Starting Well is focusing on the promotion of health and protection  from harm in the period leading up to birth and throughout the first three years of childhood. The project is based in two of the most deprived areas of the city and aims to demonstrate that child health in Glasgow can be improved by a programme of activities that supports families and provides them with access to enhanced community-based resources. The project's health visitors and a team of health support workers are providing intensive home-based support in the target areas to all families with new babies. The focus is on parenting and on giving parents practical support, with contact beginning before children are born.

I knew that I could not get through the debate without Ben Wallace mentioning Alan Milburn. I suppose that I should be pleased that Ben Wallace has such a high regard for Alan Milburn. We have made it clear that we shall publish meaningful information about the performance of individual surgeons. Also, we have said that we do not believe in crude league tables that could well be counterproductive. I want to conclude what I was saying about Starting Well, which I hope illustrates our determination to be bold and radical when it comes to health improvement. An innovative partnership management model has been developed with One Plus, the lone parents organisation, which enables lay health support workers to fulfil a vital role in the intensive support model. It complements, rather than replaces, the role of experienced health visitors and it is building community ownership for the project, which is well on course to help 1,800 families in some of the most deprived parts of Glasgow. Some 98 per cent of eligible families have agreed to take part. We must work together on new ways to improve health and to reduce inequalities and Starting Well shows how we can do so through new ways of improving health, new ways of tackling health inequalities, new ways of delivering services and new ways of driving forward change. Government must step up its efforts with regard to funding, standards and—where necessary—intervention and best practice must become common practice. Most of all, Government must create an environment that allows solutions to be developed by those who know best—front-line staff—with the involvement of patients. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's  commitment to sustained investment in health; agrees that investment must be accompanied by reform that is focused on the needs and expectations of patients and service users; acknowledges the progress that has already been made by the National Waiting Times Unit and looks forward to further improvements; supports a collaborative approach to reform which involves patients, staff and the wider public; welcomes the priority attached to dealing with delayed discharge and hospital-acquired infection, and believes that improving health and tackling health inequalities in both urban and rural Scotland should be central features of the reform agenda.

The delivery of health services for patients requires a combination of sustained investment and reform—investment in staff, equipment, facilities and new treatments, and reform of ways of working and service organisation in collaboration with patients and front-line staff. Often, in recent weeks, I have seen and read commentators suggest that investing in capacity and investing in reform are two alternative strategies for improving the national health service. Investing in staff has even been portrayed as investing in a bottomless pit that would leave few resources over for reform. That is nonsense. At the heart of that nonsense is a real misunderstanding of what we mean by reform in the NHS. I shall say more about that in next week's debate. Investing in staff is central to investing in reform. Front-line staff know their patients best; they know what their patients want and how they could make changes to improve their patients' experience. The key to reform is allowing them to do that. By "them", I refer to the whole health care team, and I thank and pay tribute to the invaluable contribution of every member of that team. However, this is international nurses' week. Nurses and midwives are central to the delivery and reform of both health care and health improvement. The central message to nurses from today's debate is, "We value you and we will seek to value you more and more in the weeks and months to come." There is no doubt that we need many more nurses in the NHS. Since 1997, there has been a rising trend in the number of qualifying nurses. I hope that that trend will continue when new national work force statistics are announced tomorrow. However, we must step up our efforts and ensure that we listen and respond to the needs of the thousands of nurses already working within the NHS. That is why it has been so important to me to meet hundreds of nurses at the national convention that we held last November and at the six local conventions that we have held throughout Scotland during the past two months. That is why it is so important to me to continue to talk to nurses throughout Scotland. In the past few weeks, I have met emergency nurse practitioners  in Aberdeen; nurse endoscopists in Ayr; infection control nurses in the Borders; sexual health nurses in Edinburgh; nurses working with the homeless in Perth; and nurses on medical wards, surgical wards and in primary care throughout Scotland. Tomorrow, in Inverness, I will have the privilege of joining others to celebrate the success of Scotland's first 11 family health nurses. That is an example of partnership at an international level, as the World Health Organisation is helping to test the delivery of a new model of care, which incorporates disease prevention and health promotion as well as caring for those who are ill. That offers exciting potential for the development of community health services in Scotland. Following the national nursing convention in November, we drew up an action plan called facing the future, which is based entirely on views that were expressed at the convention. We established a strong national implementation group, called partnership in action, which I am honoured to chair. At the November convention, we announced £1.5 million for recruitment and retention initiatives. That was increased to £5 million at the first local convention in Glasgow at the end of February. At the Glasgow convention, I also announced the immediate funding of six return-to-practice schemes, which will enable 150 nurses to return to work in NHS Scotland. The funding will cover costs, expenses and child care; 60 of those nurse returners are already in place. We are aware of the need to repair the damage that was done by previous short-sighted decisions to cut student nurse intakes; those are the life-blood of future supply. We have driven up student intakes; 10,000 more nurses will qualify in Scotland by 2005, which is 1,500 more than previously planned. As part of the facing the future initiative, I have increased intakes yet further. There will be another 250 extra students in this academic year. We have increased student bursaries by 10.4 per cent and there will be a further increase later this year.

In a moment. I need to make more progress first. We want all those who qualify to secure employment within NHS Scotland, if they wish to do so. We have therefore announced that we will guarantee a year's employment on qualification, from autumn 2002. There are potentially 1,500 newly qualified nurses due to graduate across Scotland by October; they will be the first to benefit from that guarantee. The most noticeable recruitment difficulties for nursing and midwifery are in certain specialities and geographic  locations. We know that those difficulties could be addressed largely by a more sophisticated approach to work force planning. In January, the Executive issued a consultation paper on our proposals for new work force development centres, as part of our positive response to the report of the Scottish integrated work force planning group, which is mentioned in the Scottish National Party's amendment. Of course, we are supporting that report and carrying forward its recommendations. The centres will establish work force plans based on solid research and will deliver integrated work force planning, effective recruitment activity and better collaboration throughout the service. That is a central part of our wider work force planning strategy, which is now centre stage for us. A fundamental part of improved work force planning must be a better understanding of nurse work loads. I have announced plans to establish a group to undertake a thorough study of nurse and midwifery work loads, which will ensure that future work force planning is well informed and that the developing role of nurses is not accompanied by an ever-expanding work load.

There will be a further increase in bursaries this year. I am aware of the issue that Tommy Sheridan raises, and I am sure that it will come up at the special convention for student nurses that we will hold in June. As well as improving recruitment and increasing future supply, we are delivering other improvements that will help to retain nurses and midwives in the service. We have doubled the number of nurses who will participate in leadership programmes, to ensure that every health board in Scotland will have nurses trained in clinical leadership who can provide effective leadership in clinical teams. Our introduction of nurse consultants not only improves nurse career prospects, but ensures that nurses have more influence at a higher level in clinical settings. In recognition of the fact that nurses and midwives should be at the heart of planning and decision making for the NHS, I announced a few weeks ago that a nurse director should be appointed to each of the 15 NHS boards. I expect that to be achieved by the end of next month.  Nurses are important leaders of change. That is why we are doubling the number of nurses on leadership programmes. Today I can announce further measures to develop and support nurses throughout their careers. There will be a £1.75 million boost to NHS investment in skills development for nurses and midwives. That extra investment, on top of the money that is already being spent at local NHS level, will be a major step towards ensuring that all nurses get the continuing professional development that they deserve through their careers. We will consult nurses on the best possible use of that money in the interest of staff and patients.

Time will not allow me to take an intervention. I have only one and a half minutes left. Flexibility is another key issue that has been raised at nursing conventions and elsewhere. Flexibility is about the NHS providing the care that patients want, at the time and in the place that they want it. It also about staff—in this case nurses—being able to find work that they want to do, at the times they want to do it, and in roles that they want and to which they are dedicated. We are committed to driving forward that agenda through training, spreading best practice and ensuring that the partnership information network guidelines on family-friendly working are implemented effectively. Last but not least, I will address the issue of pay. Many of the hundreds of nurses around Scotland to whom I have listened in the past few months have raised the issue of pay. However, they have also mentioned continuing professional development, working conditions, work load, career structures and flexibility as issues on which they would like to see action. I, too, am concerned about pay. I am pleased that, since 1997, we have made some progress in that area through sustained above-inflation pay awards. However, I want to see further sustained progress on pay. The agenda for change negotiations are taking forward the issue at United Kingdom level. I believe that most nurses support that. Nurses want progress to be made on pay alongside progress on service development. I agree with them. They certainly do not want the local pay that is supported by the SNP, which would set nurse against nurse and do nothing to solve the problems that we are addressing today. Because I know what the SNP's pay agenda is, I will not support the SNP amendment; nor will I support the Conservative amendment. I move, That the Parliament pays tribute to the vital contribution  made by all members of health care teams across Scotland but, in this International Nurses' Week, recognises the central role of nurses and midwives in delivering high quality patient care and supports the significant investment and action to recruit, retain and value nurses and midwives being delivered through Facing the Future and other initiatives.

Unified NHS Boards were established as recently as September 2001. We do not, therefore, expect to spend the coming months reviewing their future. However, a longer-term review of management and decision-making in NHS Scotland is now under way.

Several important developments are relevant to that point. First, with the creation of the new NHS boards, we have extended the range of people on the boards. Secondly, last week we issued new draft guidance on increased public involvement in decisions about local health services. We have a whole agenda around patient focus and public involvement that we are determined to progress quickly so that we have far more effective public involvement. Thirdly, part of the review will be to consider how we can improve the accountability of local health systems to the Parliament and the Executive and to local communities. Those are the areas in which most people think that we should have a more effective engagement with the public. The reality is that acute services reviews are inherently controversial. Sometimes people in one part of an area will want one solution and people in another part of the area will prefer a different solution. Simply having elected health boards would not get round some of those dilemmas, which any NHS board would face.

Clearly, I have already given approval for the developments that are taking place in Dumfries and Galloway and we will all take a keen interest in what is happening. That is exactly the kind of model that the continuing longer-term review will want to consider. However, the fundamental message from us—and, I believe,  from the public—is that we do not want structural upheaval and top-down imposition. We want to ensure that we involve patients and front-line staff in leading change. That is the centre of our reform agenda.

At the moment, the drugs bills are part of the general allocations to boards. That fact was welcomed during our very positive debate on primary care two weeks ago because that allows connections to be made between the drugs budget and other developments in primary care. I do not think that there would be widespread support for the proposal that Mr Raffan mentions, but I will consider it further if it is a definite suggestion.

The latest validated figures are contained in the information and statistics division's "Patients Ready for Discharge in NHSScotland: figures from 15 January 2002 census". The figures show that, at the census date, 2,075 people were delayed in hospital beyond the accepted six-week discharge planning period.

There is no question of those patients not going to the independent sector, because all nursing homes are in the independent sector at present. A question exists on the number of care home places. We have taken action to deal with that by making a major cash injection into care home fees. We have put about £50 million into that over the past three or four months. Over and above that, we have allocated £20 million to dealing with delayed discharge. We have asked all local authorities and NHS boards to produce action plans by the end of the month. Hugh Henry and I will address a meeting of all council leaders and NHS board chairs in Scotland on Tuesday. Peter Peacock will also be there. We take the problem very seriously. The money will not be handed down until we are satisfied that the boards have produced plans that will deliver.

I am aware of the issue because I visited Carstairs recently. There is an  issue with the Murray royal hospital. However, the bigger issue is to make progress on local forensic units as quickly as possible, particularly in the west of Scotland and in Glasgow. Two such units are at the planning stage. Full consultation must take place and that has been happening in relation to Stobhill general hospital for a long time. That is the key development that will unlock the problem.

I assure David Davidson that I have taken a great interest in these matters since the mid-1990s. I have believed what I stated today since I was Opposition health spokesperson at Westminster in 1996.

This is the first time that we have had a discussion on the issue. I welcome the discussion. We must be absolutely clear that when we talk about devolving funds and decision making, we do not mean holding funds for secondary care. We believe that patient choice can be delivered without GPs having the bureaucracy of holding funds for secondary care. In the interests of the debate, Mary Scanlon should be clear about where we agree and where we disagree.

I am sure that Mary Scanlon does not need reminding that no new money has been allocated over and above what has already been announced, which is an increase in excess of 7 per cent. Historically, that increase is extremely high.

With respect, I think that I was clear about that issue. The GP and the patient will decide together, using the waiting times database, whether the patient should go to  another hospital. The transfer of money can take place without the GP having the bureaucracy of holding funds. The objective can be realised without that bureaucracy. I share the objective that patients, with the guidance of their GPs, should have the choice to be treated somewhere else. The funds for secondary care do not have to be in the hands of GPs to achieve that objective.

I will be brief. Currently, patients and those who refer them do not have the information and that is why the database is crucial. When the information is available, there will be nothing in the system to stop referrals.

Our agenda of investment and reform is a collaborative venture that involves patients and front-line staff wherever they are based. Our focus is the patient and their journey within and across care sectors. Integrated care and single-system working will be required ever-increasingly. In that context, I have a passionate commitment to primary care, which is at the heart of my vision for the future of health care in Scotland. Our test for new and existing NHS services will be this: "If it can be done in primary care, it should be done in primary care." We want people to have ready access to the most appropriate member of the primary care team for such services. We want the services to be part of an integrated, joined-up health and social care system that is designed to meet the needs and wishes of patients. We want primary care teams to drive reform of the NHS, so that people will receive the services that they need, in the right place and at the right time. Ninety per cent of patient contacts with the NHS begin and end with primary care, which is the gatekeeper to most other parts of the NHS. People value the services that they receive and the staff who provide them. We want to ensure that we continue to develop and enhance those services through our reforms. However, sustainable change will be possible only with the continued support, dedication and hard work of the people who work day in and day out in primary care, caring for patients and working with communities. I thank those staff and pay tribute to all that they are doing  and will do in leading change. It is critical that we work in partnership with front-line staff to achieve the level and pace of change that we need to deliver our vision. Primary care is also a key element in our health improvement and public health agenda for tackling inequalities and raising the health status of individuals and communities. Primary care must be an integral part of the wider drive for social justice, and primary care teams must work with other agencies and local communities. This summer's decisions on the near 50 per cent increase in health spending that was announced after last week's budget will link investment to evidence of right-place, right-time care and intervention. Nowhere will that be more important than in primary care. The potential is huge for improvements in the experience of patients and the effectiveness of the NHS. That is why we intend to back local primary care teams in taking a central role in leading reform in the NHS. Those professionals—general practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, dentists, health visitors and others—see patients most often and know best their needs. They must be the leaders of change who drive forward the development of care and the redesign of services around the needs of patients. The transformation in services has begun. However, to speed up the pace of change, we must give front-line health professionals access to the investment and support that they need. That is why we have announced some £30 million of dedicated additional resources for local services, which will be spent through primary care teams on extra staff and equipment. That is also why I support further devolution of funding and decision making to local primary care teams and why I urge all those who work in primary care to play a full and active part in the high-level review of NHS management and decision making that is now under way. A key part of the review's remit is to focus on the developing role of local health care co-operatives in our unified health care system. In view of comments that were made on the radio this morning, I want to make it absolutely clear that this announcement has nothing to do with GP fundholding. GP fundholding was bureaucratic and competitive and it institutionalised inequity. We will therefore reject the Conservative amendment. Of course, we want to give choice to patients—we made that clear last week. Patients and GPs can, for example, express a preference for a hospital that can offer a shorter waiting time. Such referrals can take place without GPs' requiring funds to purchase secondary care. The money can simply be transferred. I await with interest the SNP's position on that. If the SNP amendment refers to the devolution of power and resources to  local health care co-operatives in our sense, I could accept it. However, if it means LHCCs holding funds for commissioning secondary care, I will not support it because it would set up unnecessary bureaucracy.

I do not know what Iain Duncan Smith or Liam Fox would think about it, but time and again the Conservatives talk to me about Alan Milburn. They often misrepresent him and that does not win them the argument. Last week, Alan Milburn said that to move patients around the system more easily we must get away from the bureaucracy of contracts. That is my position. We do not need to get involved in that situation. We want more resources in primary care so that professionals in that sector can develop services and lead change. Improvements for patients are at the heart of this programme of reform. By October, there will be a clear timetable in every NHS board area for the delivery of 48-hour maximum waits to see the right member of the primary care team. Patients throughout the country will also have access to a wider range of services—including minor surgery—close to home. There will be a major drive to cut the bureaucratic NHS paper chase between primary and acute care, through investment in information technology and a new contract between the NHS and GPs. Those measures will reduce delays for patients and increase the amount of quality time that local health professionals are able to spend with patients. We will invest £50 million over the next three years to step up the use of information technology in the NHS, and this year we have added another £2 million to slash the 10 million pieces of paper that slow down the organisation of primary care.

Tommy Sheridan has highlighted another part of the primary care reform agenda. Sometimes, people must go through too many stages before they reach the appropriate professional. Physiotherapy is an area in which that happens; optometry is another. Waiting times for treatment for eye conditions has been dealt with by cutting out some of those stages. The general point that Tommy Sheridan makes is absolutely valid. We also want to take steps to ensure that best practice becomes common practice throughout Scotland. There will be a major drive to encourage collaboration in primary care—for example, by funding more locum covers—so that professionals in one part of the country can share experiences systematically with those in other areas. The need for best practice to become common practice runs through the recent report of the primary care modernisation group, which is aptly entitled "Making the Connections: Developing Best Practice into Common Practice". The report identifies specific priorities for action, including improving access to services, better chronic disease management in the community and improved mental health services in primary care. I support those priorities, which are at the heart of our immediate reform agenda. I referred to dedicated additional resources of £30 million to primary care teams. LHCCs are currently investing that money in a range of services for patients. I had intended to speak at greater length about our continuing investment but, as time is passing so quickly, I will refer only briefly to the £30 million tranche and to the £48 million for 100 high-quality modern premises projects throughout Scotland, many of which will bring primary care professionals from different agencies together to provide one-stop services. An excellent example of that is at Dalmellington in Ayrshire, which I was pleased to visit recently. We will perhaps hear more about it from someone from Ayrshire later. There is also £18.5 million being invested in personal medical services to enable GPs and their teams to focus on the clinical needs of their patients through more flexible ways of providing existing and additional services and through the best use of professional skills. Examples include improved chronic disease management, improved mental health services and improved services for specific groups such as homeless people and people who have learning disabilities. I do not want people to think that all this is just a shake-up of primary care. We are stepping up the pace of change and we are taking those who work in primary care with us. They are already signed up to the agenda and are delivering it throughout Scotland.  Additional investment is not just about providing more of the same, but about doing things differently. It is about ensuring that primary care can drive change and it is about working with front-line staff and with patients to redesign services to provide more comprehensive and better co-ordinated care to individuals and communities. Service redesign, new technologies, greater flexibilities in the roles and responsibilities of different staff groups, and the stripping out of bureaucracy can all create scope to increase the proportion of time that health professionals spend with patients. Much of the redesign work to date has focused on the interface between primary care and specialist services. For example, in Dumfries and Galloway, a managed clinical coronary heart disease—CHD—network has been developed, which provides care pathways for all health professionals. It identifies what is required at each stage of a patient's care and ensures a uniform approach. That CHD network has been driven by primary care—the project manager is a GP and all the LHCCs in the area have been enthusiastic supporters, as have individual practices. That is a concrete example of what we mean when we talk about redesigning services across primary and secondary care.

I had better keep going because time is passing at an alarming speed. Other examples include cancer care, stroke care, services for the elderly and mental health services. NHS Greater Glasgow, in recognising that mild to moderate mental illness is the biggest reason why patients present for primary care, has developed a framework for primary care mental health services. That framework will be provided by a range of agencies and co-ordinated through LHCCs. Such developments will be key to the development of services in primary care, especially in the care of mild to moderate mental health problems. We intend to build on the excellent work that is taking place throughout Scotland and to share the innovative work and learning that is emerging from the redesign projects by putting in place a national collaborative improvement programme. That programme will help to create the infrastructure and the resources that will support the wider implementation of best practice. The first programme of work, supported by the primary care modernisation group and the Scottish diabetes group, will tackle demand and management of access within primary care and will support the implementation of aspects of the Scottish diabetes framework. A number of other measures can help to improve access to primary care—I will mention  just three. The introduction of NHS 24—which will commence this spring in the north of Scotland—will become an important gateway to the NHS. It will provide quality-assured nurse telephone advice and an authoritative source of health care information. Where appropriate, it will direct referral to primary care professionals, accident and emergency services or the ambulance service. The development of nurse triage and nurse practitioner services in general practice, as the first point of contact for urgent problems, will ensure that patients get to see the most appropriate member of the primary care team. That will deal effectively with minor illnesses and injuries. Expansion in the scope of nurse prescribing in order to provide more accessible patient-centred services will also be an important development. Specially trained nurses will be able to prescribe from a range of products. That will support their growing role in treating minor illnesses and injuries, and will enable them further to develop their role as the first point of access for patients. We also aim to maximise the expertise of pharmacists who, of all health professionals, have the widest knowledge of the science and use of medicines. At present, only doctors can change a patient's dosage. In conjunction with the Department of Health, we plan to introduce pharmacist prescribing to allow pharmacists to adjust doses in repeat prescriptions. That will help to prevent medicine-related hospital admissions, provide greater convenience for patients and their families and reduce GPs' work loads. So many things are happening in primary care that I will simply mention in passing the joint future agenda—we have discussed it on many occasions. I would also like to highlight the provision of intensive home care and of rapid response teams to prevent admission to hospital and to facilitate discharge from secondary care. I have made general reference to local health care co-operatives, but I highlight the recent appointment of public health practitioners, who will provide a vital resource for LHCCs. Public health practitioners will act as linchpins for actions to improve the health of local populations, as catalysts for change and as links to other agencies and communities. Everything will be done in collaboration with patients and front-line staff. There is public involvement in primary care, but I apologise for not having the time to go into it in detail. I assure members that public involvement is of fundamental importance to us. I will move on to discuss the work force. Recruitment and retention is crucial to the development of primary care. We have agreed  incentive packages for GPs, such as the £5,000 that is available to a new GP on joining the NHS and the further £5,000 on average to every new GP who joins a practice in a deprived, remote or rural area. We are piloting the World Health Organisation's family health nurse model in some of our remotest communities. The family health nurse will be a generalist community nurse who will focus particularly on the health needs of families and the communities that they live in. I look forward to visiting some of those people in the Highlands in the first half of May. I am well aware that, in some remote and rural parts of Scotland, there are difficulties in recruiting and retaining dentists to provide NHS services. I am pleased to announce today an initial package of measures to help address this situation—which we have agreed with the profession—worth about £1 million. That package includes: funding to support a vocational training place for every dentistry graduate in Scotland; allowances of £3,000 to each newly qualified dentist who takes up their training year in a remote and rural area; allowances of £5,000 over two years to vocational training dentists who have completed their training and who commit themselves to the NHS; and allowances of £10,000 over two years to those who take up similar positions in remote and rural areas. Mary Mulligan will announce the details of that in a little while. The new GP contract will also address recruitment and retention. The contract is fundamental to ensuring that general practice is effective, responsive and that it provides high-quality services that are free from the bureaucracy of the current system. The framework for the new contract was agreed last week between the NHS Confederation in Scotland and the UK general practitioners committee. The health ministers for all four countries have agreed to the principles that underlie the framework. I am confident that it will provide the foundations for a better deal for patients, GPs and the NHS in Scotland. For remote and rural areas, the work of RARARI—the remote and rural access resource initiative—is examining innovative solutions to the problems of recruitment and retention of staff. An important report on medical work force planning will come soon from Professor John Temple. Professor Gillian Needham has also produced a report—"Planning Together"—on work force planning more generally. On the back of those reports, we will produce an action plan on work force planning and development. Research is important in order to evaluate what is happening and to establish best practice. We promised in 1998 to double our investment in primary care research over five years. By the end of last year, we had already met that target and  investment continues to grow. One of our significant new investments has been in the Scottish School of Primary Care, which considers the full range of clinical and academic primary care disciplines to improve the evidence base for primary care and to support reform. I look forward to addressing its conference tomorrow and to going into some of the issues in more detail. I apologise for having to omit some issues. Although it is impossible in 20 minutes to go through the whole primary care reform agenda, I hope that I have managed to outline the direction of travel. I also hope, in speeches over the next month or so, to give further indications of where we see the direction of reform going in the next few months and years. The advantage of the funding that was announced last week is that it will allow us to make steady and sustained progress on our programme, which is practical and concentrates on delivering improvements in communities. Within the next year, I expect tangible progress in at least three key, but not exclusive, areas: the round-the-clock NHS 24 telephone advice line; the work that is being done to develop health improvement champions in every community; and the development of bigger roles for nurses, pharmacists and others in managing chronic disease. Above all, we must ensure that extra health resources are used as effectively as possible. Resources must be spent where they are needed most and where they can do most good. That will allow us to move closer to achieving right-place, right-time and right-quality care and intervention for all patients, which I am sure we all want. I move, That the Parliament applauds the vital contribution to healthcare and health improvement made by primary care teams across Scotland and supports further investment and reform to improve access and redesign services round the needs of patients.

There are 800 posts available at the pre-registration house officer grade—previously known as junior house officer—which is the period of training that immediately follows graduation.

The reality is that there is a significantly higher number of medical graduates this year than there were last year. However, we have created 40 additional posts at pre-registration house officer level as part of the extra 475 general junior doctor posts that we are in the process of creating. I will look into the details of Robert Brown's constituent's situation, if the member so wishes, but, in general, I am told that 46 posts and 33 students are unallocated.

We must ensure that the training is available, and that issue had to be taken into account when we created the 40 extra posts. I am sure that Mary Scanlon welcomes not only the working time directive but the new deal for junior doctors. More progress has been made in reducing the hours of junior doctors in the past three years than in the previous 30 years. I am sure that we all agree that that is better for junior doctors, better for patients and better for the quality of care.

We already employ more doctors and nurses in NHS hospitals. I am sure that we all welcome the fact that, as a result of the biggest sustained increases in health spending in Scotland ever, over a period of time we will be able to employ more doctors and nurses over and above those employed already in NHS hospitals.

The Scottish Executive encourages clinicians to ensure that as many patients as possible are included in relevant trials. I announced last week that £1 million is being made available to provide more research nurses and other support for clinical trials. Participation in clinical trials is subject to patient eligibility against preset research criteria and, of course, patient choice.

I will set aside the fact that the timing of the announcement did not quite coincide with Mary Scanlon's interpretation of events. I am glad that she welcomes the extra money that we put into clinical trials last week. We intend to get that money out into the research network so that more patients can be recruited for trials. The support is already in place, to an extent, because of the Scottish cancer therapy network—the infrastructure already exists. That is why we can put all the additional money, more or less, into developing clinical trials in hospitals and in the various regional cancer networks.

I agree with Margo MacDonald that we should pay tribute to the superb work that the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign has done over the past eight years. The campaign's questionnaire was extremely useful for everyone who is involved in delivering cancer services. It is clear that a lot of work is being done on patient involvement in cancer services. Many of the campaign's suggestions fit in with the wider agenda of developing patient involvement and feedback in order to improve services. I was able to give a positive response to the points that the campaign's representatives raised, although I am still pursuing some of the detailed questions that they asked.

I expect to receive the expert group's report in April and hope to publish as soon as possible thereafter.

The fact of the matter is that Professor Hanlon has no doubts about the safety of MMR, as he has made clear. There are conflicting reports about the context of his remarks. The fact is that majority medical opinion clearly supports MMR. Professor Hanlon made it clear that he was making a pragmatic judgment, but the pragmatic judgment of the majority of medical people is that, if we moved to single vaccines, coverage would fall dramatically and we would be putting the population at risk from measles, mumps and rubella.

As part of our drive to improve mental health and well-being, I launched a consultation last October on our draft national framework for the prevention of suicide and self-harm. I hope to publish the final version of the framework later this year. We are also providing financial backing for a new phone line that will go live on 8 April for people with low mood and depression who might be at risk of suicide.

The issue is complex and that is why the framework proposes a series of actions. Part of that is targeting actions on people who are at risk. As Donald Gorrie said, that is what happened in Edinburgh with some success. Again, he highlighted the important role of the voluntary sector. The important thing is that local alliances form and local action plans take a series of initiatives to deal with such a serious problem.

Those organisations certainly play a valuable role and I pay tribute to them. I hope that the phone line that I announced in my first answer will complement the splendid work that the Samaritans and others have done for such a long time.

It is extremely distressing when any young person commits suicide. That applies to young people in a range of prisons. The  specific matter that the member has highlighted falls within the remit of the Minister for Justice. Unfortunately, we have heard of suicides in quite a large number of prisons.

The Scottish Executive is committed to attracting nurses back into the national health service. On 26 February, at the first of six local nursing recruitment and retention conventions, I launched a national year of recruitment and retention, with investment in new initiatives this year amounting to £5 million. A key initiative is a return-to-practice programme to encourage experienced nurses to retrain and rejoin the NHS.

I am sure that the return-to-practice courses will be widely welcomed by women—and, indeed, by some men—who wish to return to nursing. Course costs, as well as the cost of travel, books and child care if required, will be paid. This is one of several initiatives that we are driving forward in order to start more nurses in training—250 nurses, over and above the existing increase, will begin training in October—and to get back nurses who used to be part of the work force but have left it.

That is not the case. In this morning's debate on the national health service we discussed the issue of nurse numbers. There are more qualified nurses now than in 1999 or in 1997. There are also significant variations. For example, there is a significantly greater number of nurses working in the acute sector and in the community. There are fewer nurses working in learning disability hospitals, but that is a good thing. We want people in learning disability hospitals to move out of those and to live in the community. When such people are transferred to the community, some of the nurses who work in learning disability hospitals are transferred to local  authorities and are no longer counted as nurses. Shona Robison should consider in detail the profile of nurses in different categories.

I am not sure whether Donald Gorrie is talking about the return-to-practice scheme, but the point that I made about that remains: course costs and additional costs are covered. Some people may want to enter nursing as mature students, and more places are available for that. All those students are included in the bursary system. We are also starting five nurse cadet schemes, which are an alternative route for people who may not have the educational qualifications to start the full nursing course.

No discussions have yet taken place with the care commission on the creation of new health management structures. On 12 December last year, I announced plans for a comprehensive review of management and decision making in NHS Scotland. We fully intend to ensure that that important piece of work is taken forward in an open and inclusive manner that engages all the key stakeholders, including the social care sector.

I am sure that all members welcome this first-ever national system of care regulation, which will start in April and will implement the first-ever national care standards. I assure Trish Godman that those who previously worked for NHS boards on regulating nursing homes, for example, will transfer to the  commission. That means that nurses, pharmacists and other medical professionals will work for the commission. If the member is concerned about membership of the commission board, I can tell her that it includes a nurse and someone from the education sector.

Actually, I quoted figures from both 1997 and 1999. I said that I could find good figures from 1999, but went on to explain some of the issues around the unusual activity that took place that winter.

If Mary Scanlon revisits the question that I answered last week, she will see that the number of administrative staff rose to a peak at the height of the internal market in 1995, has reduced by more than 1,000 since then and will continue to reduce.

It was a daft question.

Like Nicola Sturgeon, I like debates that have a purpose and would like an end to polarisation. However, for that to happen, we require a sophisticated and balanced analysis of the situation. We must acknowledge that there is complexity and we must recognise problems and progress. For the 15 weeks during which I have been Minister for Health and Community Care, I have been prepared to be up-front about the difficulties that we face, whether in relation to unacceptable delays, staff recruitment and morale or any other issue. I am not, however, prepared to pretend that everything is bad and that no progress is being made. Such a pretence is insulting and demoralising for staff. It is contrary to the experience of patients and it is contradicted every week as I go around the country and see the superb service that is provided by staff, and the many different ways in which they are leading the redesign of services around the needs of patients. I could mention many recent visits. For example, in Ayrshire this week I saw at Ayr hospital many redesigned services involving urology, cataracts and nurse endoscopy services. The previous week, I saw information technology services in Fort William, where services for patients are being improved and time is being freed up for front-line staff. The week before that, I was in Dundee, where I saw the improved quality of care that has been brought about by a new linear accelerator. I also saw work with patients throughout the hospital to develop patient information and use patient feedback to improve the quality of care.  Quality and patient focus are words that are absent from today's motion, but which are crucial for patients and are at the heart of our health agenda. The motion talks of nurses, beds, waiting, activity and, most of all, 1999. On activity, I remind members that until now only consultant activity has been counted. The work of the nurse endoscopist to whom I spoke on Monday has not hitherto been recorded. Work is now in hand to develop recording systems that will capture the full range of NHS activity. I also remind members of the many advances that might reduce headline activity figures. They include quality improvements, which might involve spending more time with patients or in preparing treatment; reductions in junior doctor hours, which is good for quality but also has an effect on activity; and the working time directive, which has benefited other staff groups.

We actually have falling waiting lists and falling in-patient waiting times. However, I acknowledge that we have a problem with out-patient waiting times. We are the first Administration to focus on that and will take action on it. Notwithstanding the issues that I mentioned before the intervention, I will select a few figures—it is important that Mary Scanlon should hear this. Compared with 1997, the NHS is treating 25,000 more emergency in-patients and 58,300 more day cases each year. It is dealing with 50,300 more in-patients and day-case episodes, 11,000 more first out-patient appointments and 60,000 more accident and emergency attendances each year. Compared with 1997, the NHS has 17 more adult intensive care unit beds, 220 more one-stop clinics, 450 more qualified nurses and 230 more consultants.

I have seen the list. I have visited quite a few of the clinics and hope to visit more. I have seen the excellent work that they do, and what the member has indicated is certainly not what they are telling me. Similar and corresponding staff increases since 1999 can be recorded, although there are two  issues in that. First, there is a very short time scale because the latest staff figures are for 2000. Secondly, the other fact that we must take into account is that, during the winter of 1998-99, there was a waiting list initiative that cleared a backlog of people who had been waiting for a long time for surgical procedures. That was an unrepresentative blip in activity rates—we must bear that in mind when we make comparisons with 1999. The other thing to bear in mind in relation to the trend since then is that, in many cases—if I had time I could quote figures to show it—the number of qualified acute nurses is increasing and the number of qualified nurses in the community is increasing. However, the number of learning disability nurses in hospitals is decreasing. That is quite right because we want people who have learning disabilities to be cared for in the community. Many of those nurses go on with their caring role as council employees and are no longer recorded in the nurse statistics. I have only two minutes left, so I will not quote the array of statistics from 1999 until now that show that progress is being made in relation to staff numbers, intensive care beds, waiting times for heart bypass surgery—which have been halved—and so on. I do that not out of complacency, but in the interests of balance. The NHS is not shrinking, but it is rightly and most certainly changing. More people are being treated closer to home in local primary care practices and health centres, with procedures that were previously performed only in hospitals. The number of local fast-track clinics in Scotland has increased since 1999. Given that nine out of 10 patient contacts with the NHS come through primary care teams, it is astonishing that primary care is not mentioned in the motion. I have addressed waiting and I have only a short time left, so I will not say more about that. I have said how we are increasing the number of doctors and nurses—that will continue, not only because we want to do more to tackle waiting, but because we want to improve the quality of patient care. Scotland has led the way in improving outcomes for patients in the NHS. The experience of the Bristol inquiry has made improving the quality, and not just the quantity, of care all the more critical. That is why we have provided funding for nearly 500 more junior doctors in Scotland, to reduce their hours and improve the quality of the care that they can provide to patients.

I have no time, I am afraid. More progress has been made in improving  junior doctors' hours and conditions since 1999 than was made in the previous decade—in quality and not just quantity. We are building up our nursing work force, so that it can spend more quality time with patients in aiding their recovery and rehabilitation. More qualified nurses are working in our hospitals compared with 1999 and earlier this month I announced new initiatives to get more nurses into training, to get nurses back in the NHS through the return-to-practice courses, and to guarantee nurses a year's employment as soon as they qualify. There is a series of other initiatives, with £5 million attached to them, that are being driven forward by the implementation of the recruitment and retention of nurses policy. I am chairing the group that is doing that. Many initiatives are under way to deal with some of the problems, which I acknowledge. I repeat that today's debate should be not only about quantity, but about quality. I have not had time to mention the work of the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland, whose important report on cancer services will be published next week. We are determined to improve the quality of care as well as the quantity of care. Both objectives are now being driven forward with determination. I move amendment S1M-2882.2, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "congratulates the staff of the NHS in Scotland on their commitment and dedication; welcomes their leadership role in redesigning services around the needs of patients; notes that this often leads to a different configuration of services and to some new activities that have not traditionally been counted; applauds the on-going and varied work to improve quality in health services, and acknowledges the substantial real-term increases in health resources since 1999, which are supporting the programme of patient-centred reform."

The treatment needs of sleep apnoea sufferers, along with many other clinical needs, will be reflected in national health service boards' spending plans for 2002-03, when  an average of 7.2 per cent more funding will be available from the Scottish Executive than is available in the current year. As well as meeting national waiting targets, NHS boards should ensure that they target any particularly long waiting times in their areas.

Like Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, I am concerned about the long wait for treatment for sleep apnoea. As Minister of State with responsibility for health, Lord James stopped the service being treated as a national service in 1996. The problems have, to some extent, resulted from that. Funding is now increasing, but so is demand, as diagnosis and awareness of this most distressing condition increase. I look forward to further progress this year, as well as to the publication of a Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline on sleep apnoea in the summer.

I believe what Lord James tells me on that point. I referred to the fact that the service was no longer treated as a national service. A lot of the problems have arisen because the funding no longer came from the national service but came from individual health boards. Of course, I accept the point that Lord James has just made.

John McAllion is quite right that several boards are involved. Although all the boards have increased their funding for the clinic, more funding is clearly required. The traditional stance of the Executive and the former Scottish Office was to say that waiting times were a matter for boards. We are saying that boards must tackle waiting times, especially those that are particularly long. I expect Lothian NHS Board and the other boards to deal with the waiting times for what is a most distressing condition, which can—as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton pointed out—be highly dangerous.

As I said, I am concerned about the waiting times. Having spoken to Professor Douglas, I know that he is keen to have more funding and to develop the services. He has talked about developing a managed clinical network. The SIGN guideline might also point in that direction. The position is that funding decisions are for boards, but I have probably gone further than any previous Scottish Executive or Scottish Office minister in saying that we expect boards to address their long waiting times. Sleep apnoea is clearly a serious and distressing condition and I certainly expect more action to be taken to deal with the waiting times.

Did Ben Wallace not hear the last part of my speech, in which I indicated that the £24 million for care home fees, the £20 million for dealing with delayed discharges, the £250 million for free personal nursing care and the £100 million from 5 October 2000 will all go out on a new basis, to ensure that every penny of that money is spent on older people's services?

I want to make it absolutely clear—as I did in my speech—that we are taking decisive action in a new way on the distribution of money. Plans will be required and the money will be handed over only once those plans have been approved. There will be strict monitoring of the money. The review that has been referred to is, of course, something else. What we are doing will make big inroads; but if it does not solve all the problems, it may be that other options will have to be considered. However, the money will make a big difference.

The main thrust of the Conservatives' motion, which Mary Scanlon chose wisely to ignore, is that delayed discharge problems cannot be solved without full implementation of a supposed organisational recommendation of the Sutherland report. I remind members what Sir Stewart Sutherland said on pages 84 to 86 of his report: "The Government's proposals ... are attractive in that they seek to work with the grain of current organisational structures, and do not threaten the upheaval and disruption of a wholesale reorganisation." That is precisely the approach that we are adopting. Sir Stewart also said: "We welcome the proposed legislation which would enable budget pooling to take place in a way that is not currently possible." That is precisely what we did in the recent Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill. The new power to delegate functions and pool budgets will create, in effect, a single budget in a single host organisation.

In a moment. I have much  to get through. We do not support—neither did the Health and Community Care Committee—enforced delegation of functions from local authorities to the national health service. That support is the Conservatives' position, as described at the Health and Community Care Committee a few weeks ago, although Mary Scanlon wisely chose not to mention that today. That position is a curious interpretation of jointness, but we are not in the business of derailing joint working through such an approach. We want a genuine partnership to which both parties can commit and we want results, not restructuring. However, we have gone further than the full range of permissive joint-working powers in England by insisting on joint resourcing and joint management for all community care services, beginning this year with older people's services. At minimum, agencies must by April 2003 have aligned budgets and joint management for older people's services. They must by 1 April 2002 set out the budgets that are to be included and the management arrangements that are to apply. While we are taking action to make joint working work, the Conservatives are determined to talk it down. That is the core message of their motion. The motion refers to three other issues: care homes, delayed discharge and local government expenditure. We have made an unprecedented financial contribution to care homes and we have ensured that a tripartite group was established to address long-standing funding problems. Last autumn, we announced an immediate investment of £17.5 million to deliver an instant £10 a week for care home owners. That helped to kick-start talks that led to a recommended fee increase to which all have signed up. From 1 April, we will invest another £24 million. In addition, we will honour a commitment to backdate to July last year one third of the increase that was identified by the review group. That represents another £11 million, which brings to £35 million the total that we will invest from 1 April this year. The overall Executive commitment to care home owners since last July stands at more than £50 million. That is but one important strand of the biggest-ever investment in older people's care services.

Shona Robison was first to ask to intervene. I will take Murdo Fraser's intervention later.

Aligned budgets can achieve a great deal. West Lothian, which is a bit ahead of the game, has had an aligned budget for some time. As a result, it has reduced its delayed discharges by 60 per cent. We should not underestimate what aligned budgets can achieve although, in due course, many others will want to move on to pooled budgets. Another strand to our investment in services for older people deals with delayed discharges—most of the people who are affected by that are older. We are the first Administration to count those figures, which means that the comparison that Mary Scanlon made with 1999 was nonsense. We believe in transparency and we want to know the facts as a foundation for action. The true figure for delayed discharges is just over 2,000, because everyone accepts that people should be counted at the six-week point. We are ring-fencing new money for delayed discharges to ensure that the local authority and NHS board partnerships spend the money on people coming out of hospital—particularly those in the acute sector and those who have been delayed for the longest time. We have identified deliverable improvements that are to be made in each area and we are putting in place additional and robust arrangements for monitoring performance. We will ensure that that money is used only for delayed discharge. That is why, although we are releasing £5 million immediately to kick-start action, we will issue the rest of the money only when we are sure that the targets have been set and that they are achievable. We will certainly take action if partnerships fail to perform.

I do not have time. Our first main target can hardly be clearer. By April 2003, we expect to show evidence that 1,000 extra people who have experienced delayed discharge have moved into more appropriate forms of care. The key to that is care being delivered in the most appropriate setting and in many cases, that means home. Mary Scanlon should remember that when she quotes figures for places in residential care. In many cases, support at the pre-admission stage through rapid response teams and other preventive initiatives will mean that some older people do not need to go into hospital in the first place. I have only one more minute, so I must address the last part of the motion on ensuring that funds that are allocated for community care are actually spent on such services. There have been problems in relation to services for older people. As Mary Scanlon reminded us, those problems were highlighted by the care development group  report. However, let us consider the funding streams: £24 million for care homes—money that will be targeted specifically on care home fees; £20 million to deal exclusively with the problem of delayed discharge; and let us not forget the ring-fenced £250 million over two years for free personal and nursing care. We should also remember a fourth funding stream. One hundred million pounds was announced in October 2000 and we should remember in particular the £24 million this year, rising to £48 million in April 2003, for rapid response teams, intensive home support, more short breaks and shopping and maintenance services. That money is being distributed on the basis of outcome agreements, which means that it, too, will be spent on older people's services. Therefore, we are once again taking action while others talk of structural upheaval. This is the biggest ever investment in older people's care services and we shall ensure that it is spent on improving the lives of older people throughout Scotland. I move amendment S1M-2839.1, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "acknowledges the progress that is being made towards joint resourcing and joint management of older people's services; looks forward to further developments in the Joint Future agenda; welcomes the provision of significant extra resources for dealing with the problems of delayed discharge and care home fees, and recognises that such resources are part of the biggest ever investment in care services for older people."

Plans and targets are set out in our information management and technology strategy. The £2 million boost announced this week will build on the substantial investment that is already committed and will enhance the basic infrastructure of personal computers and networks that NHS trusts and general practitioners need to underpin the strategy.

Pauline McNeill is right that IT will improve the delivery of patient care in many ways and will free up staff time by reducing bureaucracy. I saw some of the advantages on Monday, when I visited the Belford hospital in Fort William and local GPs. I saw GPs and their patients who benefit from the big advances in IT that have been spearheaded in the Highlands and elsewhere. One advance is the quick transmission of test results; another factor, which Pauline McNeill mentioned, is the electronic booking of appointments. That system means that before people leave their GP's surgery, they can see when their appointment will be. That is bound to reduce the proportion of people who do not show for out-patient appointments, which at present is 11 per cent of all out-patient appointments.

The money was by no means for a rescue package. Highland NHS Board was in the first tranche of health boards that were involved in the system. All the other boards have come on stream and the system has now started everywhere in Scotland. Highland NHS Board and four other health boards are in the vanguard. Shona Robison should welcome the many advantages for patient care in the measures that I have mentioned. When I had a recent meeting with nurses, they praised the initiative, because it means less time spent on bureaucracy and more time spent on direct front-line patient care.

We attach a great deal of importance to that, which is why we have invested in ECCI and in Scottish care information, known as SCI—everything is an acronym in the world of IT. We were keen to give the strategy a boost, which is why we announced an extra £2 million this week to accelerate the development of the system. Mary Scanlon should praise the fact that the system is being pioneered in the Highlands. It should not be too long before it is rolled out across the Highland area and the rest of Scotland.

There are many advantages in such networks, some of which I have highlighted. One advantage is the access to information that they provide. When I visited Fort William, the point was made that patient records are available as well as all the advice, for example about referral protocols—which are another issue when it comes to out-patient appointments. Every question this afternoon has highlighted a different aspect of this most important initiative.

The Executive has no plans to review the current MMR vaccine programme.

As the First Minister said last week, it is important to keep the temperature down and have a rational debate about the issue. Politicians should not second-guess medical opinion. The medical advice is clear. Two issues relate to single vaccines—the risks between vaccines and more trauma for young children. The key point is that all the evidence shows that, if we were to move to single vaccines, there would be big drop in uptake. That happened in a similar situation in 1980, with the whooping cough triple vaccine, and would mean dangers not just from measles—which have been well publicised—but from mumps and rubella. Single vaccines would result in a reduction in all-round uptake.

I pay tribute to all the work that Susan Deacon has done on the issue. She is absolutely right about GPs and other front-line health workers. They were given information packs last year, not least as a result of her efforts. We are considering further ways of increasing the flow of information to parents. I agree with Susan Deacon that what GPs say and do is crucial.

I do not think that my advice is crucial in this area. Obviously, I am making my view clear, but I am listening to medical advice and I am sure that, as most people would agree, parents want to hear medical advice. Notwithstanding Ben Wallace's opening sentence, the reality is that the overwhelming body of medical opinion, not only in this country but in countries throughout the world, is that the MMR vaccine is the best and safest option for young children and for society as a whole.

The Scottish Ambulance Service sent a full business case for that project to the department a few days ago. The department is considering the case carefully but urgently. Subject to the department's approval, the service expects to be able to complete implementation of the project in 2004-05.

The situation is the opposite of what Margaret Smith suggested. The reality is that the Scottish Ambulance Service has done an important piece of work, which the Executive asked it to do. We will look urgently at that work. However, the plan cannot be implemented unless there is investment in three operation rooms. Unless that happens, it will not be possible to move to the priority dispatch system. Those two things must be done simultaneously. I hope to be able to give a response to the report in the near future.

There will be room for smaller local centres, but the reality is that the new priority dispatch system depends on having three operation rooms and on major investment being put into them. I understand that that plan has given rise to concerns, but when people understand the reason for that investment in the new operation rooms, they will support the plan. It is clear that people want to move to the priority dispatch system, but that cannot happen without the investment in three operation rooms.

The issue of paramedics is fundamental, too. We cannot move to the priority dispatch system unless we invest in extra paramedics. That is part of the Scottish Ambulance Service's business case. I want to look at the detailed issues over the next few weeks. There must and will be more investment in paramedics. By building up that service, we can have the kind of emergency services throughout Scotland that we want.

One issue that we must consider is how the plan will work in remote and  rural areas. I look forward to discussing that and other issues that have been raised when I visit the Scottish Ambulance Service College the week after next. I will be talking with the chair and senior management about all the issues that members have raised.

I am pleased to be opening a stage 3 debate for the first time. We may celebrate the new parliamentary procedures that have been working so well throughout the bill's stages as well, more importantly, as celebrating the very substantial advances that are embodied in this piece of proposed legislation. Political comment usually focuses on disagreements, so it may be that the joint purpose and common ground that we have witnessed at the various stages of the bill will not get the recognition that they deserve. I thank the Health and Community Care Committee for all its work on the bill over the past three months. I also thank the Local Government Committee, the Equal Opportunities Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee for their work, comment and reports. All have contributed to a parliamentary process that has been effective in improving and refining the bill. Many of the changes that were suggested by the Health and Community Care Committee at stage 1 were taken on board at stage 2. We have a better bill as a result. That process has continued today. I assure Janis Hughes, who has worked so tirelessly for carers throughout the bill's progress and before, that we shall drive forward action on information for carers and the identification of carers. The work of the Princess Royal Trust for Carers has been mentioned, as has general practitioner practice accreditation in relation to the identification of carers and the carers focus of the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland. Mary Mulligan, Hugh Henry and I undertake to monitor all that work and to ensure that the concerns of the Parliament about the identification of carers and information for carers are translated into action. Turning to the contents of the bill, it will be a significant achievement of our Parliament in helping to improve community care services throughout Scotland. It will enable us to deliver real benefits for thousands of people who need those services. It will enable us to deliver fairer charging; more support and recognition for carers; greater choice and independence for people who  need care; higher-quality care services through greater joint working; and free personal and nursing care. Through the bill, we will ensure that nursing care is free for all who need it, regardless of the context—free at home, free in hospital and, for the first time, free in nursing homes. In the same way we will ensure that personal care is free for all Scotland's older people—the dementia sufferer and the stroke victim, those at home as well as those in care homes. Today the Subordinate Legislation Committee reported on the powers to make orders and regulations in relation to that part of the bill. I am pleased that the committee welcomed the changes noted above and I am grateful for its careful consideration of the matter and for making its report available so quickly to enable Parliament to have the benefit of its members' views. However, I disagree with their comment that the power to qualify the requirement for free care can be used to "undermine the purposes of the Bill." A power to qualify is not a power to remove the requirement for free care. The Health and Community Care Committee accepted in its stage 1 report the Executive's view that some flexibility is required. That is because we will need to be able to update the provisions in response to future changes in the way that care is delivered. We also need to allow for clarification where necessary to ensure that free care is applied consistently throughout Scotland. We have been clear and consistent about the need for those powers and how we intend to use them to provide free care. I remind the Parliament that we have amended the bill to ensure that such regulations are made by affirmative procedure so that they can become law only if the Parliament votes for them. Debate on the bill has often focused on free nursing and personal care. Those provisions are a major step forward in improving fairness in care charging throughout Scotland, but they should not overshadow the other important changes that the bill will introduce. The bill will extend choice for people in need of care. The measures to extend direct payments will put real power into the hands of those needing care at home to choose the best care package to suit their needs. Instead of people being provided with services chosen by local authorities, direct payments give them the power to buy in their own services. The bill will ensure that direct payments are available throughout Scotland and will make them available to all care client groups. In practice, that could mean that whereas a person's care needs are met currently by half a dozen different care  staff, in the future that person could choose to employ one or two personal assistants to meet their needs in the way that suits them best. The bill will also extend choice for people who need to go into care homes. Deferred payment of care home fees will mean that people will no longer have to sell their homes to fund their care during their lifetime. Leaving home to live in a care home will always be a stressful time, but deferred payments will mean that people are spared the additional worry of selling their homes. Of course the overall number of people involved will be greatly reduced by free personal and nursing care in any case. Part 2 of the bill will allow new closer ways of joint working between NHS Scotland and local authorities, enabling them to develop more effective seamless services to suit local circumstances. It will give them real flexibility in how they manage and resource services jointly. We want local partners to come together to provide the best services for users, carers and patients. The bill lets them do just that. Part 3 of the bill provides measures to improve health services. It will extend the medical list system so that it applies to all general practitioners, rather than just those who run practices. That is an important improvement in the coverage of our existing quality and discipline procedures. It will mean that patients can be confident that every GP will be subject to similar disciplinary procedures and standards. Significant though it is, the bill cannot and should not be seen in isolation. Effective change does not come about just because of some words on a piece of paper. That is why we are already engaging with local partners and why the bill links to many other crucial initiatives. First, there is the work of the carers legislation working group. I pay tribute to everybody who was involved with that group. Secondly, there is the work of the implementation steering group in preparing for the implementation of free personal and nursing care. Thirdly, there is the work of direct payments Scotland in laying the foundations for the expansion of direct payments. Fourthly, there is the work of the integrated human resources working group, under the chairmanship of Peter Bates, on the staffing issues that arise from our joint working agenda. Hugh Henry and I were pleased to meet Peter Bates on Friday. I take this opportunity to thank the members of those working groups and to pay tribute to all who have been involved in the bill's development over many months. Some of those were mentioned earlier. I also thank Susan Deacon, who developed many of the policies that underpin the bill and who introduced it to Parliament. I thank  Henry McLeish, who was particularly identified with the central policy of the bill, as well as all the officials who were associated with developing the policies of the bill and with its detailed drafting. The bill is also better because of the various consultations that took place on its different provisions. The extent to which we carry out consultation is a new and very positive feature of this Parliament. I thank the hundreds of individuals and organisations that took the time to contribute their views and insights at public meetings, in focus groups and through written consultation. Finally, I must mention some of those who have been instrumental in laying the foundations for the measures that the bill will put on to the statute book. I am grateful to my fellow members of the care development group, as well as to the carers legislation working group and to the joint future group before that. The completion of the bill's progress through Parliament is far from the end of the process. We will continue to face challenges. We will continue to work with key agencies to ensure that progress is made in other ways on areas for action where legislation is not needed. I repeat what I said concerning the identification of carers. I have already mentioned some of the implementation work that is under way. We now need to turn our attention to regulations and guidance, to provide some of the detail that is needed beneath the provisions of the bill. We will continue to work in partnership with stakeholders on implementation and the development of regulations. I welcome the Parliament's input to the process. The bill is a major step forward in improving care for the thousands of people in Scotland who need it and for their carers. I am pleased that there is such widespread support for the bill and am proud to see it nearing the end of its time in Parliament after months—indeed years—of planning. Although much remains to be done, the bill represents a major milestone in improving care. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill be passed.

We expect to receive the final report by March 2002. Plans are in preparation for its dissemination to NHS Scotland immediately thereafter.

The cancer strategy that was published by the Executive last year indicated that there would be a review of upper gastrointestinal surgery following the audit. As I indicated, the audit will be published in March. It will then be up to the NHS boards in the west of Scotland and the regional cancer advisory group to reorganise services for that important area of surgery. As Des McNulty said, I have a close interest in the subject, and I met the surgeons in question  last year. In the first instance, however, it is a matter for local bodies. I am pleased to be told that Greater Glasgow NHS Board has arranged a meeting with those surgeons in the near future.

There are many developments that will be helpful, including developments in endoscopy, which is important in diagnosing upper gastrointestinal cancer. There is a lot of interest in that area and research is being done. There are also new developments in adenocarcinoma, which is becoming more common. Many people have a keen interest in those developments; I, and other members of the Executive, certainly have. It is very important that networks are developed as soon as possible after the publication of the audit so that those serious illnesses can be dealt with in the best and most appropriate way.

We are making progress on several fronts. In July 2000, we announced £6 million of ring-fenced funding for training an additional 210 specialist nurses. Of those 210 nurses, 40 were specialist nurses in accident and emergency departments. There are now four programmes in Scotland that prepare nurses for the emergency nurse practitioner role.

I agree with Elaine Thomson that redesigning services is crucial and empowers front-line staff to organise and deliver those services. That is a vital part of our decentralising agenda for health, although we are quite happy to be centralisers when it comes to ensuring that there are national standards and that money is available. The initiative to which Elaine Thomson referred is important. I am determined to value and empower nurses further in the coming year as a way of improving care for patients.

Nicola Sturgeon will know that, at the moment, that is a matter for the Greater Glasgow Health Board. She ought also to know that the board is still considering the relative merits of having two or three accident and emergency departments. The proposals will, of course, eventually come to me and I can assure her that I will consider them from the point of view of best care for patients. I think that everybody accepts that change was necessary, but, ultimately, what matters is that the best possible services are available to the people of Glasgow.

Mental health is one of the three clinical priorities. The Scottish Executive is strongly committed to implementing the framework for mental health services, to developing mental health services in primary care and community settings and to promoting mental health and well-being as part of the broader health improvement agenda.

I am scheduled to visit Carstairs at the beginning of March. It is clear that there is a problem with people who need more appropriate accommodation in local forensic units. I am very glad that one such unit opened recently in Edinburgh—the Orchard clinic. We all know the controversies that have surrounded such local forensic units in Glasgow and other parts of the west of Scotland. The important thing is that planning for those local forensic units goes ahead as quickly as possible. That is the solution to the problem. We are strongly committed to that and funding will be provided for it. I hope that a solution to the case of the individual to which Shona Robison referred can be found soon. I know that work is being done on that case as a matter of urgency.

I was pleased this week to chair the first meeting of an advisory group on the promotion of mental health and well-being. That is an important new part of the health improvement agenda. As part of that, we are considering the wider issues of social justice and social deprivation, which is a broad and exciting new part of the mental health agenda that has not been covered before. Along with the expansion of services in primary care and community settings, it complements the more traditional mental health agenda as embodied in the framework for mental health services.

I will certainly join Phil  Gallie in congratulating those people and thank him for drawing attention to the centre. I congratulate the staff there and acknowledge the great effort that has been made in Ayrshire. It was not so long ago that Ayrshire was being criticised for not spending enough of its budget on mental health. Ayrshire has made big improvements in mental health because of the work of the mental health and well-being support group and other monitoring arrangements. I commend the work of the Scottish Health Advisory Service. It does vital inspection work that is critical in improving standards in mental health and other services.

I accept that there is an historical problem in relation to mental health spending. However, I remind Adam Ingram that expenditure on mental health in the NHS increased by 9 per cent last year. People will welcome the £4 million over three years from the health improvement fund, which is going toward the new work that I described. That is no threat to the massive amounts of money that are, in comparison, spent in the service sector. I believe that that agenda—which I am sure Adam Ingram supports—including the work on addressing stigma issues on mental health, will be welcomed widely by service users within the mental health system and the wider public.

The Executive believes that young people should have information on organ donation. Transplant co-ordinators visit schools regularly as part of their educational work. Earlier this week, we announced that we are developing an education resource pack on organ donation and transplantation.

I congratulate Margaret Jamieson on the initiative that she has taken. She  requested 10,000 donor cards this week and will contact employers in her constituency about distributing those cards with pay slips. A large number of lives have been saved because people have carried donor cards and registered on the organ donation register, of which Margaret Jamieson reminded us. More lives will be saved if more people do that. At the Scottish Transplant Group's conference on Monday, which Janis Hughes and Shona Robison also attended, I was pleased to announce that we have asked the Scottish Transplant Group to produce proposals for a campaign to promote the issue and ensure that more people are willing to save more lives.

Last week, I announced the establishment of a national waiting times unit to work with NHS Scotland to reduce delays for patients. The First Minister announced an additional £20 million to reduce the number of people who are delayed in being discharged from hospital.

It is widely recognised that concerns have been expressed about how the North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust deals with some of those issues. That is why the chief executive of Greater Glasgow NHS Board is carrying out a review of the trust, from which I hope there will be some management changes. Everybody believes that effective management is  important. That is also why I made the changes at the Beatson oncology centre, which was part of that same trust.

Capacity issues are of great importance. I look forward to next week, when I shall chair the first meeting of the group that will drive forward implementation of the action plan on the recruitment and retention of nurses. I am mindful of capacity issues, but it is clearly a mistake to view waiting times as a problem that needs only one solution to resolve it. We have said that several actions need to be taken. In the first place, the new unit will advise and—more important—ensure the development of good practice and service redesign. The unit will also have powers of intervention to co-ordinate any solutions that might be required. There is no single answer to the problem; we are taking action on a broad range of fronts. For people leaving hospital, we will ensure that that £20 million—part of the biggest-ever investment in care services for older people—is spent as effectively as possible. Every penny will be targeted on dealing with the problem of delayed discharge.

Following a series of representations and discussions between the Scottish Executive and the UK Government, we have reached the conclusion that it will be necessary to implement free personal and nursing care from 1 July from existing resources.

We made the strongest possible representations. We argued the case. The present First Minister had a meeting in London as recently as December and the previous First Minister was involved with the issue over a long period. However, we have decided that there is no advantage in pursuing the matter further. Our concern is to ensure that the policy is fully implemented as quickly as possible and that all the mechanics are in place to allow that to happen. We are interested in delivering this great  advance for older people in Scotland—we are not interested in constitutional wrangles that have nothing to do with the delivery of free personal care.

The care development group met for six months and there was contact between the health department and the DWP in London. That was a recommendation of the group. The argument was never going to be easy to win, but we made it and advanced the cause. However, a time comes when the important thing is to move on and to ensure that the policy—part of the greatest-ever investment in older people's care services in Scotland—is implemented, rather than continuing the argument when there is no advantage in so doing. That is where our priority lies and that is the choice that we have made. I remind members that part of the package is an expansion of care services, although it is the other aspect of free personal and nursing care that gets the most attention.

It is a fact that the majority of people in Scotland support the view that was put forward by Brian Fitzpatrick. If I go on to enumerate the advantages and benefits since 1997, the Presiding Officer will rule me out of order.

I made it clear in my first answer that those discussions went on into the month of December, when the current First  Minister went to London. I know that Alex Johnstone has referred to October in his recent interviews. I can assure him that that was not the end of the matter. A letter was written after October and the current First Minister had a meeting in London in December.

I did not understand to what Shona Robison referred in her intervention during my opening speech. As she has now clarified the matter, I can clarify what I said in response. It is important that any system is based on clear principles and criteria. That is what I meant by the system not being driven by precedent. We want to see the hepatitis situation in a general framework of principles and criteria.

I pay tribute to the work of the Health and Community Care Committee on the subject over a long period, starting in the distant days when I was still a member of the committee. Much of that work concentrated on what happened in the 1980s. That is reflected in the report that is before us today. I welcome the report and will  outline how we intend to take action on its recommendations as well as on a broader front that encompasses all those who suffer from hepatitis C. Like, I am sure, all members who are present, I have every sympathy with those who are affected by that serious disease. I assure Parliament that we are working actively and will work even more actively to make progress on care, treatment, assistance and support. I shall, of course, concentrate on what the Executive can do, but we must also recognise what others can and should be doing. For example, in the benefits system, over which we have no direct control, hepatitis C awareness is clearly important among medical examiners. The financial services providers also have their role to play through the provision of mortgages and insurance. That area is complex, but I am committed to working with patient groups to improve it. I intend to have exploratory talks with patients and patient groups in the coming weeks on that matter as well as on others. Following those talks, I intend to host a summit on the issue with the leaders of financial services providers. The central role of the health department is in the care and treatment of those with hepatitis C, although there is also the enormously important work on prevention, which is not our focus today. Two recent events illustrate ways in which we are carrying forward work on care and treatment. First, health department officials this week met representatives of national voluntary organisations to discuss the possibility of setting up a national resource centre to provide advice and information to those who are affected by hepatitis C and their families. More work needs to be done on the bid that has been put in, but it has considerable potential and I am minded to look favourably on it. Secondly, last month, the chief medical officer met directors of public health from throughout Scotland and emphasised the need for all those who are involved in delivering effective health care to continue to implement and build on the Scottish needs assessment programme report on hepatitis C. I am sure that most members know that that report is widely accepted as the template for care, treatment and prevention in the area. The chief medical officer also arranged a presentation for senior members of the health department to hear clinicians' perspectives on hepatitis C, on the quality of service and range of treatments that are available and on how provision might be improved. Following on from that, I have asked the chief medical officer to start work to gain a clearer picture of hepatitis C prevalence to inform new recommendations from him on how we can equip the NHS to deal appropriately with the needs of those with the condition.  As I indicated in the Executive's response to the committee in December, we will undertake a listening exercise with patients with hepatitis C to identify any specific difficulties that they face on care and treatment. I have already discussed that over a number of years with the hepatitis C group in Edinburgh. I look forward to listening further to that group and others throughout Scotland. As I mentioned at the beginning of my speech, much of the Health and Community Care Committee's report deals with what happened in the 1980s. It concludes, albeit provisionally, that there was no negligence or fault in relation to ALT testing or the provision of safe factor VIII concentrate. It states that there was no "general policy deliberately to mislead patients", but refers to "the existence of paternalistic 'doctor knows best' approach in relations between practitioners and patients at the time." We are determined to change that culture. That is reflected in the document on patient focus and public involvement that we issued last month as well as in the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland generic standard on patient involvement. Once that standard has been established, there are three stages in the Clinical Standards Board's accreditation process: self-assessment against the standard; peer review by multidisciplinary teams that include professionals and patients; and publication of the findings. The Executive will meet the Clinical Standards Board in the near future to discuss how to implement that process in relation to blood transfusion and treatment with blood products. I hope that members find that an acceptable way of dealing with the Health and Community Care Committee's recommendation in that area. I move on to another recommendation. I announced last month an expert group to examine the current system of dealing with patients who have suffered harm and to make recommendations on how the system might be changed. It has always seemed to me that any decisions about compensation must be grounded in general principles and criteria and should not be made on an ad hoc basis. The alternative is policy driven by precedent and policy that has not taken account of the more general implications and consequences of a particular course of action.

That is the key precedent to which I was referring. It was generally accepted  at the time that, as the Government of the day and subsequent Governments admitted, that was an exception to the general principle. We are making progress with examining the fundamental principle. We are the first Government to do so openly. The principle was followed in the setting-up of the Macfarlane Trust in the sense that it was thought at the time that those with HIV would die soon. Much of the public debate around the issue has centred on the need for fairness. On compensation, I, too, am interested primarily in achieving a fair and equitable outcome. Crucially, I want an outcome that is fair for the many as well as the few. That is why we do not believe that it is fair to consider the question of compensation to hepatitis C sufferers in isolation. If we are to have a new compensation system here in Scotland, it must be consistent, equitable and transparent for all. That is why I announced last month that there would be an expert group to examine the system of dealing with patients who have suffered harm and to come up with recommendations on how the system might be changed.

That is indeed the case and I am not sure what I said to contradict it. I intend to discuss with the committee both the remit and membership of the expert group, but I can say that the group will definitely include patient representatives. I want the group to give momentum to the debate on compensation and to report back to me within six months. I will expect the group to consider the circumstances surrounding hepatitis C infection through blood and blood products as an important part of its more general work. I also expect the group to consider whether any new system should be applied retrospectively. That is a sensible and balanced approach; it is based on keeping an open mind about what the expert group will recommend while acknowledging the complexities and implications of any course of action. One area that has been discussed often is the possible connection between no-fault compensation and the development of a risk-averse culture in the NHS. The Health and Community Care Committee report says: "All medical treatment carries risks, and it is crucial that practitioners should be able to take clinical decisions based on consideration of their patients' best interests. Doctors  and nurses should not be required to work in a climate in which fear of the adverse consequences of treatment inhibits that treatment being carried out, even where it is objectively considered to be the best available. A risk-averse NHS is in no-one's interests." Dr Richard Simpson, who was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, made that point in a more striking and, I accept, more controversial way in the debate that we had on the subject in April 2001, when he said: "I ask members to think what doctors would have done in the mid-1980s—knowing that non-A, non-B existed, but not knowing exactly what it was or whether it could be, or was being, treated—had they known that substantial compensation would have to be paid as a result of using a particular blood product. I suspect that they would have seriously considered not applying such life-saving products."— [ Official Report , 26 April 2001; c 98.]  I accept that that is a controversial statement, but it is precisely the kind of territory that the expert group must consider. I certainly know that members of the medical profession are keen that we consider that territory. We want the group to judge the merits of a new system in relation to three key agendas. The first of those is the promotion of innovation and creativity in the NHS. The second is efficient health service operation. The third and most important is a fair deal for all patients. I hope that that is an acceptable way of carrying forward the issue of compensation within a broad, general and thoroughly thought-through framework. Compensation is an important issue for a particular group of people with hepatitis C, but I end by re-emphasising the wider agenda on hepatitis C, which will help that group and the vast majority of people with hepatitis C, for whom compensation is not a substantive issue. I have signalled today my determination to drive forward that broader agenda. I look forward to meeting patient groups in the near future to listen to concerns about care and treatment issues, to discuss financial services issues and to consider whatever other matters they wish to raise. Along with the work that the chief medical officer will do, we shall ensure that progress is made on a broad range of fronts for people with hepatitis C.

rose—

I wish to clarify what I was saying. I did not say that I would justify every single change; I acknowledged that clinicians are saying that there needs to be some reconfiguration of services. I said that, as part of listening to them, I would go by their judgment on that matter.

I thank Nicola Sturgeon for introducing the subject for debate today. We all recognise that this is a most important and serious situation. In my first two weeks as Minister for Health and Community Care I have flagged the issue up as being at the top of my agenda. Nicola Sturgeon began by acknowledging the bigger picture. We ought to reflect on that. There are serious short-term difficulties and our top priority has been and will be to address those. Equally, however, we need to look ahead and acknowledge the many positive developments in cancer services, which came together in the cancer strategy that was issued this year. It is important to do that for various reasons, including the need to raise the morale of staff who work in the Beatson and elsewhere in the west of Scotland and the need to attract staff. If people feel that there is a positive future for cancer services in the west of Scotland, we are more likely to attract the kind of staff that we want. Members will know about the cancer strategy that was launched in July, which had £10 million attached to it in the first year. Quite a lot of that was spent on the kind of areas that we are concerned about. For example, £4 million was spent on building capacity to speed up diagnosis and treatment. Of the £10.7 million in the first tranche of investment, nearly £6 million went to the west of Scotland.

I was pleased to visit Gartnavel hospital about two months ago and to meet several of the upper gastrointestinal surgeons who are involved in that. I am extremely concerned to read that story and would deplore any such move. However, I hope that those people, some of whom I met at Gartnavel, will enter discussions with the North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust and resolve the difficulties. The issues that they raise are important. They are concerned about the development of specific cancer services in the west of Scotland. There are grounds for hope in that the west of Scotland regional cancer advisory group will meet for the first time on 20 December. It is up to the group, with the support of the external clinical support group that we sent in as part of the action plan, to develop the configuration of services in the west of Scotland. Part of that work is to develop managed clinical networks for upper GI cancer and other specific cancers. I hope that those specialists get involved in that process and that some of their difficulties will be resolved through that. They also have concerns about critical care beds but those are being addressed by the trust. Surgeons and specialists have been involved, and I hope that they will continue to resolve their differences in that way. One of the novel features of the strategy was the nature of the new Scottish cancer group and, in particular, the patient involvement that was part of it. I pay particular tribute to Dr Anna Gregor, who heads that group. I know of her great commitment not only to cancer services but to the involvement of patients. That relates to one of the themes that I was talking about yesterday. She said: "Patients are the key to this new way of working. In partnership with NHS professionals, patients will be able to influence the way we provide care in Scotland, both for a smoother journey of care and for better outcomes." Patients were involved in deciding how the first tranche of money was spent. I agree entirely with Dr Gregor. I received a report yesterday of a questionnaire by the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign. It is important that we listen to women with breast cancer as well. The piece of research I received yesterday will inform our thinking on that important area. Looking to the future, there is the £44 million we have set aside for the new Beatson. I said last week that I wanted to see the outline business case by the end of this month. I am pleased to report that all the west of Scotland boards met yesterday and backed the outline, which I expect to receive soon. I have confirmed that those plans  will be fast-tracked and that decisions will be made by the end of January. We are focusing on the short term—Nicola Sturgeon made several points about that. I agree with her that clinicians have not been sufficiently involved until now, but I am pleased to say that that is changing. As members know, I appointed Dr Adam Bryson as director last week. The new joint management board that we set up as part of the action plan has met twice. I have had two conversations with Dr Bryson this week. He has told me that he will chair the next meeting of that board. The clinicians are more involved now—that is an important development. In the immediate future, the issue of recruitment is essential. I am told that five people have expressed an interest. They are all well qualified but it is up to experts to appoint people. One of the options is to appoint locums, if that is what the experts decide is best. Concern has been expressed about the clinic rationalisation. As part of the development and configuration of services in the west of Scotland it would have been desirable to reorganise the clinics. I am not saying that every change that is made in the coming period is the result of that. It is simply a fact that it would be necessary to reorganise the clinics anyway.

We have to treat the subject with the seriousness that it deserves and to listen to what the experts say. I have to be influenced by the experts in cancer. Changing the configuration of services is key in the development of services. However, too much alarm has been spread about this. I am assured, for example, that if there were to be fewer clinics in Lanarkshire, it would not mean that there would be no clinics in Lanarkshire; it would just mean that they might be configured differently. There will be changes, but we should not say that every change is necessarily a bad thing.

I am not an expert in cancer services. It is up to the regional cancer advisory group, supported by the expert clinical group, to decide how services should best be  configured. It is not up to me to decide how clinics in the west of Scotland should be configured.

I am certainly listening to clinicians. I have had many conversations over the past 10 days with leading clinicians in the west of Scotland and I am pleased to continue doing that. I am determined to listen to clinicians and work in partnership with them. However, the general point I have made about the configuration of services stands. The action plan is being implemented but other issues may have to be addressed as well. I have received a letter today from the patients support group that has been formed at the Beatson. One of the issues that the group is raising in the short term is whether we can get additional space before the opening of the new Beatson. That option is being considered. It relates to our discussions about Health Care International, since space there is one of the options that can be considered. My time is up. I have to say in conclusion that the tone of the debate has been slightly regrettable. I had hoped that we would be able to address the subject on its merits. Nobody can question the priority that I have attached to the subject over the past two weeks and over the many years at Westminster and here that I have been committed to cancer services. It would be helpful if we could work together on this subject. I am happy to hear positive suggestions from the SNP and any other political party. I will seriously consider all positive suggestions. It would be regrettable if this most serious of issues were turned unnecessarily into a party-political football. I move amendment S1M-2541.1, to leave out from "; welcomes" to end and insert: "if further urgent action is not taken; supports the appointment of Dr Adam Bryson as Medical Director and welcomes the additional impetus and focus this gives to implementation of the agreed action plan, including as a top priority measures to secure appointments both in the short term and on a more permanent basis; supports the Executive's Cancer Strategy, Cancer in Scotland: Action for change , and the additional £40 million investment to support implementation; and calls on the Executive to drive forward the necessary changes, including the construction of the new West of Scotland Cancer Centre, as quickly as possible."

It is regrettable that for some time Mary Scanlon has been putting about stories about people waiting 12 months for heart surgery. In my speech, I indicated that 66 people have been waiting more than six months for heart  surgery and that no one will wait more than six months next year.

Does the member accept that the waiting list for the Royal hospital for sick children is the only waiting list in Scotland that is closed, as highlighted in a letter that Jack McConnell has sent to the leader of the SNP?

I seek clarification. I assume that the member was criticising the Conservative party. I challenge her to quote one word that I said that is different from her comments.

In two days' time, it will be the first anniversary of the publication of "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change". Of the 236 individual commitments to be implemented by that plan, 98 have been completed and 71 have been started but are not due for completion until a later date. That leaves 67 longer-term objectives or targets. I do not give those figures out of complacency, but to ensure that the major problems that we still face are balanced by recognition of the substantial progress that has been made over the past 12 months. I hope that that sense of balance will run through today's debate. I begin with the biggest issues that require to be tackled. In my first week as minister, cancer services were at the top of my agenda and they remain there. We will be debating that tomorrow, so let me just remind you, on the one hand, of the extremely positive developments this year around the national cancer strategy and, on the other hand, of the serious difficulties that we currently face in the west of Scotland. The Executive and I are determined to do anything it takes to sort out that problem, and the decisive action that we took last week will be followed by a relentless and continuing drive to develop cancer services and facilities. However, I will say more about that tomorrow. The second big issue that I flagged up in my first few hours as minister was the unacceptable delays that some people still face at various stages in the journey of care. Again, balance is required. Fifty-three per cent of the patients treated in NHS Scotland hospitals are classed as emergency admissions and never join a waiting list. Of those who must wait, about half are treated within one month of being put on the waiting list and almost 80 per cent are treated within three months. However, it is the rest that we have to think about and help. There is no comfort for them or me in the fact that waiting lists are now falling substantially or that we expect to meet our pledge to reduce waiting lists to 75,000 by 31 March 2002. "Our National Health" sets a number of  condition-specific waiting times for key stages in the patient's pathway in the national priority areas of cancer and heart disease. For example, by next year, there will be a maximum wait of 24 weeks for heart surgery following angiography. Recently, there has been much talk of patients waiting for heart surgery in Scotland. Although I am concerned about that, we should remember that at the moment only 66 patients wait for more than six months. However, we shall ensure that our target is delivered next year and that no one waits for longer than that length of time. In "Our National Health", we set a further overarching target. By 2003, no one in Scotland will wait more than nine months for in-patient or day-case treatment for which a guarantee exists. To reinforce those national standards, NHS boards will develop local waiting time standards that reflect local needs. They will focus on those specialties or procedures with long waits and reduce delays along the patient's care pathway. Those new local standards will be published next year and will enhance the patient's experience, improve equity of access and help reduce cross-Scotland disparities in waiting times. We are also providing better information about waiting. "Our National Health" committed us to providing full information on waiting in Scotland on the internet, and we have done so. Information is available by NHS trust and by specialty and includes figures for out-patient waiting and waiting in accident and emergency departments. We are boosting the capacity of the NHS to treat patients more quickly, through increased investment in, for example, new hospitals, support for service redesign, investment in more doctors and nurses and in new technology, and helping the service to deal with the number of beds occupied by patients waiting for discharge. Although I accept that the last has proved to be a complex and intractable problem, I am determined to make significant progress in that area in the coming year. However, we also believe that waiting can be further reduced through NHS Scotland making better and more effective use of available health care capacity across Scotland. Patients are already transferred between hospitals, between NHS boards and between the public and private sector. For example, NHS Grampian makes use of private health care to help cut waiting lists. NHS Highland transfers heart patients to Edinburgh Royal Infirmary to make use of its specialist skills. Furthermore, Lothian patients benefited when their cataract operations were carried out by NHS Borders, where waiting times were shorter.

I cannot give the member the precise number, but I will certainly tell him in writing if he so wishes. It is clear that much more can be done to ensure a more rigorous and systematic use of our collective resources. In recognition of that, we established the waiting times support group last December to set standards and monitor delivery.

Margaret Jamieson makes an interesting point because, in all of this week's discussion in the newspapers about private beds, the distinction has not been made between the two differing ways of using the private sector. The main discussion has been around the NHS having a contract to use private facilities for a certain number of procedures, but many people have been talking about the NHS taking either a part or the whole of the capacity of a private facility. Clearly, that is an option. For example, we will be discussing with Health Care International the possibility of the NHS occupying some of the space that is available—I do not know if it would be possible to occupy the whole hospital. Using that capacity in that way is an option that is available to us.

I agree that that is a further issue, but I am not sure that it is of prime concern to the patients. There are detailed consequences that we will have to consider. I hope that I will be able to mention some of them in a moment.

I should make a little progress as I have taken a few interventions already. I will give way in about one minute. We are going a step further with the creation of a national waiting times co-ordination unit. It will be responsible for liasing with NHS chief executives, leading clinicians and private operators throughout the country so that capacity and expertise can be matched with demand.  While we retain an open mind on the issue of treating patients abroad, it is important to keep focused on our priority of delivering the maximum benefit for the most people. It is simply more efficient for the NHS and more comfortable for the patient if the patient goes from Falkirk to Fife than if they go from Falkirk to Frankfurt. The unit will advise NHS boards on how they can make better use of the limited spare capacity that exists in the Scottish private sector and will co-ordinate that use. As we have said before, the private sector has a role to play on the margins of our health system. We need to use that spare capacity to get best value for the NHS.

It is fascinating to watch the somersaults that Nicola Sturgeon is performing. At the weekend, when she thought that I was not advocating the use of spare capacity, she was calling for it, but now that she has heard that I am advocating the use of spare capacity, she has decided that she had better claim that it is too expensive. I repeat that the private sector has a role to play on the margins of our health system. However, we believe that, if spare capacity exists, it should be used. That already happens, as I pointed out several times last week. We are simply proposing that it should be co-ordinated in a more effective way in the interests of patients. We have said consistently that the vast majority of patient contact should continue to be with the NHS. That is the area in which we can make the most progress, which is why finding ways to make more efficient use of the much greater capacity that we have in the public sector will be central to the new unit's remit. The issue of reducing waiting times cannot be reduced simply to private versus public. We are interested in making the best use of all available resources for the benefit of patients in the greatest need, such as those with cancer and heart disease. I emphasise that we are determined to avoid a situation in which private hospitals expand at the expense of the NHS and staff are drawn away from our hospitals. Our position is that spare capacity should be used to benefit patients in Scotland.

Mary Scanlon threw that figure at me last week. There is limited spare capacity at HCI, which, in line with what I have said, should certainly be used. However, the reality is that the 500 beds to which she refers are not staffed. In many cases, the building is empty. That is where the issue of the possible alternative use of a hospital such as HCI arises, such as the NHS taking over space. We will discuss that in the coming period. No one should be in any doubt as to our commitment to a health service that is publicly funded in the traditional way, that has continuing, annual, substantial funding increases and that has at its heart the expanding provision of NHS care by a unified NHS team. The forces of the defeated right are now regrouping around— [Interruption.] I refer to the forces of the defeated right in society at large and in the media. They are now regrouping around an attack on the NHS. They should take no comfort from any word that I have uttered today. That section of my speech has taken longer than I expected. Inevitably, some of its other features will have to be slightly truncated. As funding always arises in debates, to illustrate our commitment to the principle that I just enunciated on funding, I remind members that, for next year, the minimum funding increase for NHS boards will be 6.5 per cent and the average increase will be 6.9 per cent. For 2003-04, the minimum increase will be 7.4 per cent and the average will be 7.8 per cent. We should remember that during our discussions today.

Everybody knows that costs such as those for pay and drugs increase each year. I fully accept that. Shona Robison should also acknowledge that such increases in the health service have not been witnessed in living memory. The SNP amendment calls on the Executive to "reduce bureaucracy, enhance local control" and "remove institutional barriers to better patient care". Of course we can and shall do more. Let us also acknowledge the substantial progress that has already been made. The creation of the new NHS boards, which were established on 30 September  as promised in the health plan, brings chairs and chief executives of local NHS organisations to the table together with staff, clinicians and local authority leaders. Competition and suspicion have been replaced by partnership and collaboration. Bureaucracy has been reduced, and, within better-defined national standards, local NHS boards are being empowered to deliver local priorities. A new performance assessment framework will ensure that the boards deliver on a range of priorities, from health inequalities and access to care, to public involvement, clinical effectiveness and the way in which NHS staff are treated. More of that in a moment—although not quite as much more as I had planned. On institutional barriers, I mention in passing the joint working agenda, which the Health and Community Care Committee debated in stage 2 of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill this morning. Substantial progress will be made on joint resourcing and joint management of services for older people in April. The creation of the NHS boards was the start of a process within existing legislation. We have always acknowledged the existence of longer-term issues about the optimum number, construction and configuration of NHS bodies. We committed ourselves in the Scottish health plan to commissioning a piece of work to review management and decision making in NHS Scotland. I publish today the terms of reference for that important piece of work. The review will consider not only the management structures that are most appropriate for a post-devolution, post-internal market NHS Scotland, but, for example, the relationship between the Scottish Executive and NHS Scotland, the developing role of local health care co-operatives in planning and delivering patient care, and the scope to improve further the delivery of health and social care. I expect the review to make recommendations on the optimum number and configuration of NHS organisations that are appropriate for the size and geography of Scotland and to identify any consequent legislative changes that may be required. The review will build on the inclusive progress of policy development, which attracted such widespread support for the Scottish health plan. I am determined that key stakeholders, including the Parliament and the Health and Community Care Committee should have the opportunity to be involved fully. I quote briefly from page 50 of "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change", which states: "A patient-centred NHS must not be just a slogan: it must become a way of life. We want to work with the NHS to ensure that a patient focus is embedded in the culture".  I am, therefore, pleased also to publish today the document entitled, "Patient Focus and Public Involvement", as was prefigured in the health plan. The document emphasises better communication with patients and better patient information, responding to patient feedback on an ongoing basis in order to improve service quality, engaging more successfully with the wider public on health issues and consulting on the setting-up of a Scottish health council.

I had better not. I have three minutes remaining and I have given way six times, which is probably too many, considering how much I have to say.

I give way to Mr Wallace.

Patients have had the choice of where to be treated since the health service was founded in 1948. The reality is that most people want to be treated in a hospital that is near to them and where they can be confident that good national standards apply. Our work on developing national standards, which I might not have time to cover, is fundamentally important, particularly the work of the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland. We will consult on setting up a Scottish health council with national and local offices. It will be responsible for assessing how well patients' views are heard and acted on and for supporting a stronger patient and community voice. Hands-on personal experience must be taken into account on a national scale. That is why I am setting up a new NHS Scotland forum, which will bring together professional, voluntary and patient groups to discuss and recommend service improvements that can be implemented throughout the country. There will always be patients whose experience of the NHS is less than satisfactory. More than ever, we must listen to those patients and learn from our mistakes. We are taking steps to consult on the development of a fully independent NHS complaints procedure. NHS and patient groups are helping to develop proposals for that and we will consult widely on the proposals during the coming months.  If partnership with patients is a key part of the new agenda and the new health culture, another is partnership with staff. I have emphasised that since my first day as minister. I am pleased that I have already met a large number of health service staff. Several initiatives are under way. The Scottish Partnership Forum, which has existed for some time, is emerging as the key forum for staff involvement in the policy development process. Early in the new year we will introduce proposals that have been developed in partnership with staff and representative groups, to enhance the role of the Scottish Partnership Forum and complement the work of the new NHS Scotland forum. Mary Scanlon's amendment mentions staff morale and retention. I prepared a long section on that, but I will home in briefly on the work that we have done on the recruitment and retention of nurses. On 19 November, I was pleased to attend a nursing convention along with, I think, Margaret Smith from the Health and Community Care Committee. That was an important event, during which we established common ground on action for the recruitment and retention of nurses. I was pleased to launch an action plan on Friday and I hope that members are aware of that plan. I will chair an implementation group to ensure that the proposals in the action plan are driven forward as a matter of urgency.

I might have one more minute if I am lucky.

Okay.

I apologise for mentioning only nurses—very important though they are—and not dentists. I did have more to say on the matter. As I have indicated before, a group is currently working on the recruitment and retention of dentists in rural areas. I can only summarise what I had also hoped to say if I had not been so delayed by all those interventions—helpful though they were. I wanted to say a great deal about the innovations in primary care over the past year, which I think is one of the most exciting areas of development, particularly as far as local health care co- operatives are concerned. A substantial sum of dedicated money has been given to them to develop new models of primary care. Members will also remember the allocation of £18 million to personal medical services and that of £15 million to primary care premises development. I wanted to mention the work of the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland and to talk about their first report on coronary heart disease, which dealt in particular with secondary prevention. A strategy for coronary heart disease will be coming out in the near future. I hoped also to discuss the more general work on standards with regard to clean hospitals and hospital food, but I will simply remind members that that work is continuing. I apologise for being able to mention mental health only towards the end of my speech, but I think that members are aware of my commitment to that, and I look forward to chairing the new national advisory group, which will be giving advice on a programme of initiatives on the promotion of mental health and well-being, including a campaign against the stigma that is often associated with poor mental health. I must apologise even more profusely for coming to health improvement at the very end of my speech. Members will recall that health improvement was covered, deliberately, in the first chapter of last year's health plan. I could have spoken for 20 minutes on that subject alone. Members will know of the health improvement fund and of the health demonstration projects. I was delighted last week to visit the starting well project in Easterhouse, which is doing very important work in the promotion of health among very young children. I could have mentioned many other initiatives, such as the 300 one-stop clinics and other examples of service redesign and the project for the electronic transfer of information, which offers another way to reduce the bureaucracy to which the SNP amendment refers. Inevitably, I have had to be selective. I have reminded members that many good things have been happening. My focus over the next year, however, will be on the things that are not so good, and on the big problems that remain. I hope that the health service will have been strengthened in one year's time and that the vision that we all have, or that most of us have, of the health service will be fully realised. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the progress made by the Executive and the contribution of NHS staff towards delivering the commitments in Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change published in December 2000 but recognises the long-term nature of the Plan and reaffirms its commitment to the various longer-term goals, including major reductions in waiting times and significant  public health improvements.

NHS Greater Glasgow is conducting a comprehensive review of acute hospital services throughout the city, which includes a period of public consultation. The Greater Glasgow NHS Board will consider proposals early next year. On cancer services, I have appointed Dr Adam Bryson as director of the Beatson oncology centre, to drive forward improvements in cancer services for people in the west of Scotland.

Acute services reviews are inherently controversial, but we should remember that their purpose is to ensure that people throughout Scotland have access to modern, high-quality services and that the balance between hospital and community services is correct. Sometimes, the issue concerns decisions of acute services reviews being pre-empted. Earlier this year, Susan Deacon ensured that beds were kept at Stobhill hospital until the results of the review were known. I am unaware of a similar situation at the Victoria infirmary, although I know that two-way movement between the Southern general and the Victoria infirmary has occurred. If Kenneth Macintosh writes to me about his concerns in detail, I will investigate them and reply to him.

As members know, the Beatson centre takes people from a large part of Scotland. That is one issue that must be considered. I am not entirely sure in what direction John Scott's question went. His preamble introduced other topics. We guarantee that services will be provided for the patients involved. Everything is being done to recruit extra oncologists, although on my visit to the Beatson yesterday, I realised that other issues and concerns had to be taken up. The main thinking behind the decision that has been made today is that to drive forward the action plan, we must have a specific management focus on the Beatson. That is why Dr Adam Bryson was appointed. He has a sound management record, and, perhaps more important, experience as medical director of the Western infirmary, and good links with the clinicians there.

Nicola Sturgeon knows that Greater Glasgow NHS Board and the Scottish Executive are undertaking a review of the acute trust. Nicola Sturgeon has criticised personalities. I am not interested in that. I am interested in fixing problems. Today, we have begun to do that in a new kind of way.  I am as concerned as Nicola Sturgeon is about the position of the consultants. Dr Adam Bryson said today that his first priority is to talk to the consultants and to ensure that nobody else leaves. Given the shortage of oncologists throughout the United Kingdom, that is the most intractable part of the issue. I assure Nicola Sturgeon that everything is being done in this country and further afield to recruit oncologists. I am also very aware of the issue of clinics. As a result of the pending vacancies, some short-term changes have been made to clinics. In the longer term, as part of the reorganisation of cancer services, we propose to examine the clinics. I was pleased to be able to say yesterday that, this month, I want to see an outline business case for the new Beatson.

Brian Fitzpatrick's point at the end about investment was well made. Many issues are at stake. Investment is one of them. More is coming and we want more. However, we should recognise that money alone is not going to solve the problem. People talk about vacancies, but six of the vacancies are in six new posts that were created by additional investment put up by the Executive in the past few months. We have to look at the full picture It is clear that, in the short term, recruiting the consultants is fundamental. From talking at great length to staff yesterday, I am aware that there are other issues, including staffing issues, in addition to that of the oncologist vacancies. I expect the new director to start right away to address the short-term concerns about staffing and facilities. Those concerns have to be addressed now. At the same time, we can look forward to the superb new facility that will be built before too long.

Quite a few points are raised by that question. I agree with the first point that Tommy Sheridan made about waiting times. Clearly, dealing with delays in the system—and in particular with waiting times for that kind of procedure—is at the top of our list of health priorities. Delays are unacceptable. A consultant I was talking to yesterday described that problem and said, "If you put 'Urgent' on it, it would be a lot quicker." However, we cannot put "Urgent" on everything. That is partly to do with equipment, and there are plans afoot to expand the number of linear accelerators. We have some in the new Beatson, but more are to come. However, that means more radiographers, which is another staffing issue. We are well aware of that and action is being taken. The second part of Mr Sheridan's question moved into a more complex area—I am sure that that will come up later as well. We have to keep a sense of perspective about when the private sector is useful. Last night, a general practitioner in another part of Scotland said to me that someone who came to him with a breast lump was told by the private hospital where she was insured that she could be seen on 20 December. The Western general hospital in Edinburgh said that she could be seen on 11 December. Let us remember the good stories as well as the bad ones.

I am always concerned to hear about patients having their appointments delayed. I do not know the specific example to which the member refers, but I have already indicated that many waiting times are  unacceptable. The first part of the question was quite complex. Many of us who experienced the internal market over the period that Mary Scanlon's party was in power did not feel that it was bringing decisions closer to patients. On the management of the Beatson and the particular problems of the Beatson, our view was that there was perhaps an issue to do with the size of the trust. We thought it right to deal with the problems by focusing specifically on certain issues. That is the best way forward for the Beatson at this time. The general point that the member made was perhaps not true when considered in detail.

The Nursing and Midwifery Convention held on 19 November was extremely constructive and generated many ideas that require careful consideration. At the event we announced £1.5 million of immediate investment to help attract more nurses to and keep them within NHS Scotland. A report reflecting delegates'  views and setting out the most effective ways to target that investment will be made widely available next week.

At the convention last week, there was a great deal of common ground on the kind of initiatives that we need. As I indicated, there will be more information on that next week. There will be proposals on issues such as flexibility, leadership, education and training. The particular suggestion that Janis Hughes makes was not raised last week. The changes of 1992 have been broadly welcomed and have been successful. However, Janis Hughes raises an important point about access to the main nursing courses. Some access courses in Scotland represent a positive way forward.

A great many nurses were at the convention. There were also union representatives and people employed by trusts. There was good feeling and a lot of common ground. The initiatives that we have already announced, and will announce again next week, are attracting a great deal of support. Clearly, waiting times are in the news. Some figures are going in the right direction, but others are not so good. Our challenge is to ensure that they all go in the right direction. Employing more nurses in primary care is one of the fundamental ways of helping with accident and emergency waiting times. We are doing that to stop people having to go to accident and emergency departments in the first place.

There has been a lot of discussion of return-to-practice courses. Before the convention, we announced that we would have three pilots up and running in the next three months, to do with paying for nurses who are out  of the work force to return to practice. At the convention I said quite specifically that the issue was how we would do that, rather than whether we would do it. In the next few months, there will be important developments to do with nurses returning to practice.

Mental health is a priority for the Scottish Executive and the national health service in Scotland and it has attracted record spend on services in the past year. That priority is further supported and informed by the on-going visits and published reports of the Scottish Health Advisory Service and the mental health and well-being support group.

First, I welcome people who are here from Ayr Action for Mental Health. I think that it is in order to say that at this point.  I thank Adam Ingram for his remarks. It is clear that he has shown great interest in mental health issues. I indicated earlier that spend was at a record level last year, when the resources for NHS mental health services went up by 9 per cent. We are making significant progress. We are determined that mental health, which has for several years been one of the Scottish Executive's—and before that the Scottish Office's—three clinical priorities, will be delivered on the ground. We have started a series of initiatives and we are trying to develop more mental health services in primary care. We are also driving forward a new agenda on the promotion of mental health and well-being and on tackling stigma. At lunch time today, Adam Ingram and I attended an important launch to highlight the unacceptable harassment that people with mental health problems often suffer.

I will certainly undertake to look into that. Circumstances are particular to local areas, but waiting times for mental health patients are important, as they are for patients in other parts of the health service. In October, we announced a new addition to the mental health framework—psychological interventions. That is one of the areas that we are determined to expand. We want to reduce the waiting time for psychological interventions, which are an important part of mental health services.

Mary Scanlon flags up the crucial issue of delayed discharges. That is as important in the treatment of mental health as it is in other areas of the health service. We have taken a series of initiatives, but I accept that those have not yet brought the reductions that we wish to see. However, I assure Mary Scanlon and other members that tackling delayed discharges—and, indeed, other delays in the journey of care—will be  a top priority for the Scottish Executive in the coming period.

To confuse Shona Robison even more, I am afraid that, although she is up against me in this debate, I assure her that that will not happen again. We look forward to hearing from Hugh Henry and Mary Mulligan, probably starting with one of them at 5 pm tomorrow, when  we will have the first health-related members' business debate for more than a year in which I have not summed up. This has been the second excellent health and community care debate in two weeks. This debate and the debate on mental health law have shown the Scottish Parliament at its best. I thank Nicola Sturgeon, Margaret Smith, Mary Scanlon, Janis Hughes and others for their good wishes to Susan Deacon. I reiterate those good wishes. I also thank Margaret Smith, Tricia Marwick and others for their kind remarks about me. Many detailed points have been made in the debate and I would like to touch on two or three of them before moving on to the broader themes. Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Fergusson raised the issue of a precise time limit for notional capital. I assure members that the Executive is committed to ensuring that people in receipt of residential care are treated in a fair and equitable manner. There are already national regulations and guidance covering notional capital based on the circumstances of each individual case. Nicola Sturgeon mentioned top-ups and protecting individuals' disregarded income. Those are sensitive issues and regulations will need to be carefully framed to balance the aims of allowing choice, protecting people from pressure to impoverish themselves and ensuring that people with existing top-up arrangements are not adversely affected. Margaret Smith and Nicola Sturgeon also raised the issue of deferred payment agreements. We expect that deferred payments will not be difficult to administer locally, as local authorities will simply pay the person's care home fees in the normal way, recover an income contribution and keep a record of the extra money owed to be recovered from the person's estate. Because that process is so closely tied into local authorities' normal care funding and means-testing arrangements, it is difficult to see how such a scheme could be administered nationally. Funding has already been allocated to local authorities for that from next April. I move on to the broader themes of the debate. Support for carers was perhaps the strongest theme of all. In particular, I note the contributions from Janis Hughes, Irene Oldfather, Karen Whitefield and Shona Robison. I have made clear the Executive's full support for the principle of carers as partners in providing care. That means carers of all ages. The bill makes important steps in extending carers' rights to have their needs assessed in their own right. As I said, I will look closely at how we may reinforce that by ensuring that local authorities make carers aware of that right. I believe that that approach will be the best way of offering better support to Scotland's carers.  Janis Hughes also mentioned her constituent, Isobel Allan, whom I was pleased to meet recently. I echo what Janis Hughes said about her. Janis Hughes also mentioned respite care provision, which will be an integral part of assessment. I remind members of the 22,000 extra weeks of respite care that are provided from last October's funding package. That takes me on neatly to the subject of resources, to which Tricia Marwick referred. I remind members that £100 million was allocated for older people's services in October 2000 and that an extra £100 million was announced by Angus MacKay in June this year. That is an unprecedented investment in older people. Many members welcomed the direct payment proposals. Nicola Sturgeon asked about support for them. We have given £400,000 to the UPDATE consortium to support people using direct payments. Moreover, local authorities will be required to inform people of their rights. Margaret Jamieson mentioned resource transfer and grant-aided expenditure for older people's services, as did Margaret Smith. The importance of those matters is highlighted on pages 28 and 29 of the care development group's report. Margaret Jamieson also reinforced the need for a partnership approach with staff in particular. We share her view. The integrated human resources working group embodies that approach and, by the end of the year, it will have consulted more than 1,000 people. The group includes five trade union representatives. Some members of staff have expressed interest in a single public sector pay scale. I look forward to receiving the group's report in the spring. I have dealt with Mary Scanlon's remarks about home care and will not repeat myself. However, I want to reinforce my point about the intensity of home care and health visiting. The average number of home care hours per client is rising, as are total home care hours. The number of clients who receive more than 10 hours of home care a week rose by 1,500 during the first year of the Parliament. As I said, resources for home care are increasing in an unprecedented way. Mary Scanlon highlighted the importance of delayed discharges. The care development group report drew attention to that issue and, in my first day in the job, I have flagged it up as part of the more general issue of delays in the journey of care. We are committed to dealing with the issue as one of our key health priorities. Many references were made to the care development group's report. Keith Raffan asked about long-term costings. That is a complicated subject, but I repeat that we used one of the best economists in Scotland—David Bell—so we can  be confident about the costings that have been given. The care development group's recommendations are being taken forward by an implementation steering group under the convenership of Alexis Jay. I reassure Shona Robison about attendance allowance. The First Minister will pursue the issue with Westminster. We will concentrate on the merits of the argument rather than turning the issue into a constitutional stand-off, as some SNP members seek to do.

The First Minister was sworn in yesterday. Nicola Sturgeon should give him a little more time before we update her on progress on the matter. The SNP amendment refers to attendance allowance and the definition of personal care, but it is now redundant. It would be illogical to express concern over the lack of a definition of personal care in the bill, as I have assured members that we will put such a definition in the bill. I am glad that other parties have accepted that the amendment is no longer necessary. I remind members of the general principles that underpin the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill: choice, partnership, equity and fairness. With those principles, the bill paves the way for free nursing and personal care, the extension of direct payment schemes, an independent right to assessment for carers, improved arrangements for joint working and many other improvements to the provision of care and health services. The principles are admirable and I commend them to the chamber. I ask members to join me in supporting the bill.

I want to point out that that was not correctly transcribed because, if members think about it, what I said was that free personal care could be regarded as part of the international definition of nursing. It would not make sense to say that free nursing care could be part of the international definition of nursing.

I am sure that the member will accept that clinics are hardly an institutional setting. Does she accept that not only the number of visits but their length and intensity is relevant?  Does she accept that the emphasis has changed—for example, with the Starting Well project, which I visited recently—to intensive home visiting? Does she also accept that expenditure on home care increased by 10 per cent in the first year of the Parliament and is set to increase by much larger amounts in the next couple of years?

There have been many significant developments in community care in this Parliament's lifetime, and the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill marks a further milestone in the Executive's commitment to better community care services in every part of Scotland. Just over a year ago, Susan Deacon set out to the Parliament the agenda of joint management, joint resourcing, joint working, better home care, more flexible services, free nursing for our older people and help for all Scotland's carers. As members know, free personal care was added to that agenda in January. The Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill is the legislative framework for delivering that agenda. I am delighted to say that the bill has also received widespread support and that the Health and Community Care Committee's stage 1 report contains many comments and recommendations with which we also agree. I will consider in detail the many improvements that the bill will bring and the many people whom it will help, as well as referring to the widespread support that the bill has received. I begin by spelling out the four general principles at the heart of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill, which are choice, partnership, equity and fairness. Our commitment to choice is clear in the bill's provisions on direct payments, top-up payments for care home places and the creation of a deferred payments scheme. That commitment is part of a broader commitment to services that put service users first and that meet the real needs and wishes of the people who use them. The bill's second general principle is  partnership. Real change can be achieved through true partnership, which will involve national health service boards and local authorities working together to provide services that meet all of a service user's needs. To be fully effective, the partnership approach must be broad enough to include voluntary and private sector care providers, those who use care services and carers, who have for so long been the forgotten, unsung partners in care provision. Equity and fairness are the final two principles on which the bill is built. Because of those principles, the bill gives ministers powers to introduce free nursing care. No longer will someone in a nursing home have to pay for the same nursing care that would be received free in hospital or at home. For the same reasons, the bill also gives ministers powers to introduce free personal care to bring to an end the current situation in which an elderly person with cancer receives free personal care, whereas someone with Alzheimer's has to pay for the same care. By combining the principles of equity and fairness with those of choice and partnership, we are laying the foundations for care services in 21 st century Scotland. In developing the policies and proposals in the bill, we have tried to give all those with relevant experience and expertise the opportunity to help us in this important work. In some cases, that has happened through the establishment of working groups such as the joint future group and the carers legislation working group. More recently, we have had the care development group and the integrated human resources working group, of which I shall say more in a moment. All those groups have made an important contribution to the development of the Executive's priorities. In all of this, I have been encouraged by the widespread support that the bill has received. Time after time, those who responded to consultation around the bill said how much they welcome the bill and the changes that it will bring. In session after session, those who gave evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee praised the bill's general principles. The committee, in its stage 1 report, welcomed the main changes that the bill is intended to make and recommended that Parliament approve the general principles of the bill. I thank the Health and Community Care Committee and the other three committees that considered the bill at stage 1. In particular, I thank the lead committee for a very constructive stage 1 report, which was the result of many painstaking hours of evidence taking, research and discussion. I will comment on several of the report's recommendations in a moment. Let us consider the important changes and  tangible benefits that the bill will bring. It will mean that the Executive will be able to tackle existing inequities surrounding care for older people by introducing free nursing care and free personal care. We will ensure that nursing care is finally free for all who need it, regardless of the context—free at home, free in hospital and, for the first time, free in nursing homes. In the same way, we will ensure that personal care is free for all Scotland's oldest people: the dementia sufferer and the stroke victim; those at home as well as those in care homes. The committee made it clear in at least three places in its report that it supports the inclusion in the bill of a definition of personal care. We have, of course, considered the committee's views carefully, and I am happy to announce that the Executive will lodge an amendment at stage 2 to include a definition of personal care in the bill, based on the definition that was arrived at by the care development group. We will need to consider carefully how we can combine such a definition in the bill with the need for flexibility in its implementation. As I made clear to the committee in my evidence, I believe that that will be crucial to the bill's successful and sustainable implementation. I am therefore pleased to note that paragraph 32 of the committee's report "recognises the need for a degree of flexibility". The report also recommends that regulations that are made under the bill's powers should be subject to the affirmative procedure, and I am happy to accept that recommendation as well. I hope that this commitment to amending the bill will address the points that have been raised by the committee in its report and that we can all agree that the bill will mean a fairer future for Scotland's older people. In line with its general principles, the bill will also extend choice. It will do that in many ways, above all by extending the availability of direct payments. Instead of service users being provided with services that are chosen by local authorities, direct payments give the service users the power to buy in their own services. The bill will ensure that direct payments are available throughout Scotland, while at the same time extending the scope of direct payments to all care client groups. In practice, that could mean that, whereas the care needs of someone with a learning disability are currently met by half a dozen different local authority staff, in the future that person would be able to employ one or two personal assistants to meet those same needs. Changes such as that may be challenging, and perhaps difficult, for local authorities, but they will empower the service user, who will be able to commission the services that they need, when they want them and from the people whom they  choose. The service user must come first. The extension of direct payments will help to deliver that change by increasing choice in home care. The bill's provisions will increase choice not only in home care, but in residential care. Our commitment to improved choice in residential care is clear in the bill's provisions for top-up payments, in our removal of barriers to care home placements throughout the UK and in our introduction of deferred payment schemes, which will mean that people will no longer be forced to sell their homes to pay for residential care. Members will recall that a much smaller number of people would be in that position anyway, because of the introduction of free personal and nursing care. Those provisions will make a real difference for those in care homes and will combine with the improvements that arise from the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 to bring better choice and quality into many people's lives. More than that, the provisions will ensure that anyone who is entering residential care for the first time will be able to experience real choice, with an assurance of quality services and the reassurance that they will not have to dispose of their home to meet the costs. It is not only those who are in need of care who will benefit from the bill, however. As I said earlier, the Executive recognises the vital role that Scotland's carers play as partners in the provision of care. Our carers strategy acknowledges their immense contribution and our firm commitment to support carers better than ever before. This is no empty rhetoric; the resources that were attached to the carers strategy and the further new funding to expand short-break services throughout Scotland effectively mean that resources to support carers will have quadrupled in just four years. One outcome of the carers strategy was the establishment of the carers legislation working group, which examined how we could support carers better through legislation. The group made a number of recommendations for change and those are an important part of our carers agenda. The majority of the recommendations do not require changes to primary legislation and we will be taking forward those changes in a variety of ways in discussion with carers organisations and other bodies that will be affected by them. The bill takes forward those recommendations for which new legislation is needed to improve support to careers. In particular, the bill gives carers the right to an assessment of their needs as a carer, independent of the cared-for person. I am pleased to announce that the Executive will lodge an amendment at stage 2 to ensure that the new right will be available to young as well as adult carers. The new flexibility will improve carers' access to  the support that they need to sustain them in their crucial role. It reflects their status as full partners in providing care, a principle that the Executive whole-heartedly endorses. I am aware that the Health and Community Care Committee suggested that that principle, and one other, be placed in the bill. We are considering what is reasonably possible, but we are concerned that the legislation should have precise legal meanings that will work in practice. If such meanings cannot be clearly set out in the bill, the interpretation might be left to the courts and might not reflect what Parliament intended. If it is not possible to give precise legal meanings, it is better to leave a provision out of the bill and avoid the problem. We need to distinguish between good intentions and good law and be sure that we deliver the latter. The Health and Community Care Committee also suggested that there was a case for building on the extension of carers' rights by requiring local authorities and the NHS to identify carers and offer them information. I have also considered those points carefully. There would be practical and legal difficulties in imposing such a duty on the relevant people in the NHS in a way that would work. In any case, I do not believe that we need to go down that road as we can work with the NHS to build carer-awareness into the main stream of the health service through the development of a range of initiatives that are already under way. However, I recognise the committee's concern to ensure that carers are aware of their right to an assessment and I am examining carefully the scope that there may be for building further on the new right for assessment for carers with a view to lodging an amendment at stage 2. The Executive will emphasise the importance of the partnership with carers in other ways. Good things are already being done to help carers in lots of different places, and the challenge for the Executive and other agencies is to spread that best practice. We plan to give clear new guidance to local authorities, the NHS and others to ensure that carers receive full recognition and support in their caring role and to ensure that best practice is turned into the norm. No one should be mistaken about our commitment to improving support for carers not only through legislation, but across the range of the Executive's agenda. That same spirit of partnership is equally important for local agencies working together to provide services. The joint future group provided a new lead on joint working between NHS Scotland and local authorities, and applied the good practice of pilot schemes and projects across Scotland to the heart of community care. Our commitment is to enable and drive a joint approach between agencies rather than to opt for  wholesale reorganisation by creating a new body for community care services—such as care trusts, which are being implemented in some parts of England—which might be perceived as a takeover of one agency by another. The bill delivers on that commitment by removing the final remaining legal obstacles to better joint working within the parameters of existing agency structures. I believe that agencies are signed up to the joint approach and that that is more likely to deliver results in the short to medium term. Much has already been done within the scope of existing legislation, such as the joint resourcing and joint management of learning disability services in Glasgow and of mental health services in Dumfries and Galloway. In Perth and Kinross, the agencies have formed a high-level partnership and have recently extended those principles by appointing joint locality management. However, the full flexibility of delegation and pooled budgets was not possible. Sections 10 to 14 of the bill will achieve that. They will allow NHS Scotland and local authorities to deliver services in a more integrated way. They will also allow more flexible resourcing to support our goal of care that is designed around the needs of individuals. Sections 10 and 11 will free up barriers to the transfer of funds between NHS Scotland and local authorities. That will empower the new NHS boards and local authorities to plan for healthier communities, to improve well-being and to resource plans with the emphasis on the outcome for citizens, not the constraints on agencies. Those powers, as well as those in section 12 to delegate powers and pool resources, will allow the new approaches to community care service provision and the fuller integration of services that are needed to meet the expectations of service users, carers and patients. The bill will allow local agencies to determine their local balance of care and to ensure that the resources that are available to them are used and channelled to best effect. It will also allow them real flexibility of response, pooled resources and the delegation of functions to the agency that is agreed to be best placed to lead on any particular function. In that way, agencies can concentrate on outputs for users, carers and patients rather than be restricted by fruitless discussions about who can do what and how it will be resourced. I agree with the Health and Community Care Committee's observation that community care needs a well-motivated workforce. That is why we have established the integrated human resources working group under the chairmanship of Peter Bates. Membership of the group is drawn from a broad range of players. It includes, for example, a local authority chief executive, a primary care trust chief executive, personnel managers from NHS  Scotland and local authorities, and representatives from no less than five professional bodies and trade unions. The group, rightly, seeks to expand its membership to take account of the parallel interests of, in particular, the voluntary sector. Already, the integrated human resources working group is consulting staff on the issues. Some issues, such as secondment protocols, training needs and personnel procedures to support new ways of delivering care, are short term. Other issues, such as pay and pensions, are clearly more complex and will require longer-term consideration. By the end of December, the group will have consulted more than 1,000 staff throughout the country on their concerns about, and aspirations for, joint working. A report will be produced for ministers by April 2002. In the interim, section 13 is intended to reassure staff that their transfer between agencies will not affect them adversely. In section 14, Scottish ministers take powers to enforce joint working arrangements where necessary. That is not, and will never be, ministers' preferred option, but it may be necessary in the interests of users, carers and patients. Of course, joint working is more than the sum of the statutory agencies. Voluntary organisations and private providers have a key role to play. We expect agencies to consult all the key players in care provision about joint working arrangements and to involve them in those arrangements. Agencies already have a statutory duty to consult the voluntary sector on community care planning arrangements; mechanisms to do that are in place throughout Scotland, and agencies should build on those. Our emphasis on the statutory agencies is deliberate. We want to improve joint working between the agencies as a matter of priority. From that, we anticipate better, more consistent engagement with the voluntary and private sectors. The bill's contribution to better care services is matched by its measures to improve health services for all. Part 3 will extend the medical list system to all general practitioners, not just those who run practices. That will improve the coverage of our existing quality and discipline procedures. Patients can be confident that, whichever GP they see, that GP will be subject to high disciplinary procedures and standards. That may sound like a dry technical measure—if members have looked at the bill, they will see that it reads like one as well—but it is an important improvement to the quality of our health care service. While I am on the subject of GP lists, I want to address the concerns that the stage 1 report raised about that issue. The Health and Community Care Committee recommended that the Executive should hold discussions with the  Royal College of General Practitioners and the British Medical Association to clarify points in their submissions. I am happy to confirm that my officials have written to both bodies to resolve those matters. I look forward to hearing the views and suggestions of my fellow MSPs during the debate. I also look forward to the detailed discussions with the Health and Community Care Committee that will follow at stage 2. I remind members of the general principles that we have been discussing: principles of choice, partnership, equity and fairness, which have received broad support from many different quarters. I commend those principles to the Parliament and I commend the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill, which has been based upon them. I am confident that the bill will lay the foundations not only for better care services, but for better lives for many in our society: better lives for Scotland's older people, who will be able to live free from the fear of poverty and debt; better lives for service users, who will be able to choose how services are provided for them; and better lives for Scotland's carers, who will see that their contribution to Scotland's care provision is being recognised and valued. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill.

I assure Nicola Sturgeon and Shona Robison that we understand entirely what we are trying to do and why. In contrast to the content of their speeches, which once again showed us the SNP attempting to dance on the  head of a constitutional pin, an overarching body was strongly recommended by the Kennedy report, which I suggest they read. I quote one sentence: "In addition, a single body should be charged with the overall co-ordination of the various professional bodies and with integrating the various systems of regulation." There is a strong case for consistency and oversight. If that is the objective, it would be illogical to increase inconsistency, which is what the SNP is proposing. It would be nonsense to have a separate Scottish co-ordinating body that could not oversee the reserved regulatory bodies in Scotland. We would have the ridiculous situation of having two bodies. The objective of consistency would be sabotaged. Ben Wallace asked about informing the public. I agree that it is important that that should be done so that the public understand the role of the body and know that there is a new strong route for dealing with public complaints and concerns. As I said in my opening speech, the council could appeal to the courts about decisions by regulatory bodies, and will also have an ombudsman role with reference to those bodies. Ben Wallace also asked about the appointment procedure; I assure him that it will be transparent and open. It is a good thing that members of the public will be in the majority over the health professionals on that body. Margaret Smith asked about accountability. Reports and accounts will be laid before the Scottish Parliament as well as the Westminster Parliament. Clearly, the council will deal substantially with reserved areas, but the Health and Community Care Committee will be able to question the Scottish member of the council and, if the council takes on devolved areas, the Health and Community Care Committee will be able to question the chair of the council. On the timing of the motion, to which Margaret Smith referred, the agreement is that the debate on the motion should take place before the committee stage, which is precisely what is happening.

I am almost out of time, so I am unable to do so. I conclude by saying that we value and wish to empower front-line public service workers, but we also wish to protect the public in the few cases where something goes wrong. There is a need for an open and transparent regulatory framework that puts the needs and interests of patients and the public first. We have made a judgment based on those enduring principles, while the SNP once again shows its preference for constitutional nit-picking and a single ideological obsession.

The motion relates to the NHS Reform and Health Care Professions Bill, which has received its second reading in the House of Commons, where it will commence its committee stage on 27 November. Clauses 23 to 27, together with schedule 7, propose the establishment of a council for the regulation of health care professionals and set out its functions and powers. The Scotland Act 1998 defines the regulation of the health professions as a matter that is reserved to Westminster. However, some powers in this policy area are potentially devolved. That is why we are debating the motion. Before I come to the devolved issues, let me say briefly what the proposed council will do and why we support its establishment. The council will be an overarching body to oversee the various bodies that carry out professional self-regulation. It is designed to improve the effectiveness of self-regulation to enhance public protection. It will do that by bringing greater consistency and spreading good practice. If necessary, it will exercise its powers to require changes to the rules of a regulatory body. The council will not deal with the fitness of individuals for professional practice, but it will have a power to appeal to the courts against individual regulatory decisions, where it thinks that it is in the public interest to do so. The proposals for the council for the regulation of health care professionals in essence follow the recommendations of the Kennedy report of the Bristol inquiry. The council's remit will extend  across the United Kingdom. That is entirely appropriate to ensure consistent standards and to reflect and encourage the mobility of health professionals. The council is designed to be independent of Government. We look forward to the benefits that it will bring to Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. I shall now explain the devolved issues. The Scotland Act 1998 reserved regulation of the health professions that were covered by the eight regulatory bodies that existed at that time. Scotland cannot legislate for those bodies nor, by extension, for a body to oversee them. However, the Health Act 1999 gave powers for further regulatory bodies for other health professionals to be created by an order in council. An order could be made to provide a separate regulatory body for Scotland. If new Scottish regulators were thus established, it would in theory be possible for the Scottish Parliament to create its own body to oversee them, which would be a Scottish equivalent of the council for the regulation of health care professionals. That is the main reason why there is a devolved aspect to the bill. From what I have said, members will appreciate that I value the United Kingdom dimension to the body that the bill proposes. For that reason and because it is important that the same body should oversee both the eight reserved regulatory bodies and any new regulators, I do not favour the creation of a separate body to oversee any Scottish regulators, which in theory could be created. Two other aspects of the bill affect devolved competence. They flow from the intention that the remit of the new council should cover the United Kingdom. First, Scottish ministers will be given the power to appoint one of the members of the council. That is to be welcomed. That power will, of course, be exercised in accordance with the Nolan principles. Secondly, Scottish ministers will have the power to fund the body through payments or loans. That will allow the commissioning of work from the council; it does not affect the fact that the costs of the council will be met by Westminster. I commend the motion to members and ask them to consent to Westminster's legislating for a body that will bring considerable improvements to the regulation of health care professionals in Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom. I move, That the Parliament endorses the principle that the Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals, which is to be created to oversee the regulatory bodies for healthcare professionals under the NHS Reform and Health Care Professions Bill, should also have power to oversee any regulatory bodies which might be established in future and which fall within the devolved competence of the  Scottish Parliament; agrees that the Council be made accountable to the Scottish Parliament in respect of such of its functions as fall within devolved competence; agrees that the function should be conferred upon Scottish ministers of appointing one of the members of the Council, agrees that power should be conferred on Scottish ministers to make payments and loans to the Council, and finally agrees that the relevant provisions to achieve this end in the Bill should be considered by the UK Parliament.

There are no plans at present to issue similar guidance in Scotland. However, the Executive is taking similar steps to ensure improvements in care of deafblind children and adults in Scotland through implementation of the recommendations in "Sensing Progress" and the certification and registration working group.

We attach great importance to services for people who have sensory impairments, but we are going about our work differently from England and Wales. We are monitoring progress in the matter and the chief social work inspector will report on it in his annual report. As Cathie Craigie knows, one of the recommendations of the report was to set up a certification and registration working group. We are currently consulting on that group's 15 recommendations. We will progress those with an Executive response in the near future.

No recent discussions have taken place concerning dental provision.

I am well aware of that problem and that is why the Executive recently set up the national expert group on the recruitment and retention of dentists in remote and rural areas. We are mindful that there are issues that have to be addressed urgently. There are, of course, initiatives under way that are already having some effect—such as the Scottish dental access initiative. I know that there have been some awards to dentists in Dumfries and Galloway under that initiative. There is also the possibility of having salaried dentists and perhaps an approach will be made from Dumfries and Galloway about that. There are also financial incentives for dentists who commit themselves to the NHS. There are many on-going  initiatives—that is true of dentistry overall. I am sure that we all welcomed the announcement by Susan Deacon this morning of £3.8 million for the improvement of dental practices throughout Scotland.

I know that Elaine Murray has taken a keen interest in the issue. I would be pleased to meet her, as the constituency MSP, to discuss the matter with her.

I congratulate Johann Lamont on securing a debate on this most important subject, following the tragic death of a young man in her constituency. I thank all the other speakers, especially Cathy Jamieson for sharing her family's experience of the condition. I also congratulate the Cardiomyopathy Association on the work that it does to raise awareness of the condition among the medical profession and the public. As we have heard, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is an inherited condition that involves an abnormal thickening of the heart muscle. Because the thickening occurs in an inward direction, the  working of the heart is obstructed. At present, there is no cure for the condition. There is a slight possibility that some drugs can decrease the degree of muscle thickening. Treatment aims to improve symptoms, for those who have them, and to prevent complications. There is no standardised therapy. Various drugs that affect the rate and rhythm of the heart have been used with some success, although those drugs do not necessarily affect the long-term outcome. Similarly, surgical treatment has been of benefit in selected cases. Recent evidence suggests that the prevalence of the condition is higher than had been thought. It is now accepted that about one person in 500 has the condition. Its clinical course varies markedly from person to person. Some patients have no symptoms at any time during their life. Some have symptoms of severe heart failure. Others die suddenly, often in the absence of previous symptoms. As for the number of sudden deaths among young people in Scotland, the main category is in those below the age of one. In the past 10 years, there have been 16 deaths in that age group. The other peaks are among those aged 15 and 16. Over the past 10 years, there have been eight deaths of 15-year-olds and 10 deaths of 16-year-olds. I note the points that Mary Scanlon made about the possible discrepancy between some of the Executive's figures and figures elsewhere. I shall look into that and write to her about it. Christine Grahame also raised issues to do with figures and other matters, which I shall look into and write to her about. She asked whether I would meet the trustees of Scottish HART. I am happy to do that. I ask Ian Jenkins to pass on my apologies for having to postpone the meeting to which he referred. I shall reschedule it as soon as possible. Cathie Craigie mentioned research, on which I undertake to write my third follow-up letter, although I know that Susan Deacon recently wrote to Scottish HART about the issue, saying that the chief scientist's office would consider any proposals that Scottish HART produced. None has so far been received, but we would be happy to hear from Scottish HART on that subject. Any sudden death is a tragic event, but all the more so when it happens to a baby or to someone on the threshold of adult life. I can well understand why there have been calls for some form of screening from those who hope that such deaths can be prevented. The rest of my speech will be divided into two parts: first, whole-population screening and, secondly, targeted screening.

I do not have any data on that, but I can look into the matter and get back to Kenny Gibson. In taking decisions about screening, the Scottish Executive is advised by the national screening committee, which provides independent expert advice to the UK health ministers on the introduction of new screening programmes. The committee will recommend the introduction of a population screening programme only if the natural history of the disease is well understood, if there is a simple, safe, precise and validated screening test and if there is an effective treatment for the patients who are identified as a result of screening. Having examined population screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the committee concluded that it could not recommend the introduction of population screening for that condition. That was because none of the committee's key criteria was satisfied: the natural history of the disease is poorly defined; there is no clear definition of the degree of thickness of the heart muscle, as measured by the ultrasound technique echocardiography; and, as I have mentioned, there is no good evidence that treatment will necessarily improve the outlook for those who have the condition but do not have symptoms. As the Executive announced in April last year, we have accepted the committee's advice. The motion mentions ECG and ultrasound screening of all first-degree relatives of those who die as a result of the condition. We support that approach. We have made it clear all along that we want clinicians to be alert to those people who are at higher risk of sudden death because they have a significant family history of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Those people might benefit from advice and treatment. Everything should be done to ensure that the condition is tackled with care and sensitivity. We have emphasised that GPs are expected to refer such patients to a cardiologist for the appropriate investigations. Those patients, and relevant family members, should also be given counselling, including genetic counselling. Johann Lamont referred to the inadequate encouragement of GPs and asked us to ensure that GPs' knowledge was improved. I will certainly look into that and write back to her.  Recent scientific publications suggest that the use of implantable defibrillators might help to prevent sudden death in high-risk patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Those initial findings need to be confirmed, but that could be the first form of therapy to prolong survival in such patients. In the light of that new evidence, the national screening committee has commissioned further work and will be considering a report on it next month. For those families in which a particularly serious form of the disease occurs, the Scottish molecular genetics consortium has been considering the possibility of including tests for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in its molecular genetic service. That could help with identification of family members affected by the condition. I fully agree that we should all be working together to raise awareness of the condition, partly among the public but—perhaps even more fundamental—among the medical profession. Johann Lamont and Shona Robison emphasised that GP awareness is critical and, as I said, I undertake to follow up that issue as a matter of urgency. I again congratulate Johann Lamont on raising an important subject and on ensuring that renewed impetus is given to addressing a most serious condition.  Meeting closed at 17:42.

The debate has been excellent and, as Margaret Ewing put it, a shining example of what the Parliament is about. There have been continual references to the wider spectrum of mental health policy and initiatives, but the focus has been on renewing mental health law. At the heart of our approach are the needs and rights of individual mental health service users. We are strengthening the rights of patients to assessment, services and protection and are giving patients a stronger voice in legal proceedings and dealing with professionals. However, balancing the rights of patients is a wider public interest, particularly when people with mental disorders are involved in offending behaviour. Our reforms in that area will lead to more transparency in decision making, stronger rights for patients and better protection for the public, through more effective assessment and management of risk. I thank all the members who have expressed their best wishes to Susan Deacon and, since the next member I will deal with is Mary Scanlon, I particularly thank her for her rather interesting reference to the new arrival. I know that Susan Deacon has been working miracles in the development of maternity services, but I am not aware that she has reduced the waiting time for birth to quite such an extent. Mary Scanlon asked a specific question about the provision of safe and appropriate services and how they would be monitored. I assure her that they will be monitored as part of the care programme approach and that the Mental Welfare Commission will also monitor the delivery of service in individual cases. Mary Scanlon's main point was perhaps about advocacy, which is also the point that Nicola Sturgeon started with and which many others referred to. I assure members that we are committed to the same aim as Millan—that mental health service users should have access to an advocate when they need one. In "Our National Health", we have already set out a requirement that NHS boards demonstrate their plans for making independent advocacy available to all who need it. That must be done by the end of this  calendar year. We are currently examining their plans. The bill will go further and, for the first time, create a duty on both the NHS and local authorities to support independent advocacy in mental health. Various members, including Brian Adam, expressed concern about collective advocacy. There are different forms of collective advocacy. It is only recently that the importance of collective advocacy has been properly recognised. If we imposed a duty in legislation, it would be necessary to define collective advocacy and how it should be supported. We are concerned that that might restrict flexibility and innovation. We want collective advocacy to develop through local negotiation and discussion, not in response to a statutory imposition from above. However, we recognise that many people feel strongly about this issue. We will continue to discuss with advocacy interests how the duties in the mental health bill should be expressed, to ensure that the aims of Millan are fulfilled. Nicola Sturgeon made many points in her speech. I do not have time to go over all of them. She made an interesting and important reference to advance statements and commented on the suggestion from SAMH that those should have a formal standing and perhaps should be able to be overturned only by a tribunal. We will consider that and the many other helpful suggestions from SAMH. We currently feel that that suggestion might create problems in emergencies or where statements are unclear. Nicola Sturgeon also referred to the title of the coming bill. Robin Harper suggested that it should be called the regulation of psychiatric care act. I think that that title would be rather narrower than the current scope of the bill. A lot of what Nicola Sturgeon said, and stated in her amendment, focused on resources. She referred to her fear that compulsory treatment orders might be a sticking plaster. We should remember that a new feature of compulsory treatment in the proposals is that a care plan must go with it. Some members have drawn a false dichotomy between services and compulsion. As I said, Nicola Sturgeon's main point was about resources. I am pleased to announce that we accept the SNP's amendment. We are in discussions with service providers on the resource implications of the bill. It would be premature to specify a figure for its cost. When the bill is published, the financial memorandum will set out our views on resources, but members should be in no doubt about the Executive's commitment to the proposals that we are putting forward. We will ensure that the necessary resources are in place for effective implementation of the reforms.  Margaret Smith asked why we are using impaired decision-making, rather than impaired judgment, as one of the criteria for compulsion. It reflects advice from the mental health legislation reference group. A concern was that the term impaired judgment was too limited and subjective. For example, disagreeing with the psychiatrist might be said to be impaired judgment. The point of the test is that the mental disorder must be adversely affecting the patient's ability to understand and make a real choice about the treatment. Kenny Gibson raised concerns about psychiatric services in relation to sexual abuse. I am very aware of that issue and was pleased to launch some research recently by Sarah Nelson, which focused on female survivors of sexual abuse. The matter was also raised in the "National Framework for the Prevention of Suicide and Deliberate Self-harm in Scotland", which I was pleased to launch recently. I hope that the addition to the mental health framework, on psychological interventions, which I also announced in October, will help survivors of sexual abuse. Margaret Jamieson made a passionate speech about stigma. I was pleased to announce, on 8 October, the setting up a national advisory group to take forward the programme of work funded by the £4 million allocated in "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change" for the promotion of mental health and well-being and the attack on stigma. I intended to say more about that group, but I have one eye on the clock so I will just say that the members of the group will be announced soon. Part of its work will take on board Robin Harper's concerns about doing work in schools and Margaret Ewing's concerns about the use of certain language by the media. I regret the absence of the media at this debate. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton asked how patients could be compulsorily treated in the community. We will explicitly legislate that forcible treatment can be administered only at designated clinics and hospitals. We accept that such treatment in a patient's home, or other domestic or public setting, would be very traumatic and unhelpful, and it will not be allowed. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton was concerned about the role of ministers. It is right that ministers should no longer be able to discharge restricted patients. That is a judicial role; however, ministers will still be involved in the oversight of restricted patients and will be able to make representations to the independent tribunal and to appeal to the Court of Session against discharge decisions that they consider to be inappropriate. Margaret Ewing asked about the implementation and monitoring group. We are continuing to support a mental health legislation reference  group throughout the process of implementation. Once the act is in force, we will wish to review how the monitoring will continue and will bear in mind the on-going role of bodies such as the Mental Welfare Commission. I am sure that we all agree that David Davidson made a most moving speech about eating disorders. I am pleased to remind members that, in October, we announced a further extension to the mental health framework which deals specifically with eating disorders and which states: "Much more needs to be done to create treatment protocols, clear referral pathways and a pattern of specialist in-patient provision in the NHS." I will conclude by referring to two points made by Richard Simpson. He said that the mental health framework must be driven forward with a real sense of urgency. I believe that that is happening now. Ben Wallace may well be right to say that no support group existed in the early years of the framework, before the Parliament was created, but one of Susan Deacon's early acts was to set up such a group. As a result of the group's excellent work and the additions to the framework to which I have referred, there is now a momentum behind the framework's implementation. Richard Simpson also referred to the fact that institutional care accounts for 80 per cent of mental health expenditure. That issue is being addressed by the performance assessment framework, in which we specifically examine the percentage of mental health spend on services in the community. My time is up. I hope that members will appreciate the vast range of initiatives that are in store. Although I have not mentioned the resource question that John McAllion and Shona Robison raised, I should point out that spending increased by 9 per cent in the NHS last year. That increase is over and above specific initiatives such as the mental illness specific grant. As for the law reform proposals that we recently announced, although our changes are radical, they are also principled and practical and amount to the most fundamental reform of mental health legislation for a whole generation. I commend them to the chamber.

It is for NHS Tayside to ensure that appropriate measures are taken to monitor local services.

I am sure that Andrew Welsh knows that the medical director of Tayside  University Hospitals NHS Trust gave a guarantee yesterday that there would be no closure of the coronary care unit until robust evaluation of the community services that are provided by paramedics has been carried out. I regret Andrew Welsh's language and his use of the term "guinea pigs", because Angus is not the only place in Scotland where the procedure is being tried. A pilot is being conducted by the remote and rural areas resource initiative, which involves Highland, Grampian, the Borders, Dumfries and Galloway and the Western Isles. The procedure was recommended a few weeks ago by the coronary heart disease task force. Andrew Welsh should listen to the clinical experts before he makes charges like the one that he has made today.

It is precisely because of long distances that the issue of pre-hospital thrombolysis—or the use of clot-busting drugs—has arisen in the first place. It was because of such circumstances that the coronary heart disease task force flagged up the procedure. The procedure is particularly appropriate for the area that was described by Murdo Fraser. As I have said, the procedure will be evaluated robustly by the medical director and the local managed clinical network for coronary heart disease before any decision is taken to close the coronary care unit at Stracathro.

The length of stay of patients in hospital is determined through continuous assessment of their individual clinical needs.

I am sure that Margo MacDonald knows that the length of stay in hospital has been declining throughout Scotland, the United Kingdom and further afield. That is because of changing patterns in care. There is no fundamental difference between Lothian and the rest of Scotland or further afield. There will be an excellent new hospital and orthopaedic suite at the new Edinburgh royal infirmary. I do not think that it is right for Margo MacDonald to raise concern and alarm about that among people in Edinburgh. I have every confidence that there will be an excellent orthopaedic service in the new hospital and that there will also be enough beds in the new hospital, if those matters are the hidden agenda of Ms MacDonald's question.

We have taken a series of initiatives this year to deal with hospital-acquired infections and clean hospitals, which is a separate issue that also causes concern. Mary Scanlon can be assured that we are vigorously tackling what I admit is a serious problem.

Dennis Canavan would not expect me to become involved in decisions on the precise locations of health services in Forth valley. Some decisions are most appropriately taken locally. We are determined that important strategic decisions and priorities will be led from the centre by the Scottish Executive and the Scottish Parliament. The precise location of services is not a question for me.

The matter is still being considered. Whatever the outcome, the Scottish Executive has given an assurance that the care development group's recommendations on free personal care for the older people of Scotland will be implemented in full.

As I said yesterday, the negotiations with the Westminster Government are on-going. Nicola Sturgeon should not expect me to say—yesterday or today—where we might have to find the money. That would weaken our negotiating position. It would be tantamount to saying that we are not going to win the argument. We are having a rational argument with the Westminster Government about the matter. The argument is about a resource transfer in a new situation—a devolution situation. That is the way to proceed, rather than trying to turn it into some constitutional stand-off, which is what the SNP wants to do.

The Executive has initiated a wide-ranging review of audiology services to address the wider issues of hearing aid provision. That is being progressed in consultation with the Public Health Institute of Scotland. We are monitoring progress of the pilot studies in England and will consider constructively the results when they become available, but have no plans to introduce a similar scheme in Scotland. NHS Scotland has already introduced 11 different types of digital hearing aids on to its central contract range.

Susan Deacon and I are both concerned about the situation, but I remind Mike Rumbles of the wider review that is taking place. I accept that digital hearing aids are an important part of that agenda. I met representatives from the Royal National Institute for Deaf People over the summer, and Susan Deacon will meet them in a few weeks' time. We are certainly keen to see progress on the matter. The review will report next year and we will watch the progress of the English pilot studies. Members should remember that it is only in the pilot areas that the provision to which Mike Rumbles referred is available. Where someone would benefit  clinically from a digital hearing aid, it certainly ought to be available.

As I said, we are certainly keen to monitor the results of those projects. It is clear from what I hear at this early stage that some people can benefit greatly from digital hearing aids. That reinforces what we already know. There is some dispute among clinicians about how much advantage digital hearing aids might have, and it looks as if some people will benefit more than others. However, the principle that I outlined, which is stated in Scottish Executive guidance, is that if someone will benefit clinically from a digital hearing aid, it should be available.

There are pilot studies in England, but it is quite misleading to say that more people in England have a digital hearing aid than in Scotland. If one takes population differences into account, the numbers who have a digital hearing aid in Scotland are more or less the same as in England. That is not enough people, as I have acknowledged, and we are determined that more people who can benefit from them will have access to digital hearing aids. Matters are not helped by making inaccurate and exaggerated references to a situation in England that does not exist.

One of the good things that is happening is that the cost of digital hearing aids is falling. I am sure that we all welcome that. I agree that that is important, not least because I have responsibility for older people—many people who need hearing aids are older people. That is an important part of our many-faceted strategy for older people. We are determined that there will be progress on the issue, and I assure members that that progress will come soon.

I congratulate Cathie Craigie on securing the debate. I have no hesitation in agreeing with the motion and with many of the important points that have been made in the debate. As the motion indicates, there can be no doubt about the need to raise awareness of dementia or about the importance of Alzheimer Scotland's work in supporting sufferers and their families. Since its establishment in 1994, Alzheimer Scotland has become the leading national  organisation providing specialist services for people with dementia. Its local day care and befriending services, respite breaks, carer support and education groups, campaigning activity and information and national 24-hour helpline services—to which Janis Hughes referred—all make a significant contribution towards the improved understanding of, and provision of service to, people with dementia and their carers. I have no hesitation in recording our admiration and respect for Alzheimer Scotland's work. I am also pleased to pay tribute to the University of Stirling's dementia services development centre, which is at the forefront of world thinking on what can be done to help sufferers of dementia. I was pleased that the Executive was able to provide a grant of £0.5 million to assist the centre with the construction of its new Iris Murdoch building and I was delighted to lay its foundation stone last month. The needs of dementia sufferers are broad and diverse and demand a broad and diverse response. Many speakers referred to elements of the Executive response, such as the framework for mental health services, the carers strategy, the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001, the recommendations of the care development group's report and our whole joint-working agenda. I will deal with some of those issues and with postcode prescribing, which has featured prominently in the debate. The framework for mental health services sets out a template for dementia services. Last year, we stepped up the implementation of that framework through the creation of the mental health and well-being support group. During its visits, it has been paying attention to those who use services and their carers. I recall its report on its visit to Ayrshire and Arran Health Board, which referred to the good practice and strong local basis of innovative dementia projects. I also remember the example of home care and weekend services, which were being developed in Orkney with the help and involvement of Alzheimer Scotland. However, the positive examples of service innovations are balanced by reports of less developed local services in other parts of the country. With that in mind, I was delighted to approve the round two focus for the support group. That focus includes the development of co-ordinated inter-agency approaches to dementia services and support. Services are improving, but there is no doubt that they need to improve further. Once again, Alzheimer Scotland's recently produced document, "Planning Signposts for Dementia Care Services", offers the statutory agencies real  pointers on how to improve such services. I concentrated on that document in the members' business debate that I secured last year, to which Cathie Craigie referred. I remember that one of the features of that document was the importance of early-stage therapeutic services, including drugs, and early-stage support services, including information. Early diagnosis is also important, as Cathie Craigie said, and we are determined that there will be a better understanding of the disease among professionals and service providers so that that can happen. Alzheimer Scotland's document is a useful and comprehensive document against which the planning agencies can measure their services and I commend Alzheimer Scotland for its production. Reference will be made to it in the forthcoming report from the chief medical officer's group on health care and older people. He will also address the charge of agism to which Adam Ingram referred. Several people mentioned the carers strategy. I remind members of the extra money that is going into that strategy and of the 22,000 extra weeks of short breaks that will, I am sure, be welcomed by the carers of people with dementia. Drug treatment and postcode prescribing featured prominently in the debate. I understand and share the concerns of members and of Alzheimer Scotland. People rightly find it unfair that access to a particular drug or treatment should be determined by where they live. As I said at the Health and Community Care Committee this morning, the Executive is committed to tackling postcode prescribing. We have an extensive work agenda to ensure that all patients have access to consistent, high-quality NHS services no matter where they live.

As I was about to say, we should welcome the guidance from the Health Technology Board for Scotland. That body has been somewhat criticised in the past few days, but it has put a Scottish angle on its work and has developed the NICE guidance in relation to the possibility of GP prescribing in rural areas that do not have access to specialists. As Richard Simpson reminded us, the thrust of the guidance was that it should be specialists who do the prescribing. That is beginning to happen in Grampian but I accept—as today's report  indicates—that there is wide variation in the amount of money that is being provided for new drugs. I think that all health boards are now providing some money, so nowhere are the drugs not used at all. However, there is clearly room for improvement. Richard Simpson also referred to the Forth Valley Health Board area. I note that a short-life working group there has produced proposals. I hope that that will lead to improvements in the amount of prescribing in that area.

I am in my last minute, so I had better not. I have many topics to cover and I will be able only to summarise them. The number of topics indicates the breadth of the agenda in terms of what sufferers and their carers need. It also indicates the breadth of the response required. Alzheimer Scotland has always campaigned for free personal care and I pay tribute to the work of Jim Jackson in the care development group. Mary Scanlon talked about home care services. I accept that there have been problems over a long period. However, the trend has been reversed. I remind members of the £100 million that was announced by Susan Deacon last October and of the £100 million that was announced by Angus MacKay in June. Both those announcements will lead to big improvements in the development of home care services.  The wider joint-working agenda includes single shared assessments and the joint management and resourcing that will come for older people's services next April. Much is being done, but much remains to be done. I shall certainly pay close attention to the various points that have been made today. I assure the Parliament that we acknowledge the importance of world Alzheimer's day in raising awareness of dementia. We also acknowledge the work of Alzheimer Scotland, which I know will continue to work with us in helping the thousands of people who suffer from dementia and their carers.  Meeting closed at 17:59.

The Scottish Executive funds nurse training and the continuing professional development of nurses in a number of ways, including specific centrally funded initiatives such as ward sister and charge nurse development. The new national health service boards will be required to make plans for staff development. The new special health board for education and training that will be created on 1 April 2002 will take a proactive role in co-ordinating and overseeing educational support for health care staff, including nurses.

We are strongly committed to the agenda of continuing professional development. This week Susan Deacon and I attended an important conference called "Still Learning Together", which considered career development and training across all NHS staff, with particular reference to nursing. In preparation for the convention, we are considering recruitment and retention issues and we are working closely with the Royal College of Nursing, Unison and other relevant bodies. The convention will not be a talking shop, but a meeting that will lead to initiatives. The matters that Mr Adam referred to will be at its heart.

The new health boards  must consider the matter to be a central part of their planning. We will monitor their performance as part of the new performance assessment framework. We will play our role, although the new special health board that I referred to will also have a role. The issues to which Donald Gorrie referred are under active consideration and will be discussed further at the convention in three weeks' time.

There is a range of funding sources for training. I am sure that Dorothy-Grace Elder welcomes that fact. Some funding comes from trusts and some comes from central initiatives. We gave £1.75 million in January for centrally funded initiatives. It is right that there should be a range of funding sources. However, the issue to which Dorothy-Grace Elder referred is also under consideration and we want to make that an important part of the agenda. The commitments that we made at this week's conference were part of that process. New funding initiatives, such as the new partnership with the Scottish university for industry, were announced, which open up many new development opportunities for nurses and all health care staff.

I begin by congratulating Margaret Smith on securing the debate and by welcoming nurses to the public gallery. I applaud the enormous contribution that they make to patient care, both in the community and in hospitals. The Scottish Executive is determined to promote nursing as a valuable occupation and to demonstrate by our actions that nurses are valued. As in other related areas, I believe that we should balance the positive initiatives that have been taken against the various problems that certainly remain. Those problems must not and will not be swept under the carpet. That is why we need to come together to address them positively and constructively. On Tuesday, as several members have mentioned, Susan Deacon, the Minister for Health and Community Care, announced arrangements for the nurse recruitment and retention convention, which will bring together key players in the nursing and midwifery professions in Scotland and overseas to address long-term recruitment and retention issues. The convention will be held on 19 November. Invitations have been issued to a wide variety of people who have an interest in the future of nursing in NHS in Scotland—staff representative bodies, directors of nursing, providers of nurse education and nurses themselves—to come to the summit to discuss and investigate innovative ways of addressing recruitment and retention at all grades in the  nursing profession. The convention will not be a talking shop or a one-off event. Instead, the round-table discussion will give all parties an opportunity to look at the key areas that affect recruitment and retention and to follow that up with the necessary initiatives that will develop local and national actions towards our shared objectives. The value nurses campaign began with six demands. I am pleased that the first of those was met in July when I announced a 10.4 per cent rise in student nurse bursaries from 1 September this year. I hope that that will help to some extent to attract nurses and keep them in training. Since 1996-97, student intakes have risen by 15 per cent and 10,000 more nurses will qualify in the next five years. That is 1,500 more than was originally planned. There are also 450 more qualified nurses now than there were in 1997. However, as we know, there are vacancies—albeit fewer here than there are in England. The number of vacancies that last over three months is 0.6 per cent. At the convention, we shall certainly give serious consideration to the RCN's proposals on return-to-practice courses. The possibility of more flexible return-to-practice courses will also be considered at the convention. Family-friendly policies are very relevant to recruitment and retention, as Margaret Smith reminded us. We already require all NHS employers to meet, or exceed, best-practice guidance on family-friendly policies as part of the new staff governance standard. In order to help employers, guidance on family-friendly policies was launched recently, including guidance on flexible working, child care and career breaks. We shall ensure that those policies are implemented. Further discussion on those issues will take place at the convention. This year, for the third year in a row, we have implemented in full the recommendations of the independent nurses pay review body. The latest pay award means that pay for all nurses has increased by 20 per cent in cash terms since 1997. I note that Tommy Sheridan called for a Scottish pay review, but I know that the RCN supports a UK approach to the matter. We know, however, that the current NHS pay and grading structure does not meet the needs of today's NHS. That is why the health department, along with the other UK health departments, is playing a full part in discussions on "Agenda for Change", which Jamie McGrigor asked about and which sets out proposals for modernising the NHS pay system. The proposed new system will underpin better career progression and modern conditions of service and it will ensure that all NHS in Scotland staff are rewarded fairly, according to the work that they do and the contribution that they  make, rather than according to their job titles.

I made an announcement in the summer in response to one of those demands and I have stated clearly that the other demands—some of which I have yet to deal with in my speech—will be addressed fully by the convention. I know that Margaret Ewing wants me to give assurances, but I can say only that we are taking the demands very seriously as part of a process. We are not limiting ourselves to those specific demands, but we are addressing the issue on a broader front. On NHS boards, we want to ensure that all staff have the opportunity to contribute appropriately to decision making in the NHS in Scotland, without one profession being favoured over another, which is the point that Janis Hughes made. That is why we are giving a stronger voice to area partnership forums and asking NHS boards to carry out a major overhaul of their area professional advisory committees, including the establishment of new area clinical forums in each board area. The chairs of the area clinical forums and the area partnership forums will be on the boards, and either or both of those chairs could be nurses. There are two other parts to the campaign. The first is the protection of time off for, and the provision of more money for, training. That issue must be addressed because some trusts find it difficult to release staff and because the money for training is not always spent on that. That issue will be addressed. We expect, as part of that, that the new special health board for education and training that will be created in April will take a role in co-ordinating and overseeing educational support for health care staff, including nurses. The second part of the campaign is the empowering of senior nurses to direct quality patient care. Trust directors of nursing have been asked to ensure that every ward sister and charge nurse in their organisation has access to a leadership development opportunity within a five-year plan, commencing this year. That is why the Scottish Executive has invested £1.75 million in areas such as ward sister/charge nurse development. That is regarded as a key priority in the modernisation of the NHS in Scotland and the empowering of staff. We have also issued guidance on nurse consultant posts. The number of posts—13—is totally inadequate, and we are determined that trusts will employ more nurse consultants.  Those latter proposals are part of the extension of the role of nurses. Many recent initiatives have reflected the new roles that nurses are adopting, including the role of nurses in NHS24, a service that will provide 24-hour access for patients to health advice from nurses. However, we have also heard the announcement of funding for 80 public health practitioners and the Executive is involved in the family health nurse project. That project is being tested as a means of delivering community nursing in remote and rural areas of Scotland and is a World Health Organisation pilot project. Other initiatives that I have heard about recently include the role of nurses in endoscopy services, which reflects the way in which roles throughout the NHS are changing. We are committed to extending and expanding the role of nurses in the NHS in Scotland. I conclude by reaffirming the Executive's commitment to valuing our nurses. Much has been done, but the main point is that more remains to be done. I know that some people will be disappointed that I have not been able to make specific announcements tonight, but I have clearly indicated the direction of travel. I am sure that everyone is looking forward to the convention, in which answers to many of the questions that members have asked will be given. I look forward to listening to nurses at the dinner tonight and at the conference tomorrow, and I leave it to them to decide whether my soup will be hot or cold.

In common with many other diseases and conditions, lung diseases are tackled through a range of measures at all stages of care.

I am aware that several people have problems in getting portable oxygen cylinders on the NHS. I shall shortly meet representatives of a breathe easy group from Edinburgh to discuss those problems. Following that meeting, I shall consider the points that Michael Matheson has made.

I have nothing to add to the answer that I have given.

Several interesting points have been made during the debate. In the time available to me, I shall try to respond to them, party by party. I thank the Liberal Democrats for their positive response to the care development group's report. Margaret Smith made a point about diagnostic fairness—her point is repeated on page 69 of the report. She welcomed the publication of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill this week—some members seemed to be unaware of its publication—and the fact that the bill will remove barriers to joint working. She reminded us that some of the bill's provisions will standardise charges for non-personal care services. We should remember that that is part of the picture. Mike Rumbles made an interesting point about the SNP motion's support for a UK veto on our policy. I had not thought of that, but when members consider it, they will agree that he made an interesting and valid point. Mike Rumbles also said that the Labour party preferred targeted benefits. I will make a general response to that point: the Labour party supports a combination of universal and targeted benefits. Since its first day, the welfare state has been based on that combination. It is clear that other Executive policies on health, social inclusion and many other areas are targeted.

I genuinely believe that that is a false dichotomy. Our policy has changed the boundaries of universal benefits in Scotland, but the fact remains that one cannot have only  universal benefits or only targeted benefits. I turn now to the Conservatives. It is unfortunate that Keith Harding and Ben Wallace were unaware of the developments on joint and pooled budgets that are laid out in the bill that was introduced to Parliament this week. As I indicated in my opening speech, Ben Wallace's figures were wildly out. We are aware that not all the grant-aided expenditure for a particular service is spent on that service and, on page 29 of the report, we refer in particular to the spending gap on older people's services. Our recommendations take that on board. They talk about the need for outcome agreements. On resource transfer, our recommendation is that "the full amount of NHS long stay resources freed up by bed closures should also be part of the aligned or pooled budget."

The details on older people's services are in our report, as I indicated. Local authorities generally spend 98 per cent of GAE, which is slightly different from the 44 per cent that Ben Wallace mentioned yesterday. I will now turn to the SNP. Christine Grahame asked several questions. I assure her that the £50 million will be available for aids and adaptations. I agree with what she said about the decline in home care hours. The report refers to that point, but also welcomes the fact that, because of increased Executive funding, home care hours increased by 9.8 per cent in 2000. We strongly support the continued development of that trend.

I am sorry, but I must move on because I have only five minutes. Christine Grahame was incorrect when she said that Stewart Sutherland favoured a fixed amount for housing and living costs. It is true that he considered that as an option, but he favoured a fixed rate for personal care. In that and in almost every other regard, we have followed Sir Stewart Sutherland's methodology. We have also adopted an average charge, which Sandra White asked about, which again, is what Sir Stewart Sutherland recommended. We used the same method for future projections as Sir Stewart, but we also built in an allowance for the response to the new policy, which he did not build in. That is why we allow a great deal of money for the expansion of services in the community. Finally, let me respond to the one speaker in my  party who was allowed to speak in the debate. Richard Simpson seems not to have given due weight to the £50 million for the development of new services, because he said in his intervention that that would not benefit the care of the elderly. I confirm that the ring fencing is an interim measure, which is what he wished for. Let me also repeat that resource transfer will be transparent, which he supported. Richard Simpson also called for long-stay beds to go into the pooled budget. That will happen. He made one final point in which he seemed to suggest that funding people in hospitals should become a local authority responsibility. That seems to contradict his earlier point about pooled budgets and joint responsibilities. That is a detail in the context of today's debate. I welcome the positive responses that have been given and the constructive comments that have been made. I hope that we can all go forward together into the exciting new world that begins for older people next April.

I too begin by sending our best wishes to Mary Scanlon. As far as I remember, today's debate is the first on health or community care in which she will not have participated. We hope that she returns soon to contribute to our debates. The care development group report is a complex response to an even more complex subject. The Executive always intended that the Parliament should debate the report properly once the Health and Community Care Committee and other members had had a chance to digest the details. It is a pity that the motion focuses on one aspect only—attendance allowance in care homes—especially when we are in the middle of constructive discussions with the Department for Work and Pensions on that topic. Put simply, passing the motion would hinder rather than help those discussions and risk turning an argument about resource transfer into a constitutional stand-off between Edinburgh and London. Let no one be in any doubt that we are pressing the case strongly for resource transfer. The case is set out most forcibly on page 60 of the report, and I will make three brief comments over and above that. The fundamental point is that the DWP pays about £20 million to self-funders in Scottish care homes and that that money must not be lost to Scotland. The precise mechanism by which that is achieved is secondary, although resource transfer is probably the simplest arrangement and already happens regularly. Secondly, the current rules do not take account of devolution, as savings to the DWP budget now result in costs to another Administration rather than to another department within the same Administration. Thirdly, the rules about attendance allowance stopping in care homes when other publicly funded help is given were created to avoid any element of double funding. However, we in the care development group were careful: we deliberately and meticulously avoided any such double element, as outlined on page 60. Therefore, the £145 of free personal care is made up of £90 from the Scottish Executive and £55 attendance allowance, and the £210 for someone in a nursing home is made up of £155 from the Scottish Executive and £55 attendance allowance.

Clearly, if people do not currently receive an attendance allowance, it is not an issue. I thought that Nicola Sturgeon was going to raise the point that Shona Robison raised yesterday. The vast majority of people in care homes receive the full attendance allowance. The reality is that no one—not the DWP, or the Scottish Executive, or anyone else—has the precise figures, but it is broadly accepted that most people receive the full amount. So, £145 and £210 are the amounts that will be delivered. There will be no ifs, no buts and no maybes, as the First Minister made clear earlier this week. That is just one half of the picture. Beyond that is free personal care in the community and the recommendation that £50 million of the new money should be allocated to the expansion and improvement of services in the community so that care is available and needs are met. That is the most distinctive of all the care development group's recommendations. I believe that it will be welcomed by everyone in Scotland, even those who have reservations about the policy as a whole. In response to Nicola Sturgeon's point about the inadequacy of resources for services in the community, as she put it, I say that we must also remember to set the £100 million that Angus MacKay announced in June beside the £100 million that Susan Deacon announced last October, which was also for improvements in personal care and home care services more generally. That £200 million is an unprecedented investment in older people and a massive commitment to improving their lives. Through those extensive resources, we can ensure that building up services and extending the boundaries of free care go hand in hand. To anyone in the wider community who still has doubts about the second part of that policy, I make three brief points. First, as indicated at the start of the report, free personal care is right in principle because it removes the discrimination against older people who have chronic or degenerative illnesses and need personal care. Secondly, and contrary to what some journalists have said, our public opinion research indicated support for that approach. When questions were asked about the individual elements of personal care, as described on page 88 of the report, there  were consistent majorities of two to one in favour of universal free provision. Thirdly, free personal care will make it easier to provide integrated health and personal care services. It is extremely helpful to the joint working agenda, which is strongly endorsed by the care development group report and driven forward by the publication this week of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill. That bill facilitates the pooled budgets to which the Conservatives refer in their amendment to the amendment. It also provides powers for the Scottish Executive to ensure that the new joint working arrangements take effect in every part of Scotland. The care development group made many other recommendations, to which I will refer as far as I can in my last minute. One of the most important was that a group should be established to consider in detail the mechanics of implementing our proposals. That group will be set up soon. Another recommendation was that the £125 million of new money should be ring-fenced until local authorities agree with the Executive robust and clear outcome agreements that will allow us to ensure that the investment is being channelled appropriately. That responds to Nicola Sturgeon's point on ring fencing. A third recommendation was that all the money for older people's services should be the subject of clear outcome agreements. Those points address the substance of Ben Wallace's amendment, although not—I fear—the shocking arithmetical skills that he displayed yesterday. I wait with interest to find out whether he will make the same simple errors today. Now is an exciting time for the development of older people's services. There is new money, new joint working and an absolute determination to ensure delivery everywhere in Scotland. I thank members for the endorsement that they have given the report over the past few days. I move amendment S1M-2248.1, to leave out from first "notes" to end and insert: "welcomes the report of the Care Development Group and the Scottish Executive's commitment to implement its recommendations and further welcomes the statement made by the Minister for Health and Community Care on 26 September 2001."

The Scottish Executive provided additional resources of £36 million over three years from April 2001 to improve services for people with learning disabilities, including services for adults with autism.

Several agencies are doing excellent work. The Scottish Society for Autism and the Public Health Institute of Scotland are doing important pieces of work to examine services for adults with autistic spectrum disorder. When those reports are published soon, we will provide funding for a national network for people with autistic spectrum disorder. That was a recommendation of the learning disability review. More generally, we are considering all the partnership in practice agreements from local agencies throughout Scotland to find out how they address the recommendations of the learning disability review, including how their services for autism do that. Many areas have good strategies,  but some do not and we will provide feedback to those.

Will the member give way?

The debate has been good. On a day on which there is good news for the health service in Tayside, I welcome the pupils from Lochee Primary School, which is in Kate MacLean's constituency. We all appreciated the first half of David McLetchie's speech. He made an interesting point at the beginning: the majority of people are  satisfied with the treatment that they get from the health service, but still have serious concerns about the health service as a whole. We need to remember such facts and perspectives in any health debate. Clearly, for many people, treatment is good. In fact, it is getting better in many cases. For example, Richard Simpson reminded us of the one-stop clinics that are fast-tracking treatment for so many people. In the context of the references that many members made to heart surgery we should remember, for example, that the median wait for coronary artery bypass grafts is down from 120 days in March 2000 to 73 days in March this year. There is progress, but we acknowledge the problems that remain. The 89 weeks' wait to which David McLetchie referred is totally unacceptable. Indeed, I used those words in letters to Wendy Alexander and Hugh Henry who wrote to me on that subject. Mary Scanlon emphasised the importance of waiting for the first out-patient appointment. We are certainly focusing on that now, although I say to Dorothy-Grace Elder that the median wait for the first orthopaedic appointment in north Glasgow is three months not, as she said, a year. More controversially, in the second part of his speech, David McLetchie turned his attention to the independent sector. We have nothing against the independent sector: I met the Independent Healthcare Association recently. We are supportive of the voluntary health sector and have several new initiatives for it. Many health boards also use private hospitals. The fact is that the independent health care sector has a role to play, but the size of that sector in Scotland is not remotely comparable to its size in England. There are already local links between the NHS and independent providers and we can see no reason to change that to a national relationship, because it would add no value.

Such links are a matter for local determination. The lack of information does not mean that such links do not happen. In the second half of his speech, David McLetchie veered towards the traditional Tory dogma—private sector good, public sector bad. Shona Robison, however, appeared to turn that on its head. We are quite happy to use both sectors. We are proud to be supporting the largest building programme in Scotland since the NHS was  established. That means funding some new hospitals by PPP, but it also means using traditional funding. Traditional capital expenditure has increased from £136 million when Labour came to power in 1997 to £295 million this year.

There has been a lot of activity to protect the rights of staff under PPP contracts. That is one of the main changes that we have made to the arrangements that we inherited. Margaret Smith was absolutely right when she said that we should be driven by what delivers best quality patient care. Shona Robison talked a lot about cleaning services. Earlier in the year, we said that contracting out of cleaning services should no longer be the norm. We are therefore now following the principle that I quoted from Margaret Smith. For the first time, there are national standards for decontamination, cleaning services and infection control. Those standards will be closely monitored. The new Clinical Standards Board for Scotland will establish and oversee those new standards. David McLetchie pointed out that standards differ in different parts of the country and he proposed competition as the answer to that problem. That has been tried and it has failed. We are rebuilding the NHS as a national service—partly through new bodies such as the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland and partly through the new performance assessment framework, which is starting this year. That framework will examine standards and will also consider issues such as public involvement and other issues across the board.

I might give way in a minute, but I am running out of time so I had better press on. Des McNulty and Richard Simpson referred to capacity problems. Those problems exist and Susan Deacon acknowledged that. However, they do not exist on the same scale as they do in the rest of the UK. Shona Robison used the figure of 1,000 fewer nurses—a figure that has been thrown around recently by the SNP. The fact is that there are 450 more qualified nurses now than there were when Labour came to power. We must also remember the closing of learning disability hospitals, which meant a reduction in the numbers of nurses, although they might still be working in the community. Des McNulty also referred to cancer and to  oesophageal cancer in particular. Recently, I was pleased to visit Gartnavel hospital to talk to the gastrointestinal surgeons. We clearly acknowledged, in the recently published cancer strategy, the capacity issues in relation to cancer. I am pleased to see that there have been two new radiotherapy machines installed at Gartnavel. I was also pleased to see new endoscopy equipment. The cancer strategy and many other initiatives that were announced over the summer all have extra sums of money attached to them. We all know that results matter, but results cannot be achieved without money. Members should remember that there has been an increase in funding of more than £0.5 billion from last year to this year and that there will be an increase of more than £0.5 billion from this year to next year. There have not been such sustained funding increases under any Government in recent times. Everybody should welcome that important development. The new distribution formula takes account of deprivation and rurality. I hope that that meets with the approval of George Lyon, who majored on that topic. The Executive has already established an expert group—the remote and rural areas resource initiative—to develop responses on the delivery of health care in remote and rural areas. RARARI has established a short-life working group to examine specific recruitment and retention issues that affect staff in the full range of national health service work. My time is up. I thank members for their contributions to an interesting debate. I hope that everybody will acknowledge the progress that has been made and accept that we know that there is a long way to go.

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the debate and on drawing attention to an important topic. The Scottish Executive is committed to promoting better health for all Scots as a central concern of health policy, but part of that involves recognising the income dimension that Tommy Sheridan referred to and the gender dimension that we are focusing on today. Mary Scanlon and Shona Robison reminded us that part of the problem is that men are often unwilling to seek medical advice and help, and that they tend to have infrequent contact with health professionals. For example, between the ages of 15 and 64, women consult their general practitioners on average twice as often as men do.  Those figures can be explained partially by the fact that women are more inclined to have regular contact with the health service for reasons of family planning, maternity and child health. However, there is no doubt that many men believe that health and health services are of no concern to them. Too many men think that ill health cannot happen to them, or that if it is coming, there is nothing that they can do about it. However, ill health does happen to men—several members have reminded us that life expectancy is shorter for males than females and that mortality rates are greater in males of all ages for all the major causes of death. However, men can do something about it—the choices we make about how we live can affect our health. Health is everyone's business, not just that of the national health service, health departments or Government. Men need to take responsibility for their own health and well-being to a much greater extent than hitherto. However, we must recognise that health and health inequalities are influenced by a range of factors that are not entirely within personal control. Men living in poverty have much worse health than well-off men do. Tommy Sheridan reminded us of the seven-year gap between men living in the most affluent areas and those living in the poorest areas. The fight against inequality and social injustice is also a fight for good health and better, longer lives. However, recognising the great importance of life circumstances should not lead to the fatalistic attitude to which Kenny Gibson referred. Life circumstances matter, but so does lifestyle. David Davidson asked about initiatives for men. I am sure that he will welcome the fact that the Executive has provided a grant of £180,000 over three years to the Men's Health Forum Scotland—the organisers of this week's men and health event—to help it raise awareness of some of the issues that affect men's health. We also support a range of men's health initiatives through NHS Scotland. For example, Grampian health promotions has recently supported a men's health fortnight and a men's health fair, which consisted of mini health checks and advice on healthy eating and alcohol. Highland Health Board has supported a conference aimed at identifying some of the reasons for men's reluctance to seek medical advice, an issue that the Men's Health Forum deals with well on its very informative website. Men will also benefit from a range of other health improvement measures that the Executive has put in place, such as the award-winning Scottish community diet project, which continues its work with low-income communities; extensive smoking-cessation measures and developments in  relation to alcohol and drugs misuse; and the network of healthy living centres that are now in place around the country, which target the needs of communities that face particularly challenging circumstances. There are several other initiatives, such as the physical activity task force. That connects with Tommy Sheridan's point. There is also the work on health-promoting schools, which will address Tommy Sheridan's concerns on education.

I am dealing with specific issues of men's health. I will go on to the three clinical priorities of cancer, heart disease and mental health. There are specific issues for men, but the big issues such as heart disease and cancer are big issues for men as well. Those issues have been taken on board in the Health Education Board for Scotland's remit. Several members have mentioned mental health. We recognise that men often keep their feelings to themselves. That machismo, to which Mary Scanlon referred, can exacerbate mental health problems. Statistics show that young males in particular are a high suicide risk. In 2000, there were 878 suicides, 674 of which were males. We are committed to reducing those rates, and a framework for suicide prevention will be issued shortly. The framework will build on the work done by SNAP, to which Mary Scanlon referred. We also plan a telephone helpline for people who are at risk. The recently launched cancer strategy, which provides a framework for further advance, has been widely welcomed. Moreover, as members know, there have been enormous advances in treatments in recent years. For example, testicular cancer is now curable in all but the most advanced and aggressive cases. It is therefore vital that men should check for lumps and seek medical help at the earliest opportunity. There is also the complex issue of prostate cancer, which Maureen Macmillan and Richard Simpson dealt with in detail. I refer members to what Richard Simpson said on the controversies around prostate-specific antigen screening, which is an imprecise test. As members, we often get letters and queries about it. The third clinical priority is coronary heart disease, to which Shona Robison referred, which is a major killer of both men and women. However, as Shona Robison reminded us, in many cases it kills men at a younger age. Coronary heart disease can be prevented or delayed by following a healthy lifestyle. Many of the issues that have  been mentioned already, such as smoking, poor diet and lack of physical activity, are highly relevant. I was pleased to visit over the summer the demonstration project, Have a Heart Paisley. I hope that the project is not, to use Shona Robison's words, guilty of pilotitis. The successful health demonstration projects will be rolled out across the country when they have been evaluated. It is important to identify problems at an early stage, and I look forward to visiting on Monday the Lanarkshire body check bus, which offers blood pressure, cholesterol and other tests. My time is up. I repeat that this has been an important debate and once again I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing it. I welcome the opportunity to support initiatives such as men and health week, and I wish the Men's Health Forum Scotland every success as it continues to raise awareness and encourage men to access health services.

I congratulate Annabel Goldie on obtaining today's debate, which will help to raise the profile of endometriosis in Scotland. The timing of the debate is appropriate, as an awareness day for endometriosis takes place next week, on 4 July. As a man, I will never suffer directly from the condition, but I have read about the symptoms and can imagine how debilitating and distressing it must be. Perhaps the most distressing thing is the fact that endometriosis can cause fertility problems. It is estimated that between 3 and 10 per cent of women between 15 and 45 have endometriosis. Endometriosis accounts for 25 to 30 per cent of women who have fertility problems. As Elaine Smith reminded us, endometriosis is the second most common gynaecological condition in this country. Various members made important points about the need for the greater awareness to which the motion refers. Greater awareness of the condition is needed among the general public and I hope that today's debate has helped. I will certainly consider Elaine Smith's suggestions about an information campaign. We are developing an information strategy for patients in the health service, which I am sure will take on board the points that have been made today. Awareness among general practitioners is also required, which Annabel Goldie referred to when she suggested that guidelines be provided. I am pleased that the Royal College of Obstetricians  and Gynaecologists has produced UK-wide guidelines on the investigation and management of endometriosis. The guidelines have brought together the latest knowledge and best practice and are based on clinical evidence and treatment of endometriosis. The guidelines also examine the options for treatment in the light of symptoms and associated infertility. The guidelines will, if necessary, be reviewed and updated in 2004. The guidelines have been distributed to all the fellows and members of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and been made available to the Royal College of General Practitioners. I hope that the guidelines will lead to earlier and better diagnosis of endometriosis, although, having spoken to GPs, I know that they do not always receive the guidelines that are sent to them. One GP suggested that local health care co-operatives should look at the endometriosis guidelines—and, indeed, other protocols that they receive—as part of clinical governance. We will certainly try to take that work forward as well. The NHS in Scotland provides treatment that can help reduce or eliminate the symptoms, such as hormone treatment, which has been referred to, and laparoscopic or conventional surgery. Hysterectomy is a last resort. The Scottish Executive is aware that service provision could be improved. All members referred to problems with infertility treatment, which we recognise has, in the past, been variable. Last year, the report of the expert advisory group on infertility services in Scotland was published. It set out how the management of delivery of infertility services could provide equity of access to services and treatment and so end the postcode lottery for treatment across Scotland. NHS boards and trusts are now working on how best to implement the report's recommendations. Officials in the health department have recently written to boards and trusts to ask for information on what progress has been made to date. The need for further research has also been mentioned. Two endometriosis research projects in Scotland are currently being funded through research funds that have been made available through the chief scientist office. The projects, at Aberdeen University, are looking at a particular form of treatment for the conditions and the most suitable form of anaesthesia for that treatment. The motion also refers to the need for greater co-operation. Because of its unfortunate tendency to recur, endometriosis might be said to come into the category of chronic enduring conditions. In "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change", the Executive promised that we and the NHS would work closely with patient support groups to ensure that the needs of those with chronic enduring conditions are met. As the plan  states: "These groups possess a powerful and valuable insight into the spectrum of needs of people suffering from enduring health problems. We want to ensure that these support groups are closely involved in service design and delivery at both a local and national level." One of those groups is clearly the National Endometriosis Society. I pay tribute to the work of that society. It is based in England but it could, of course, apply to the Scottish Executive health department for funding for its work here in Scotland. I hope that we have learned more about endometriosis today. I commend Annabel Goldie for drawing this little-understood condition to our attention. As she said—and this is a fitting way to end our debate—it is a tribute to the accessibility, accountability and responsiveness of the Scottish Parliament that this debate has been held here today.  However, we will not rest content with having discussed the issue. I undertake to work in the ways that I have indicated. I thank all members who have contributed today and helped to draw more attention to this very serious condition. It certainly needs our attention.

The Scottish Advisory Committee on Alcohol Misuse, which I chair, is closely involved in advising the Executive on the development of a national plan for action on alcohol misuse. Our wide-ranging consultation exercise on the action that is required runs to the end of June.

Richard Simpson raises an important issue. Young people are one of the key groups on which our action plan will focus, although they are by no means the only such group. We have commissioned a piece of work from Save the Children to establish young people's views on alcohol. That will help us to decide how we can engage most effectively with young people on that important matter. The action plan will focus on both prevention and education, and on developing a framework for treatment and support services.

As I indicated in my answer to Dr Simpson's question, the action plan will lead to the creation of a framework for support and treatment services. It will involve an audit of existing services, because a great deal of money is already spent on dealing with alcohol misuse. We will, therefore, address the issue that Christine Grahame raises. I remind Christine Grahame that, on the ground, many of the drug action teams work on drugs and alcohol together.

We want to see how all the bits of work add up. I am sure that the Health Technology Board will want to examine the action plan on alcohol misuse, just as the Scottish Advisory Committee on Alcohol Misuse will pay heed to what the Health Technology Board says on such matters.

I congratulate Michael Matheson on securing a debate on this important subject. Lung disease represents one of the major elements of the care that is provided by the NHS in Scotland. For example, worsening of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease—COPD—as we now call what used to be known as chronic bronchitis and emphysema, is the commonest cause of admission to hospital. A quarter of all medical emergency admissions are because of respiratory diseases. The Executive greatly appreciates the work of the British Lung Foundation in Scotland. The foundation's 16 Breathe Easy groups across Scotland do excellent work in offering information and support to those who suffer from lung conditions, as well as to their families, friends and carers. They also help health professionals. The groups' involvement with health boards has encouraged initiatives such as the introduction of respiratory nurses in GPs' surgeries. The motion mentions in particular lung cancer in women, as did Richard Simpson. That is an issue of serious concern. About 1,900 cases in women are diagnosed every year. Unfortunately, the incidence of lung cancer in women looks set to go on rising over the next 10 years. "Scotland's Cancer Strategy", which is due to be published soon, sets out the Executive's key messages for improving cancer prevention and for the detection and treatment of cancer. Lung cancer will feature prominently in that national strategy. The Clinical Standards Board is developing standards for lung cancer, based on the relevant guideline produced by the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network—SIGN.  The gloomy outlook for women and lung cancer is due in large measure to smoking patterns. Smoking is the greatest single cause of preventable disease and ill health in Scotland. It is responsible for about 84 per cent of lung cancer deaths; in some areas, the figure is as high as 90 per cent. We shall do everything we can to reduce the toll smoking takes on the nation's health. That applies to all respiratory diseases and lung conditions, not just lung cancer. The Executive is already introducing a comprehensive range of measures to reduce smoking levels. I assure Richard Simpson that we have made the strongest possible representations to the UK Government about introducing the tobacco advertising ban that the Health and Community Care Committee recently agreed could be imposed most effectively on a UK basis. Michael Matheson referred specifically to CHART. I tell him that £13 million has already been made available for linear accelerators. That will mean that, in time, treatments such as CHART can be planned for. More will be said about that in the cancer strategy. The motion also refers to research. The Executive fully appreciates the valuable contribution that charitable bodies such as the British Lung Foundation make towards funding research. I am happy to endorse what the motion says on that score. The chief scientist's office, which is the body within the health department that is responsible for sponsoring research, has funded 36 research projects related to lung disease. Its total investment in that work is £3.5 million. There is some good news in relation to specific lung diseases. On flu and pneumonia, we are encouraging vaccination for older people, with considerable success. On cystic fibrosis, the high quality of services that are provided for both children and adults has been recognised by the Cystic Fibrosis Trust. On chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, clinicians in Scotland have promoted a successful initiative, called the acute respiratory assessment services, which helps people with severe exacerbations of COPD. Michael Matheson, who referred to specialist nurses, will note that that initiative is a nurse-led, hospital-at-home service. Last year, it helped to avoid 120 hospital admissions to Edinburgh royal infirmary alone. Cathy Peattie, David Davidson, Dennis Canavan and Richard Simpson referred to asthma. It is encouraging that the use of anti-asthma drugs has been rising. At least some of the credit for that must lie with the SIGN guideline on the management of asthma in primary care. All the guidelines are produced nationally, but they are intended to be implemented locally. I agree that we want uniformly high services across the  country. "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change" has as its fundamental aim the delivery of health service that is truly national, with consistent standards across the country as a whole. The SIGN guidelines are an integral part of that process. The Clinical Standards Board for Scotland, too, can help. If the clinicians who are responsible for the management of lung disease could produce a set of core standards, which should apply no matter where in the country the treatment is delivered, the Clinical Standards Board could consider them. The board would want to ensure that the standards were in line with its ethos, which is about fully involving the public in the process. I remind members that the Clinical Standards Board is already working on cancer treatments. David Davidson asked about guidance on the management of asthma in schools. The intention is that such guidance should be issued by the middle of August, in time for the start of the autumn term. It will have recommendations on raising the awareness of school staff about common conditions such as asthma. It will also provide guidance on more specific training for school staff who volunteer to administer medication to children, including children with asthma.

I bow to Cathy Peattie's superior knowledge in that regard. For several years, the health department has given grant support to the National Asthma Campaign Scotland towards its work in supporting and promoting the interests of people with asthma. In the current financial year, the campaign has been awarded a grant of £57,000. On chronic diseases generally, "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change" commits the Executive to work with NHS Scotland and voluntary bodies, such as the British Lung Foundation, to improve services for people with chronic conditions such as asthma and bronchitis. That will provide an opportunity to examine the assertion in the motion that services are provided inconsistently across Scotland. I understand why there is a wish to raise the profile of those conditions through the development of a national strategy. I agree that we must all work together to tackle lung disease and reduce the suffering and  misery that such conditions cause to all too many people in Scotland. As the action and investment outlined earlier testify, the Executive is committed to making a difference, but it is not a question just of money and organisation—it is also about the choices that people make about how to live their lives and the support that we give them in making those choices.  Meeting closed at 17:40.

I congratulate Donald Gorrie on securing today's debate, which follows national carers week. I join him in congratulating the young carers who, at  their recent conference in Linlithgow, formed a national young carers forum. As more than one member has said, estimates show that there are more than 6,000 young carers in Scotland—that is, carers under the age of 18. The wide range of roles embraced by the word "carer" and the fact that some young carers and the people for whom they care are not known to the statutory agencies mean that the figure is likely to be much higher, as Rhoda Grant confirmed. Many young carers find that helping to care for an ill or disabled parent, or other relative, is rewarding. However, many are likely to find themselves spending a large part of their time providing care or taking on full responsibility for doing so. Like Donald Gorrie, I pay tribute to the huge contribution that they make to family life. Young carers, like all carers, need recognition of, and support for, the invaluable work that they do. At a reception hosted in Edinburgh Castle by the First Minister and Mrs McLeish to mark the start of national carers week, the Scottish Executive paid tribute to the remarkable contribution made by Scotland's carers, including our young carers. I was pleased to meet some young carers at that event, two of whom specifically lobbied me in support of Donald Gorrie's motion. We need to ensure that we listen to carers if we are to fulfil our commitment to support them as a central and vital component of a modern health and social care service that is fit for the 21 st century. Mary Scanlon and others demanded Executive action and a report. Our commitment to carers is evidenced by our carers strategy and the changes that we have introduced as a result, which are already beginning to benefit young carers. Young carers support groups are now expanding as a direct result of the £10 million a year for carers services that is available to local authorities under the strategy. As I indicated in yesterday's debate, we are monitoring the use of that money and the extent to which carers have been involved locally in decisions on its use. Young carers will also benefit from the additional resources that are being made available from this April to authorities to provide an extra 22,000 weeks of short-break services across Scotland each year by 2003-04. A total of £5 million is being put in this year; £6 million will be put in next year; and £11 million will be put in by year 3. Social inclusion partnership resources are also helping young carers. For example, £210,000 is being spent in Dundee on a project to identify and support young carers and £500,000 has been given to the voluntary sector for carer-related projects, including £37,000 to the Princess Royal Trust for Carers to help to develop standards for young carers projects and to help with other  purposes. We plan to do more. Mary Scanlon asked about legislation. We are consulting on proposals for legislative changes to help carers, including the proposal to give young carers for the first time the legal right to a direct assessment of their support needs. Rhoda Grant commended that and, of course, young carers support projects have been consulted about it.

The consultation has certainly been very inclusive already. I am sure that, during the stages of the long-term care bill, the Health and Community Care Committee will ensure that that request is complied with. Mary Scanlon also asked about research. We will shortly be commissioning research to establish how young carers' needs are being addressed across the key agencies of health, education and social work—the very agencies that Donald Gorrie mentions in his motion. Through that research, we hope to identify best-practice examples of how best to meet needs. Thereafter, through guidance, we shall promote those examples across the various agencies. That will result in more effective partnership working, quicker decision making and better support packages for young carers. Donald Gorrie referred to teachers. Teacher education institutions have been asked to include the needs of young carers in initial teacher training. The research that I referred to will help to assess its impact. The carers strategy focuses on services, legislation, monitoring, standards and information. I have covered, albeit briefly, the first four. The last aspect—information—is important for all carers, but perhaps particularly so for young carers. To help to raise awareness of young carers issues in schools and to help young carers—hidden or otherwise—we have made young carer information packs available to all primary and secondary schools in Scotland. I am pleased to say that we are also helping to fund, through the Princess Royal Trust for Carers, the creation of a young carers website and the production of a young carers practice guide, which will set out best practice on how support projects for young  carers can be delivered efficiently and effectively. Of course, there is more to do. Several members have referred to the need to address the issue of hidden carers. We are determined to do that. In fact, that is a major subject of the consultation paper that has been drawn up by the carers legislation working group. Richard Simpson made an important and interesting suggestion about advocacy. We are driving that agenda forward and have asked health boards and their partners to have integrated advocacy services in place by the end of the year. The intention is that there should be seamless services across health and community care. In conclusion, it is vital that the many young carers who have made a conscious decision to help vulnerable family members should be supported and protected from the stresses that caring can bring. At the same time, we need to protect those young carers who may not be caring through choice and we need to safeguard young carers against having to provide inappropriate levels and types of care. In discussions on those complexities, the voices of young carers need to be heard. That is why we helped to fund the young carers conference, which led to the establishment of the national young carers forum. I welcome the concept of the forum as an avenue for discussing the wide range of issues that affect the lives of young carers and I look forward to the forum's contribution to improving those lives. I end by welcoming once again the two debates that we have had on important carers issues this week and by assuring members of our determination to make further progress on those issues for the benefit of all concerned.  Meeting closed at 17:42.

Officials representing the Scottish Executive, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and care home providers have met and had a useful discussion. They are to meet again. I hope that those discussions will help to resolve the current problems.

The issue is complex. Part of the complexity is that the situation that Elaine Thomson described for Aberdeen is different in several respects from the situation that may obtain elsewhere. We are doing a great deal of work on the issue in the care development group and through the series of meetings that the Executive is convening on the issue. I will say two things. First, we are committed to finding a long-term solution to the important issue. Secondly, I reassure care home owners that there will be a continuing need for a large number of  residential and nursing places, notwithstanding the build-up of services in the community.

Clearly, one issue is the money that the Executive provides to local authorities. We continue to give thought to that. The other issue that David Davidson and his Conservative colleagues often raise is the amount of that money that the local authorities devote to services for older people. Both of those issues will be part of the discussions in the coming period.

We are certainly determined that nobody will find themselves homeless. We are working hard to avoid that. It would be preferable if the care home owners did not talk in those terms. I met the Church of Scotland board of social responsibility in April. I am well aware of the difficulties that the church is encountering. The church is also at the table, with the voluntary sector as a whole, in the important discussions that we continue to hold. We are determined to find a solution in the very near future.

I congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing this important debate. I welcome the opportunity to acknowledge the immense contribution that carers make to society and to making care in the community a reality. At the beginning of her speech Karen Whitefield mentioned various initiatives such as the strategy on carers; the £10 million that has been given to local authorities, which we are monitoring; and the £0.5 million for voluntary sector initiatives to support carers. She also referred to the current consultation on new legislation for carers and Janis Hughes spoke about that in detail in her speech. I am glad that carers were centrally involved in the formulation of that consultation document. I look forward to reading the responses in the near future. Margaret and Fergus Ewing referred to the need for extra respite care. I remind members of the extra 22,000 weeks that were announced in October, for which a sum building to £11 million in year 3 has been allocated. Mary Scanlon asked about the NHS helpline. I can assure her that it was extended in April 2000 to provide information for carers on local and national sources of advice and support. Donald Gorrie also referred to information and made an interesting suggestion on a possible role for the CABx. I am not aware of such a role in relation to carers but I know that, in Mr Gorrie's former Westminster constituency, there are welfare rights people in certain general practitioners' surgeries. I would like to acknowledge Karen Whitefield's role in helping to bring about an initiative in Airdrie involving the CAB and Macmillan nurses. The main issue that I would like to refer to is the report entitled "You Can Take Him Home Now". Karen Whitefield gave a very balanced account of that report. It is clear from the survey that some carers feel that they and their relatives are not receiving a level of service that meets their needs and that improvements could be made in hospital discharge arrangements. In particular, the survey suggests that many carers feel that their relatives were discharged before they were ready and had to be readmitted shortly thereafter. Christine Grahame highlighted that point. The reasons for readmission are many and complex. Inevitably, there will be occasions when readmission will happen, especially when the patients concerned are older people. However, what the NHS must do is to work with social care agencies to minimise inappropriate discharge and  provide optimum home care as necessary. I know that much work has already been carried out by the health and social care sectors to improve the experience for patients and carers. To take last winter as an example, disruption to successful service delivery and to patients was minimised by the implementation of robust planning arrangements. The spread of rapid response teams across Scotland enabled people who would previously have been admitted to hospital to be cared for in their homes. The rapid response team approach also provided support after discharge for patients in their homes for an agreed period to assist in their recovery and allow them to regain their confidence. These teams of professionals, working together with patients and carers, provide assessment, intensive rehabilitation and home care packages; they facilitate the smoothest and timeliest possible discharge; and they ensure patient and carer choice. The Executive is committed to the expansion of rapid response teams throughout Scotland. Of course the issues for carers and patients are wider than discharge arrangements. Properly planned continuing support is paramount. Joint planning based on individually assessed needs is the only safe and sensible way to proceed and is the best way to arrive at a successful and sustainable transfer from hospital care. That is why "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change" unequivocally underlines our commitment to improving and integrating planning and decision making so that patient care, in and out of hospital, is organised and provided on a seamless basis. There will be a step change in that process from next April, with health boards and local authorities coming together to jointly resource and manage all services for older people. I am sure that Mary Scanlon will welcome that. Clearly, money is an important issue. We have invested £24 million this year and next, which will rise to £48 million in 2003-04, to develop key services such as rapid response teams, more intensive home care services, more short breaks and the shopping and domiciliary maintenance services to which Fergus Ewing referred. Those measures will make a difference, as will the totally free home care for four weeks following discharge, which we announced recently and for which £2.4 million has been allocated. Additional work is being taken forward by the chief medical officer's group on the health care of older people. It is looking at all stages of the older patient's journey of care through the NHS, from home into hospital, intensive care if necessary, discharge and back home again. The objective is to identify problem areas and seek solutions, so that older people can have the smoothest possible  journey through the system. At its meeting next month, the group will be examining delayed discharges. The Carers National Association Scotland is represented on the expert group, and has already provided it with a copy of the supplementary report for Scotland. I am sure that the group will find that to be a helpful contribution, as will the emerging delayed discharge learning network. Carers undoubtedly help to hold the complex web of health and social care together. It is fitting that this week we have two debates on care. I look forward to the debate tomorrow on young carers, and I concur with Karen Whitefield's remarks on it. As an acknowledgement of the importance that we attach to carers, the First Minister held a reception last week at Edinburgh Castle, at which I was pleased to meet a large number of carers. I was also privileged to meet a number of remarkable carers last night at Douglas House in Edinburgh, which is a residential and respite facility for children with severe disabilities. I will consider the policy recommendations in the report "You Can Take Him Home Now" to ensure that the concerns of carers are comprehensively considered as we develop and implement our policy initiatives.  Meeting closed at 17:22.

Oral cancer, including awareness raising among the public and health care professionals, is included in the Scottish Executive's forthcoming cancer strategy, which we expect to publish within the next few weeks.

I am aware of both the groups that Ian Jenkins mentions. I pay tribute to their work and I am certainly prepared to meet them. Oral cancer will be comprehensively covered in the cancer strategy, but action has already been taken on the prevention work that he refers to. A comprehensive training and information pack was widely distributed last year to dental and general practitioners. Screening by dental practitioners in the course of their normal work is being developed, in line with the action plan for dental services.

Bids for research are taken by the chief scientist's office and I will write to Elaine Smith to advise whether any such projects are being funded. There are clear risk factors for oral cancer, but those factors do not explain everyone's cancer. As with many cancers, the picture is complicated.

As I indicated in my answer to Ian Jenkins, the work of dentists is crucial in detecting oral cancer. I was pleased that Paul Martin recently brought a number of dental practitioners from Glasgow to meet me at the Scottish Executive. The dental hospital was one of the issues that we discussed on that occasion.

The regulation of international trade is a reserved matter. However, the Executive continues to be in regular contact with the Department of Trade and Industry on trade issues, including WTO matters, and how those may impact on our responsibilities. Neither the UK Government nor the Executive expects any changes that would have an impact on how public services such as health are run, as a result of the negotiations relating to the general agreement on trade in services.

I note John McAllion's comment and the reference to the European commissioner, but neither the WTO secretariat nor any Government that I know of takes that view of the general agreement on trade in services. Public services, such as health and education, are excluded from GATS . Indeed, any service that is supplied in the exercise of government authority is excluded.

Alex Neil will be pleased to know that Susan Deacon attended such a meeting last week. In line with my answer, I am not aware that this is an issue that requires to be raised, but if the particular individual who made the remark is there, it can be taken up with him. However, the position is absolutely clear. As I indicated, the WTO secretariat and every Government that I know of takes the same view of GATS.

I congratulate Brian Adam on securing this debate which, in the wording of the motion, brings together several topics, including mental health week, suicide, the Millan report and prescription charges. I begin by assuring Adam Ingram that mental health is one of our three priorities, and we are proceeding with a wide-ranging agenda on it, one part of which, the Millan report, has been referred to on more than one occasion. I read the report right through earlier this year, and the only reference that I can recall to the subject under debate today was in relation to those who are compelled to accept treatment. The Millan committee felt that medication ought to be free for those people. I cannot give an Executive response to that report, because currently we are considering it with a wide-ranging reference group, which includes users and carers. That group is helping us to work through some of the issues. There will be a statement on that later this year, and a new mental health bill will follow next year. Brian Adam tried to connect prescription charges with mental health, and I understand and share his concerns, but the reality is that many people with various physical illnesses might well put forward exactly the same case, which is the point that David Davidson made. That highlights the fact that this is a complex issue, which has to be considered carefully. Change would be a major exercise, and it should be remembered that we are in the middle of a much wider programme of change and development in the health service and community care. In view of that, we do not regard reviewing the prescription charge arrangements as a priority at present. I know that some groups have raised the issue of prescription charges, but in my contacts with mental health groups, and user groups in particular, it has not been at the top of their agendas. We also found that to be the case in our consultations on the health plan last year. While we acknowledge the concerns, we have to retain a sense of perspective on prescription charges. For example, the 1.6 per cent increase in prescription charges this year was the lowest for 20 years. We should remember that the charges bring in £45 million for the national health service. People have to reflect on the hole that would be made in NHS finances if there were free prescription charges for chronic mental illness, although I accept that they  have not been arguing for that particular position today.

That is the case for mental health exclusively, but I make the point that many people would not regard it as fair to except only one category. That is the point that David Davidson made. When medical exemptions were introduced in 1968, only 42 per cent of national health service prescriptions were dispensed free, whereas that figure now is 90 per cent. We can reflect that the majority of people receive free prescriptions. A pre-payment certificate is available to cover all prescriptions for four months for £31, so I am unsure why the constituent to whom Adam Ingram referred should pay £31 for two months' prescriptions. The issue was connected to the serious problem of suicide. It was unfortunate that it was perhaps implied that the high rate of suicide was somehow connected to prescription charges. No evidence for that exists. We should also reflect that not everyone who commits suicide has recent experience of mental health services. The confidential inquiry into suicide and homicide that was produced earlier this year showed that 25 per cent of those who had committed suicide had had recent contact with mental health services. We take suicide seriously. I read the most recent annual report of the Mental Welfare Commission, which highlights the problem. The Executive is committed to developing a framework for the prevention of suicide and self-harm as an urgent priority. I have been pleased to speak at two major seminars on the topic in the past few months. The most recent took place in Dunblane a couple of weeks ago, when we considered the draft framework. I thank the Scottish Development Centre for Mental Health for undertaking much of the work on that. The draft framework is being revised in the light of comments and we will issue the framework for consultation shortly. Work on preventing suicide encompasses the promotion of mental health and well-being and the development of services. Those are the two substantial parts of our mental health agenda. The motion refers to mental health week. Every April, the World Health Organisation holds a mental health day. Scottish mental health week takes place every October and is run by the Health  Education Board for Scotland. It seeks to raise awareness about mental health and helps to tackle the fear and stigma that are often associated with it. Concerted action to deal with stigma is also a major priority for us. I know that the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on mental health will welcome that, which is part of our wider work on promoting mental health and well-being. From the health improvement fund, £4 million has been set aside for that work in the next three years. Detailed announcements will be made about what will be done. I must refer to the service agenda, which complements the promotion agenda, as our health plan said in December. We are accelerating the implementation of the framework for mental health services and have given an extra £2 million this year for projects that are directly linked to it. About a year ago, we established the mental health and well-being support group, which will ensure that the framework is implemented throughout Scotland. We also said in the health plan that "severe and enduring mental illness is only the tip of the iceberg". We seek to extend mental health services in primary care for the wider range of people who can suffer mental health problems at some point. At least one speaker mentioned employment. Developing employment opportunities for those with mental health problems is critical, and the new futures fund helps in that. Two weeks ago, I was pleased to open a project in Aberdeen that is run by Rehab Scotland. It was a superb demonstration of good practice in working on employment issues with those with mental health problems. My time is up and I know that Brian Adam will not be pleased with what I said about prescription charges. However, I hope that he will note the points that I made about them and that he will welcome the broader mental health initiatives that we seek to drive forward.  Meeting closed at 16:15.

Shona Robison will be pleased that I will get the last word on this matter, although she may not be pleased if I get it on certain other issues. I wish to thank everybody who has been involved in the bill over the past five months, first on the Parliament side. That involves a great many people. I think that five committees were involved with the bill at stage 1, which illustrates the superb scrutiny that we give to legislation at that stage. That is a unique feature of this Parliament. I cannot name all those committees, but I thank in particular the Health and Community Care Committee, which did such an enormous amount of work on the bill at each stage. I thank the clerks to that committee and the other parliamentary officers who helped with the bill. I am not sure whether I am supposed to do this, but, secondly, I would like to thank my officials. A regulation of care team has been working on the bill for several months, and it should be congratulated for the very open way in which it has conducted its work. That leads to the third group of people to thank, which is the large number of members of the general public who have participated in the work carried out on the bill. The enormous strides that we have made in engaging with the public over the past two years is sometimes not appreciated. That engagement was always one of the ideals to be mentioned in connection with the Parliament, and we have seen that in action with this bill. The working groups that considered care standards involved representatives of the stakeholders and of the users of services. If the public becomes aware of that procedure, they will realise that the Parliament is moving towards a new way of doing business, particularly in relation to legislation. I suppose that I am more aware of that, as I am able to compare our procedures with those of Westminster. In passing, I note that John McAllion was pleased because this was the first time than an amendment to a bill lodged by him had been accepted, after 14 years at Westminster.  I accepted an amendment of his that changed "may" to "shall"—[ Laughter. ] He said that that never happens at Westminster. Mary Scanlon referred to the importance of the regulations that will follow in the wake of the bill. We agreed to an amendment this morning that will ensure full consultation on those regulations. I am sure that the Health and Community Care Committee is looking forward to them. I will mention one particular set of regulations on local advisory committees, which is an issue that was not aired this morning. Margaret Jamieson lodged an amendment about local advisory committees at stage 2, in response to which I indicated that the Executive was minded to set up a national advisory forum. I gave certain details about that proposal to the Health and Community Care Committee recently, but it has yet to get into the public domain. I hope that all those in Scotland who were concerned about that issue will recognise that we intend to set up a national advisory forum by regulation. That forum will be an open body that will have the power to set up sub-committees, which could well be like the local sub-committees that many members support. When we implement the bill's provisions, we intend to continue the inclusive process through which the bill arrived at this stage. Without being too self-congratulatory, we should be pleased with the procedures adopted for the bill. In the midst of the bad publicity that sometimes attaches to the Parliament, we can be proud of what we have done. I thank everyone, and I hope that the bill will be passed.

Individual health boards and national health service trusts should co-operate to plan and provide services for the treatment of sleep apnoea.

I am aware of the petition and I recently spoke to the person who submitted it to the Parliament. There is a problem in Edinburgh, due to the increasing demand for what I, as a constituency MSP in Edinburgh, know is a valuable service. I am pleased that the trust is working with Lothian Health and other health boards in Scotland on a review. That review will report in June and I hope that there will be progress in the very near future. A Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline will also be issued soon, which will give guidance on both the diagnosis and the treatment of sleep apnoea.

"An Action Plan for Dental Services in Scotland", which was published on 20 August last year, sets out a number of initiatives aimed at improving the dental health of the people of Scotland.

I welcome the figures and the fact that Ayrshire and Arran Health Board is developing an oral health strategy. I am unable to comment in detail on Irene Oldfather's second point, in view of the fact that the case mentioned in the papers today is before the General Dental Council. However, I assure her that patient protection is paramount for the Executive. She can be assured that we are taking action in general terms in the area to which she refers.

Several points have been raised by members who have great expertise and experience in the area of child care—a great strength of the Scottish Parliament is that we have so many members who, in their former lives, have been heavily involved in the areas that we discuss. That certainly applies to Cathy Jamieson, Tricia Marwick and Scott Barrie as far as this group of  amendments is concerned. I welcome the fact that Cathy Jamieson was pleased with the amendments, as I know that she has taken an interest in child care for a long time. She said that the amendments would improve the quality of aftercare services, which is their fundamental objective. Tricia Marwick, who has housing experience, welcomed the extra duty on local authorities. She tried to tempt me back into my former housing portfolio, but I do not think that Margaret Curran would appreciate it if I were to take up that challenge. I will move on to Mary Scanlon's point. I think she was referring to whether foster carers should be registered with the Scottish social services council. There are complex arguments around that issue, given its interrelationship with reserved areas, such as the status of employees. I believe that is why the registration of foster carers has not been taken up. Mary Scanlon will understand that the Executive is able to consider those matters and the council will be involved in discussing them in future. Scott Barrie queried subsection (4) of the new section on aftercare. I assure him that its use would be entirely exceptional. It is clear that the fundamental thrust of this group of amendments is to ensure consistency throughout Scotland.  Amendment 54 agreed to.

This group of Executive amendments proposes changes to existing legislation to take account of the changes made by the bill. Amendment 63 is a simple, technical amendment to update the definition of secure accommodation in the Children (Scotland) Act 1995, to take into account the changes that will be made by the bill. Amendment 64 amends part of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. The amendment is being made to take into account changes to the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984, which are made by schedule 3. It is a simple consequential amendment that is required in the light of previous amendments. Under section 31(1), the council must satisfy itself that an applicant for registration "is of good character". Similarly, under section 7(2), the commission can request information to determine whether a care service should be registered. The purpose of those checks is to ensure the protection of children and of some of the most vulnerable adults in our society. For that reason, it may be appropriate to require enhanced criminal record certificates for individuals who apply for registration or employment in a care service at the time of registration. Amendment 79 amends section 115(5) of the Police Act 1997, which deals with enhanced criminal record certificates. The amendment will enable the council to require all social services workers who apply for registration to obtain an enhanced certificate. Likewise, the commission will be able to require anyone who is employed in a care service at the time of registration to obtain a certificate. Amendment 79 also removes a reference to registration under section 71 of the Children Act 1989. That section is already repealed under schedule 4. Amendment 65 corrects the erroneous numbering of an insertion to the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 that was made by the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 in connection with an intervention order. Amendment 66 inserts a definition of an intervention order under the Adults with Incapacity  (Scotland) Act 2000 into the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. Finally—members will be pleased to hear that word—amendment 67 repeals paragraph 61(b) of part II of schedule 1 to the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1992. The amendment removes the reference to the tribunal system from the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 to take into account the new system that the bill will create. I move amendment 63.  Amendment 63 agreed to.  [Amendments 64, 79, 65 and 66 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.]

The commission will not solve all the problems of community care and neither will the care development group. The group was set up to address specifically the care of older people, which is not to say that we do not care about other people who require care in the community. However, the group's broad remit is circumscribed. I could pass on a copy of that remit to Mary Scanlon if that would be helpful. It was predictable but wrong of Shona Robison to pick up a suggestion that the series of meetings that I mentioned is timed to coincide with the general election. Community care groups can verify that they have been planning to meet the Executive for several weeks and that the meetings have absolutely nothing to do with the general election. Shona Robison and Mary Scanlon both referred to a desire for transparency. I completely support the principle of transparency, as does COSLA, as Richard Simpson reminded us. Much activity has been set in motion over a period of time to address the issues that have arisen in the debate. In the vote that is about to take place, members should remember what Margaret Smith said—that supporting section 24A would deflect and divert the commission from its main function. Christine Grahame said that the provisions in section 24A are an appropriate role for the commission. However, as I said in my opening speech, the  commission will have an important role in contributing to thinking about the funding of care in general, and will be able to make general observations to ministers and the Parliament. That will fulfil the recommendation of the Royal Commission on Long Term Care for the setting up of a national care commission. That is one thing, but commenting on individual contracts is another—in terms of the time that it would take and the general principle, which John McAllion highlighted. I thank John McAllion for pointing out the inappropriate role that is proposed in section 24A for non-departmental public bodies. I end by agreeing with John McAllion that we have a duty to address these issues nationally. I accept that duty and commit myself and other ministers to working to ensure that we find long-term, sustainable solutions to the issues that have been debated in the past half hour.

Amendment 52 is the result of discussions at stage 2, during which Richard Simpson and Scott Barrie lodged amendments seeking to place general principles in the bill. I indicated that I was sympathetic to the idea of making explicit reference in the bill to the principles that underpin it and undertook to bring back an amendment for discussion today. The bill will introduce a new system of care regulation that we intend should have the user of services at its centre. That new system is intended to improve the quality of care services and offer  better protection to vulnerable people who use the services. The amendment that I propose will ensure that, in carrying out their functions and exercising their powers under the act, ministers, the commission and the council will have to act in accordance with principles which put the user of services at the centre. The principles are that the safety and welfare of people using care services should be protected and enhanced, that their independence should be promoted and that diversity in the provision of care services should be promoted so that users are given choice. The amendment makes clear the principles behind the policy that is being implemented by the bill. I ask Parliament to accept it. I move amendment 52.

Shona Robison asked about the position of the statement of general principles in the bill. People will not worry about its position, but I point out that the reason for its being placed where it is is so that it comes after the sections that describe the commission and the council. There would be drafting problems if we referred to those bodies without having defined them. That is the practical reason—I am sure that Shona Robison is less concerned about that matter than some other people are. I thank Richard Simpson for his words about consultation. As I said earlier, we have inserted references to consultation throughout the bill, which is a more effective way of ensuring that there is adequate consultation than inserting a general principle about consultation. If we had done both, there might have been some tension. I think that we chose the correct option. Donald Gorrie talked about financial independence. He is specialising in asking me difficult questions this morning. However, as I am neither Gordon Jackson nor a clever lawyer—which might be the same thing—I do not totally understand the point that he is making. Perhaps we can have one of those civilised conversations that he referred to earlier, unless he wishes to press me on the matter at this point.  Amendment 52 agreed to.

Section 50 of the Children Act 1975 enables a local authority to make maintenance payments to a person other than a parent who is looking after a child. At stage 2, I accepted the principle behind the amendment that Margaret Jamieson helpfully lodged, which sought to raise the child's age limit for qualifying for such payments from 16 years to 18 years. That would bring the age limit into line with that for fostering allowances. Amendment 54 fulfils that agreement.  I was pleased to lodge amendment 55, which concerns the giving of advice and assistance to vulnerable young people who have been in local authority care. The provisions will amend the current provisions in section 29 of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995, which deal with local authority provision of aftercare for children who are formally looked after by local authorities. Local authorities will be required to make an assessment of the needs of young people who qualify and establish a procedure for considering representations about the work that they do in that regard. Scottish ministers will be empowered to make regulations specifying to whom assistance may be given and how assistance is to be provided. That will help ensure consistency throughout Scotland.  Most members will be familiar with the statistics from our recent debate on looked-after children. I make no apology for restating them, so that we are reminded of the problems that young people can face: up to 75 per cent of care leavers leave school with no educational qualifications; up to 50 per cent of them may be unemployed; and about 20 per cent of them are likely to experience some form of homelessness within two years of leaving care. We are determined to make improvements to ensure that those young people have a better chance of making a successful transition to independent living. One of the problems with the current arrangements is that of young care leavers falling through the gap between local authority support and the Department of Social Security system. In 1999, we consulted on proposals to transfer to local authorities the resources that the DSS currently spends on certain benefit entitlements for 16-year-old and 17-year-old care leavers. Our aim is to create a one-stop shop, thereby strengthening the support that is available. There was general support for the broad principle and we decided to press ahead with the proposals, but only after carefully considering the details. They are being examined by a working group, with representatives from local authorities and other key players, such as Glasgow's Big Step social inclusion partnership and the Scottish Throughcare and Aftercare Forum. We expect their report later this year. A clear message from the consultation, which I understand the working group has also picked up, is the need for consistency in the giving of advice and assistance. The regulatory powers in the amendments will allow us to set an overall framework, which should help to ensure that there is no difference in the level of advice and assistance that is given to any young care leaver,  wherever they might live. Amendment 59 adds to the regulations and orders that must be approved by the Parliament before they can become statutory instruments. That reflects views expressed by the Subordinate Legislation Committee that certain key subordinate legislation powers should be subject to the approval of the Parliament. I am happy to accord with the committee's view. Amendments 68 and 69 amend the long title, to accommodate the changes that we propose to maintenance payments for children and aftercare of care leavers. The amendments in this group will all help to reinforce the bill. I move amendment 54.

This has been an interesting debate, with several important contributions. Richard Simpson began by saying that the funding of care is not mentioned in the bill. It is not mentioned in the bill because that is not the correct place for it. That is not to say that we are failing to recognise and address the problems; we have implemented a series of measures to address some of the issues that have been raised. I have been aware of the problems since my  appointment as a minister, and, like Richard Simpson, I was pleased to meet representatives of the Church of Scotland not long ago to hear about some of the difficulties that it faces. We are willing to confront those issues. Nevertheless, members should be wary of overstating their case and misrepresenting the facts. For example, Nicola Sturgeon referred to the underfunding of local government—her description may have been more extreme than that, but that is what I wrote down. The reality is that every local authority will receive a real-terms increase in funding for each of the next three years and the increase in funding for community care this year is 10 per cent.

We will not come up with any solutions unless we realise that the funding situation is complex. If Shona Robison will allow me to continue, I shall address some of the complexities. Margaret Smith and Mary Scanlon referred to one of those complexities, which is the way in which the distribution of funding and GAE work. Mary Scanlon quoted Sir Stewart Sutherland, who has also drawn attention to the issue, which the Parliament has become increasingly aware of. I am concerned if local authorities are not spending up to their GAE on services for the elderly. That matter needs to be discussed and addressed. Another issue that has arisen in the debate is delayed discharges. I would be the first to recognise that there are problems with delayed discharges. Nonetheless, in the interests of balance, we should also recognise the fact that the Executive has done more than any previous Government in recent times to address that problem, through the resources that we have allocated to it over the past year and through the new joint working. Delayed discharge figures began to fall over the winter, and I am not aware of any previous year in which that happened. I am not saying that the problem is solved. I am saying that we should keep a sense of proportion and realise that such issues are being addressed. [ Interruption. ] Sorry, I thought that Mary Scanlon was waiting to pounce, but she has not done so yet. The care development group, to which Mary Scanlon and I referred, is examining all those issues. However, the group has been asked to report within six months and it is not its role to consider individual contracts, although we are  addressing the whole range of issues that have been mentioned this morning. I remind Ben Wallace, who wanted to bring personal care into the debate, that part of our remit is to introduce proposals for the implementation of free personal care. I reassure Richard Simpson that the process that we are setting in motion will involve a series of meetings with the main players. As I said in my opening speech, we are aiming for long-term, sustainable solutions. I reassure him that I shall report to the Parliament on any progress.

Amendment 25 is a clarifying amendment. It follows from a detailed discussion that took place at stage 2 as a result of an amendment that was lodged by John McAllion. That amendment concerned whether the commission could require information from those whom it suspected of operating a care service without being registered. As I explained at stage 2, the commission would not write to persons who were suspected of operating an unregistered care service for information about their activities, as that would effectively mean that such persons would be incriminating themselves in their reply. If that were the case, it is likely that any subsequent prosecution would be prejudiced. The amendment therefore clarifies that the commission may require information only from registered care services. Amendments 27 and 28 deal with the frequency of inspection by the commission. All care services that will be covered by the bill will be subject to inspection by the commission. The inspections will benefit all service users by helping to ensure that all service users are offering an appropriate quality of care. The bill as introduced reflected our position that the commission should have maximum flexibility over inspection. Section 21 provides that all services should be subject to inspection at least once a year, but that the commission can choose to inspect a service at any time with or without notice. That would strike a balance between ensuring that regular inspections are made, to ensure that all services are supported and continue to improve, and leaving  the commission sufficient scope to focus on the services that require most attention. As I indicated during stage 2, we are now persuaded that a minimum of two inspections a year by the commission would be more appropriate for services that offer 24-hour care away from home. We are also persuaded that at least one of those inspections should be unannounced. Our inspections method working group supports that position. I have therefore lodged amendments 27 and 28 to include those requirements in the bill. The amendments will mean that care homes for adults and children, secure accommodation, boarding schools and some independent health care services are inspected at least twice a year. Unannounced inspections will take place without any formal or informal warning and could take place at any time of day or night. All the other services covered by the bill will have a minimum of one inspection. Over and above that, the commission will retain the power to inspect all services at any time. I am happy that the proposed arrangements will provide better protection for service users, in particular the most vulnerable groups who are cared for away from home, and I hope that the Parliament will support the amendments. I move amendment 25.  Amendment 25 agreed to.

Amendments 26, 29, 30 and 31 are designed to ensure that the commission and HMI work together effectively to deliver an integrated and seamless service in the regulation and inspection of relevant care services. It can be both difficult and counterproductive to try to separate out the care and education elements of services for pre-school children. The amendments ensure that the commission and HMI will collaborate in their approach to pre-school services, residential units or schools, and secure facilities for children. That would fulfil the commitment that I made at stage 2 when I indicated that we would introduce amendments to reflect our new thinking on the better integration of the roles of HMI and the commission. Amendments 28 and 29 remove references to HMI from section 21. Those references were included because it was originally planned for HMI and the commission to carry out separate inspections of early education. Amendment 31 provides for a new section, which explicitly requires the commission and HMI to collaborate in the regulation and inspection of care services that include an educational element. The specific care  settings are defined in subsection (2) of the proposed new section. Amendment 26 makes a minor change, consequential to the introduction of the new section. Our aim in making those amendments is to ensure that service users and providers, whether parents, children or institutions, feel that they are dealing with an integrated process for all matters relating to registration and inspection. The intention is that the resultant service will ensure high-quality social development and care, as well as maintaining momentum on raising educational standards. An integrated approach will be forward looking, responding to the changing nature of pre-school and child care provision, where traditional boundaries between care and education are blurring. It will combine the expert eyes of both HMI and the commission, in the best interests of children. Ministers throughout the Executive support the amendments enthusiastically and are determined to integrate inspections. We intend to back that up with detailed ministerial directions, both to the commission, as provided for under section 1(2), and to HMI. I commend the amendments to the Parliament. I move amendment 26.

As I said, there will be detailed ministerial directions. It is not for me to comment or to make a decision on Michael Russell's point. That is a matter for the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs, who I think has heard what Mike Russell said. I will talk to the minister, who I am sure will reply in writing to the member on that matter.  Amendment 26 agreed to.  [Amendments 27 to 30 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.]

Section 24A was inserted at stage 2 by an amendment in the name of Richard Simpson. It imposes a duty on the commission to examine and comment on contracts between purchasers and providers of care services, when asked to do so by the provider in a range of circumstances. As I said at stage 2, there is a serious issue about commissioning, but section 24A is emphatically the wrong way to deal with it. We all want a fair and equitable system for the commissioning of care services and we can all agree that the present system does not produce equity and fairness in all cases. Many private and voluntary sector providers have complained about inadequate funding from local authorities. Those providers see that, in some cases, local authorities' own services are well funded in relative terms. That issue is clearly of great interest to the care development group in its consideration of the whole map of long-term care. However, we are not addressing the issue only in that way. My officials have been in discussion with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities; Scottish Care, which is the private sector umbrella organisation; and Community Care Providers Scotland, which is the voluntary sector organisation. My officials have agreed to chair an initial meeting as soon as possible to bring together the commissioners and the providers of care. The aim will be to develop a shared understanding of the problems of the present commissioning arrangements and a way forward that is based on equity and realism. The process will not be a talking shop. Providers want reassurances very soon about what will happen to their funding, and COSLA is well aware of the urgency of the situation. The process aims to make progress, in the short term, on the immediate funding situation and seeks to reach agreement on longer-term solutions. I undertake to report the results of the process to Parliament in  due course. The results will also feed into the work of the care development group. The commission will have an important role in contributing to thinking on the funding of care in general, as it will report to ministers in the Parliament through its annual report. As members know, the intention is that the commission will fulfil the recommendation of the Royal Commission on Long Term Care that there should be a national care commission to take a strategic overview of the care system and its funding and to advise on trends. However, that is totally different from examining individual contracts, as proposed by section 24A. The Scottish commission for the regulation of care is a non-departmental public body. As John McAllion reminded us in another context, the commission should not intervene in decisions that are made by democratically elected local authorities on the funding for individual providers. It is for elected local authorities to consider the overall interests of their local population and to decide how much of their resources should be spent on purchasing care, taking best value fully into account. The commission's main purpose is to ensure quality of life and of care for service users. It would be diverted from that purpose if it were to consider funding when considering any individual care service. That would be bound to lead to compromises over care standards and would be a complete distraction in terms of time, effort and focus. If section 24A stands, every care provider could argue that their problem was not the will, but the means to meet the care standards. The commission would quickly become tied up in controversial financial judgments and case-by-case discussions with local authorities on finance. If the commission has to take into account a range of factors, including the financing of the service, it will not be able to press for improvements in quality and the thrust of the bill would be fundamentally undermined. The commission is not intended to resolve every problem with the care system in Scotland, but only the commission can address quality in a way that ensures that the needs of users are at the centre. We must let it get on with that. I move amendment 34.

The debate has been interesting and has included many useful contributions. I will start with the point that John  McAllion made that the financing of the system is a matter for elected politicians. That is the key issue in the debate on section 20 and on section 24A. Perhaps some members were not giving their full attention to the debate but, if they remember one statement, it should be the key message that it is up to elected politicians to decide on such financing matters. Shona Robison's amendment 76 would not strengthen amendment 24, as it is quite irrelevant to it. As I said, amendment 76 is pointless. The commission should not—indeed, it could not—get involved in such decisions, as running that operation would require financing. Amendment 76 is a total irrelevance and members should not support it. I am glad that people have picked up the point that I made about a balance between fees and grant, as that has always been implicit in our proposals. We have already exempted early education and child care from the self-funding principle. As I indicated, amendment 24 makes it clear that we are determined to take account of the effect of fees on issues such as the care home market. The reality is that the commission has somehow to be funded. We take the view that it is best for providers to have some stake in the system. People who suggest that the commission should be funded totally from the centre perhaps forget that many private operators, such as private health care services or individuals who self-fund, will pay fees. I am not sure whether members are suggesting that those fees should also be fully paid for by public funds. Nicola Sturgeon and Richard Simpson made great play on the idea of money circulating in the system, but what is local government finance but money circulating in the system? If people want to argue that the Parliament and the Executive should fund everything directly, perhaps they will do so, but it is not sensible to argue in terms of money circulating in the system. Clearly, money is given to local authorities through GAE. I accept Margaret Smith's point that there is an issue about whether the money that is allocated for community care is spent appropriately. I have no doubt that we will revisit that issue later this morning—and on many other occasions—because there are concerns about it. However, I have made it clear on several occasions that, when GAE is set in future, community care will be taken into account. Mary Scanlon made several points, one of which concerned the situation in which a service can reasonably be expected to attract only a small number of clients. As Margaret Smith reminded us, that situation would be covered by the  exemption—indeed, I indicated that in my discussions with the committee. However, Mary Scanlon's proposition that there should be an assessment of whether an individual care service can afford to pay is not practical. The commission would be completely distracted if it had to examine the financial position of every care service and it would not be able to get on with its proper job. Margaret Jamieson referred to Ayrshire and Arran Health Board and difficulties in collecting fees for registration. The bill makes it explicit that registration can be cancelled if the service is carried on "other than in accordance with the relevant requirements". That includes, of course, the payment of fees. I have dealt with the point that Margaret Smith made about GAE for community care, but she also referred to what I said about the rate of self-financing varying from one service to another. Again, I will use the example of private health care. That system will be self-financing from the outset in 2003, whereas there is no proposal that residential care should be self-funding within such a time scale. Richard Simpson referred to the registration and deregistration of beds. That was a timely reminder of how fragmented the current system is. I know that one area may adopt that procedure while others may not. We are bringing that fragmentation to an end through the system of registration, which will be the first-ever national system. I can assure Richard Simpson that the staffing levels that will be agreed by the commission will be flexible and that the arrangements will be able to take into account changes in occupancy. The debate has been important. Clearly, there is no finality about what is said today. I merely repeat that the bill leaves the balance between fees and grant entirely open. That balance can be revisited on any occasion that members wish it to be.  Amendment 24 agreed to  [Amendment 76 moved —[Shona Robison].]

Amendment 22 relates to our discussion on local authority statutory duties. There may be cases where a service that is registered in the normal way becomes essential to the fulfilment of a statutory duty, perhaps because all other providers withdraw from the local market. Amendment 22 provides for a local authority to argue that that is the case if the commission issues an improvement notice foreshadowing cancellation of registration. Again, any dispute over whether the service is essential will go to ministers. There may also be cases where the cancellation of the registration of a private or voluntary sector service commissioned by a local authority would put that local authority in breach of a statutory duty. A voluntary sector care home may be the only one available locally, for example, and the local authority may have decided that a care home is necessary to meet the needs of the area.  Amendment 21 provides for a local authority to be informed when improvement notices are issued to a care service within its area, so that it has time either to work with the provider to avoid cancellation or to make alternative arrangements to meet the care needs of the area. Amendment 23 removes a reference to section 9(1), which deals with improvement notices, from section 16A. That is a technical change to ensure consistency in the bill now that it contains part 1A. I move amendment 21.  Amendment 21 agreed to.

We had considerable discussions during stage 2 on fees for the regulation of services and how they should be set. Section 20 provides for ministers to set maximum fees and section 42 provides for ministers to pay grant to the commission. The bill does not say anything about the relationship between the two or about what proportion should be fees and what should be grant. When we consider what the fee level should be, we will take into account all relevant factors, including the effects that registration fees have had on the care market in the previous years and the likely effect of further increases. We will take a range of factors into account in deciding what the balance between income from fees and central Government grant should be. Self-financing remains the general policy and that will be the case at the outset for the registration of those services that are to be regulated for the first time, including private doctors and dentists and home care agencies. However, we will ensure that that policy does not cut across objectives in other areas, including the need for a flourishing care home sector. The rate at which self-financing is achieved will therefore vary for different care services. In coming to a view on the level of fees for 2004-05 onward, ministers will be interested in the views of service providers. We have always consulted providers and others on proposed changes in registration fees and, as I agreed at stage 2, I am  happy to include a specific provision in the bill to that effect. Amendment 24 therefore provides that ministers must consult providers on the potential effect of proposed fees on care services. Amendment 76, in Shona Robison's name, would require the commission to have regard to "the anticipated impact of fees on service provision and service providers" and to any representation from local authorities, health boards or other interested parties. That would not be appropriate. It is for ministers to consider the impact of fees on the sector. Amendment 24 will provide the mechanism to allow them to do that effectively. For the commission to reconsider the issue in setting its fees would be pointless and would require it to carry out its own consultation. Amendment 77, in Mary Scanlon's name, would empower the commission to charge a single registration fee where more than one care service is provided in an integrated way. There is no need for the amendment. Section 20(3)(b) already empowers the commission to charge a nominal fee or to waive the fee altogether. We will be providing the commission with guidance on the circumstances in which it may wish to waive fees, and the example in amendment 77 would be one such instance. We also have the power to prescribe by order circumstances in which fees are not to be payable and we will do so if it proves necessary to clarify the issue. There are also technical difficulties with the amendment. The words "operated" and "charge" are not used in the bill—although I accept that I have used them in explaining these matters—and there would have to be appropriate clarification of what is meant by "integrated manner". I move amendment 24, and ask that amendments 76 and 77 be not moved.

I will deal with Mike Russell's point first. There is no suggestion that what is provided in the bill for adoption and fostering in any way impinges on the review of adoption and fostering. I am not looking for too much sympathy, but many of the areas that are covered in the bill are not within my direct ministerial responsibility. The review of adoption and fostering that is being carried out by Jack McConnell and Nicol Stephen has been broadly welcomed. The review is not impinged upon by the equally welcome proposals in the bill to ensure that adoption and fostering services continue in all circumstances. The precise point of part 1A is that statutory functions will continue in all circumstances. The general provisions that allow a care service to be shut down if it does not meet standards do not mean that there will be no adoption and fostering services. I hope that my reply to Mike Russell reassures Donald Gorrie as well. I am not sure what he was implying when he talked of adoption and fostering services being "targeted"; I would argue that those services are being protected. They will be further enhanced as a result of the review. I am also not quite sure what Donald Gorrie had in mind in his second point. If he had mentioned any specific services that he does not think should be in the bill, I might have been able to respond more specifically. Clearly, I do not think that the list of care services is too widely drawn, or I would not have put it in the bill.  Amendment 16 agreed to.

I thank Mary Scanlon for helpfully citing various explanations that I have given at the committee stages so that I do not need to repeat them. All I would add is that guidance on these matters will be issued to the commission. Amendment 75 would allow the commission to accept a single application "where more than one care service is operated and managed in an integrated manner". There is a danger in that proposal. The care standards and regulations will be different for different care services, and it must be clear to the commission from the outset which care services are to be provided. We therefore consider it important that, as section 7(3) makes clear, separate applications are made for each care service, even if they are being provided and managed together. Once the commission has the applications, it can treat them as one process and decide on the appropriate package of care standards to register and subsequently inspect the service against. No unnecessary bureaucracy should be involved, therefore. Our inspection methods working group has been asked to examine this issue with a view to deciding what guidance needs to be given to the commission and providers. I should also point out that the commission will be able to charge a fee for registration that is less than the combined fees for the separate care services, because of its powers under section 20 to waive or charge nominal fees. We will discuss this issue in more detail in the group of amendments on registration fees. With that assurance, I hope that Mary Scanlon will withdraw amendment 75. Amendment 18 is an amendment to section 7 to ensure that adoption and fostering services can be provided only by voluntary organisations. At present, the bill merely says that the person applying to register as the provider of such a service must be a voluntary organisation. That person might cease to be a voluntary organisation after registration. Amendment 19 is consequential to the previous group of amendments on local authority statutory duties.

I can give Mary Scanlon assurance on that: she has a point about what is in the bill, which is why we have been so careful to ensure that all the regulations are fully and comprehensively consulted on. It would be entirely appropriate for the guidance that I referred to to be discussed in the Health and Community Care Committee. I emphasise the point that the inspection methods working group is considering the issue. Mary Scanlon will remember that at stage 2 I undertook to refer the issue to the group. The members of the group are the experts in this area and I look forward to the detailed guidance that they will produce soon.

Amendments 72 and 73 would limit the exemption from regulation for services that are provided directly by a school to those that are provided as part of the school's educational activities. I will deal first with what is included in the bill  before moving on to what is excluded. The bill will regulate after-school activities that are provided on school premises or in association with a school, but are not managed by the school. Such activities include, for example, after-school clubs that are run by a management committee of parents. In response to the specific point made by Shona Robison, the bill also covers services provided by a local authority that take place in a school but are not part of the school's activities as such. Local authority child care that is provided on school premises, but not as part of the school's activities—that is, not managed by the school—would be covered. Our reason for excluding from regulation all activities that are run by the school was the difficulty of distinguishing between educational activities and child care in that context. We remain convinced that it is not practical to distinguish between a school's child care activities and its learning activities. For example, in activities that are run by a school, such as homework clubs, pupils sometimes do homework and sometimes play. We discussed the issue fully at stage 2 and the committee was not convinced of the need for Shona Robison's amendments. I invite Shona Robison to withdraw amendment 72 and not to move amendment 73.

The question is really whether the school manages the activity. As members know, management committees of parents run most after-school clubs and it is clear that the bill covers those clubs. If the school manages the activity, it becomes a different matter. That is the key criterion.  Amendment 72, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendment 73 not moved.  Amendment 9 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

From the outset, we wanted the whole process of introducing the bill  and the care standards to be based on consultation. For example, we issued seven consultation and three policy position papers. We established a reference group, which consists of all the stakeholders. The care standards were produced by 15 or so working groups involving a range of other interests, including, crucially, users and carers. I held six consultation meetings with a wide range of stakeholder groups in March and April. I could go on. We have not gone through the motions of consultation, but have genuinely been prepared to take on board the views we received and to adapt our proposals where we could to meet any concerns that were expressed. However, during our stage 2 discussions there were some concerns that the consultation provisions in the bill did not go far enough. Various suggestions were made about bodies that ministers, the commission and the council should be explicitly required to consult—for example local authorities, health boards, users and carers, providers, the Mental Welfare Commission and the voluntary sector. Of course we intend that ministers, the commission and the council should consult all those bodies, but I agreed to reconsider the consultation provisions to determine whether they were as consistent and appropriate as they could be. This group of amendments is the result of that consideration. First, I propose to add more consultation provisions to the bill. We had intended to consult in any event, but I understand the argument that a specific statutory provision is a safeguard. Amendment 10 requires ministers to consult before amending the definition of care services. Amendments 32 and 50 require ministers to consult before conferring additional functions on the commission or council or making regulations that relate to the registration process. Amendments 61 and 62 require ministers to consult before making regulations about appointments to the two bodies and about their procedures. Amendment 51 requires the council to consult before making rules about registration. Such measures will strengthen the consultation arrangements in the bill and I hope that they will be welcomed. Secondly, I have reconsidered the way in which the consultation provisions are framed. I cannot add a specific requirement to consult voluntary organisations, for example—which was strongly pressed by Janis Hughes—or providers, users and carers. Such terms are not sufficiently specific to let ministers, the commission or the council know what is required of them and whether they have fulfilled their statutory duty. Which voluntary organisations would ministers have to consult? Would all potential users and carers or only a  representative sample have to receive a consultation paper? I intend, however, to set out in guidelines how the commission and the council should consult. Amendment 53 therefore provides that ministers have a duty to issue guidelines to the commission and the council as to how they are to fulfil their consultation functions under the act. The voluntary sector, for example, would certainly be mentioned in guidelines. As well as extending the number of references to consultation and ensuring that guidelines will be issued, the amendments also require consultation with "such persons" rather than "any person". That makes clear that there must always be consultation. Deciding at the outset that there are no appropriate consultees will not be an option. We also propose to add "groups of persons" to the provisions to make clear that representative bodies as well as individuals and corporate bodies are to be included. The flexibility needed for the process to work well will be allowed by having ministers, the commission and the council consult the persons and groups of persons that they think appropriate. However, that does not give them carte blanche: their decisions must be defensible in the courts and will be open to judicial review. I commend the amendments and move amendment 10.

I thank Janis Hughes for welcoming the proposals. I repeat what I said about guidelines for the commission and the council containing a reference to consulting the voluntary sector and I affirm that ministers give a commitment to consulting the voluntary sector where the responsibility rests with us. I hope that that reassures Janis Hughes.  Amendment 10 agreed to.

Amendments 11 and 60 ensure that ministers can make orders that deal with the various transitional issues that are relevant to the bill. We will need to ensure the smooth changeover from the current registration and inspection systems that are operated by local authorities and health boards. Our transitional issues group is working on these complex but routine issues and that will help us to identify the key areas that need to be addressed. Ministers will be required to consult appropriately before making an order under section 52. I move amendment 11.  Amendment 11 agreed to.

Amendment 12 builds on a commitment that I gave at stage 2 in response to an amendment lodged by Richard Simpson to ensure that the information the commission gives to the public is available in a variety of formats. Amendment 12 ensures that a person requesting information from the commission is entitled to receive it in any format that that person may reasonably request. I envisage that that will include audiotape and Braille versions of care information as well as information in minority ethnic languages. The amendment reflects our commitment to ensuring that the commission meets the needs of service users and their families. Amendment 13 relates to a commitment that I gave at stage 2 to reflect on a suggestion made by Shona Robison. The suggestion was to include persons or groups of persons who represent users and their carers in the bodies that may ask the commission for advice about any matter relevant to its functions. Given our commitment to users and their carers, the amendment is important and useful. Amendment 14 gives ministers the power to prescribe by order other persons and groups who may ask the commission for advice. That gives necessary flexibility to enable the commission's duty to provide advice to be extended to cover other bodies. An example of such a body would be the Mental Welfare Commission. I move amendment 12.

The bill empowers the commission to refuse to register a care service or to cancel an existing registration. We hope that that will happen only rarely, but the commission must have effective enforcement powers if vulnerable users are to be protected properly. In the vast majority of cases, such provisions should apply to local authorities in exactly the same way as they are to apply to services provided by the voluntary and private sectors. One of the main intentions behind the bill is to level the playing field. The one general exception is for local authority adoption and fostering services. Local authorities have a statutory duty to provide such services and would be in breach of that duty if the commission either refused or cancelled registration. Part 1A therefore covers those services. Rather than a local authority being deregistered by the commission, it will be possible for ministers to take default action against a local authority if they are satisfied that it has no reasonable excuse for failing to comply with an improvement notice or for not complying with relevant service requirements. Local authorities do not have a statutory duty to provide other care services, but there may be some circumstances in which they can meet a statutory duty only by providing a particular care service. For example, a local authority may have assessed the care needs of a rural area and decided that they can be met only if a home care service is provided there. There may be no private or voluntary sector providers who are willing to offer such a service in the area. A local authority service would then be the only means whereby the local authority could fulfil its general duty in those particular circumstances.  This group of amendments therefore extends the provisions that apply to local authority adoption and fostering services to cover care services that a local authority determines it must provide to fulfil a statutory duty. The decision on whether those provisions should apply should not, of course, be left entirely to local authorities themselves. We want to be sure that this mechanism is used only in the very small number of cases where failure to fulfil a statutory duty is genuinely involved. Amendment 36 therefore provides for any dispute between a local authority and the commission on this issue to go to Scottish ministers for a decision. If ministers do not agree with the local authority's view that the registration is essential, the normal provisions will apply. Amendments 40, 43 and 78 are technical amendments to clarify the existing provisions relating to local authority adoption and fostering services. I do not envisage the provisions introduced by this group of amendments being used very frequently. In the vast majority of cases, there is no reason why a local authority service should be treated any differently from the service of a voluntary or private sector provider, but the amendments will introduce useful safeguards to the new system to ensure that local authorities' statutory position is protected where necessary, and to ensure that the safety net that is provided for vulnerable people by the statutory duties placed on local authorities continues to operate as it should. I commend these amendments to the chamber. I move amendment 16.

Janis Hughes and Kate MacLean lodged equal opportunities amendments at stage 2, which I was pleased to accept. As members will know, equal opportunities are reserved under the Scotland Act 1998, except for the encouragement of equal opportunities, in particular the observance of equal opportunities requirements. It was entirely appropriate and correct that Kate MacLean sought to ensure that the proposed Scottish commission for the regulation of care acts accordingly, but her stage 2 amendment was inserted as an addition to section 1(1), which establishes the commission, whereas it is more appropriate to make an addition to subsection (2), which deals with how the commission will act. To leave the provision where it currently sits would not give the commission the correct focus on equal opportunities—that focus should be in the exercise of its various functions. I commend amendments 1 and 2 to the Parliament. I move amendment 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  [Amendment 2 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.]

This group of amendments makes a number of changes to section 2, which deals with care services, and some consequential changes to section 55 on interpretation. Perhaps the most important amendments are  those that relate to child care agencies. They respond to the considerable debate at stage 1 and stage 2 about the need for regulation of nanny agencies and other services that offer care for children. In particular, they respond to the amendment lodged by Margaret Jamieson at stage 2 in support of the regulation of nanny agencies. Amendments 3, 6, 57 and 58 provide for child care agencies to be regulated by the commission. The definition of what constitutes such an agency has been drawn sufficiently widely to include all relevant services. Nanny agencies, sitter services and au pair agencies that supply child care staff, as defined by amendment 6, will be subject to registration and inspection by the commission. That will include agencies that provide volunteers to support families who are in need of help with child care as well as nanny agencies—those that employ nannies directly and those that introduce suitable nannies to parents, who then become the employer. Those are important services for parents and children. Parents and guardians need assurances that the child care agency has carried out appropriate checks on the individual who will come into their home. The commission would have the power to regulate that. There will be ample opportunity for interested parties to comment when we draw up detailed proposals for implementation. Amendment 4 removes part of section 2 (4)(b). As it stands, the definition of a school care accommodation service does not include mainstream boarding schools. By removing the wording, "together with personal care or personal support by reason of the pupil's vulnerability or need", we make it clear that the definition of school care accommodation covers mainstream boarding schools. Amendment 5 slightly alters the definition of "nurse agency" to include agencies that introduce clients to registered nurses, midwives or health visitors, so that regulation is not limited to agencies that supply such staff directly. Amendment 7 deals with secure accommodation. Such accommodation forms part of the spectrum of residential care for children, so it is right that it should be subject to the same regime as other forms of residential child care. However, depriving a child of his or her liberty is a serious matter and we have always said that we wish to continue with the requirement for approval by Scottish ministers. The amendment ensures that secure accommodation is defined in the list of care services as "accommodation approved by the Scottish Ministers",  and makes it clear that the power that enables ministers to approve such accommodation is the regulation-making power under section 24. Amendment 8 responds to an amendment that Shona Robison lodged at stage 2, which aimed to provide collective terms for the fostering services that local authorities are required to provide or arrange and for the service that authorities provide by overseeing private fostering arrangements. There is considerable confusion, which statutory terminology may go a considerable way towards resolving. Amendment 9 results from a commitment that I gave at stage 2, in response to an amendment lodged by Mary Scanlon, to reconsider the rather basic definition of housing support services in the bill as introduced. The amendment uses wording from section 81 of the Housing (Scotland) Bill to give a much fuller definition of housing support services in the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill. The wording is slightly different, to reflect the terminology in the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill, but maintains an important link between it and the Housing (Scotland) Bill. I believe that amendment 9 gives useful clarity as to the housing support services that are to be regulated. Finally, in accordance with what I agreed to do at stage 2, amendment 56 clarifies the position on the definition of a child in respect of the bill's provisions on adoption, fostering and secure accommodation. The amendment brings into play the current definitions in Scottish adoption and fostering legislation and the definition of "child" in relation to the provision and use of secure accommodation under the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. I commend the amendments to Parliament. I move amendment 3.

I thank Irene McGugan and Mary Scanlon for their broad welcome of this group of amendments. I respond to Irene McGugan by saying that, in general, there will be ample opportunity for interested parties to comment as we draw up detailed proposals for implementing the bill. On her specific point about a child who is cared for in the parent's home, it is the agency that will be regulated. It is clear that that will cover most children who are looked after in the parent's home, but children who are being looked after in someone else's home will also be covered. Irene McGugan's third point was about costs. We will have at least one debate on that point, so we should perhaps leave it for later. Mary Scanlon also raised the issue of costs. Although funding for hostels for homeless people falls outwith the scope of the bill, she is correct in her understanding that drug and alcohol services would come under housing support services, which are covered by the bill. Finally, Mary Scanlon raised a point of detail about wording in the Housing (Scotland) Bill. I do not want to tread too far into that territory, lest members sitting behind me leap to their feet. However, I believe that Mary Scanlon was referring to specific funding arrangements for supporting people. I understand that some housing support services will be funded through other routes, such as the Scottish needs assessment programme—SNAP—and I think that the exceptions are to do with that. I would prefer Mary Scanlon to address any supplementary questions to Margaret Curran.  Amendment 3 agreed to.  [Amendments 4 to 8 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.]

I congratulate Nora Radcliffe on securing the debate and on giving members the opportunity to discuss the important matter of maternity services. The motion was well timed, since we are starting to implement and address the action points in "A  Framework for maternity services in Scotland", which Susan Deacon launched in February. At the beginning of that document, various broad themes are emphasised that are consistent with several points made by Nora Radcliffe. First, the framework reminds us that pregnancy and childbirth are normal physiological processes in women's lives. Nora Radcliffe's motion points that out. Secondly, the framework states that maternity services must deliver a woman and family-centred approach to care and support, planned in partnership with the woman. Finally, it reminds us that maternity services should be essentially community-based and midwife-managed wherever possible, with an emphasis on continuity of care. Stand-alone midwifery and GP units such as those in Gordon have developed in rural areas to meet the needs of people who make the choice not to travel to a distant, consultant-led centre. As Mary Scanlon said, their use involves careful balancing of risk and choice, but they meet the very real needs of a number of women. Provided that the risks are fully explained, appropriate criteria for early transfer in emergencies are strictly adhered to and appropriate consultant advice and regular updating and training of staff in key skills such as resuscitation and stabilisation continue, such units will continue to provide a valuable service. However, from time to time health boards and trusts must consider all their services to ensure that they are still consistent with need. Such assessment is rightly for NHS bodies to undertake locally, on the basis of their detailed knowledge of local circumstances, so members will not expect me to become closely involved in the details of the situation in Gordon.

I will not comment on the particular issue of Insch hospital, but I am assured that the proposed changes, which have not yet been before the health board, do not entail any cost savings. Mike Rumbles was wrong to pursue that route in relation to the motion. I remind members that the Arbuthnott settlement gives Grampian a 5.5 per cent revenue increase this year. Although we do not have detailed allocations for the next three years, we have announced that Grampian will receive minimum increases of 6.5 per cent in 2002-03 and 7.4 per cent in 2003-04.  By any reckoning, those are large increases, which are unprecedented in recent times. Duncan McNeil moved us on to a different area. I cannot get too involved in that, but I remind members that there are no specific proposals yet for the Rankin. When proposals are drawn up, they will be subject to full and proper public consultation and will have to be consistent with the princi-ples of the framework. Duncan McNeil referred to health board boundaries. The framework makes it clear that cross-boundary issues must be considered. Decisions must be taken following detailed consultation. Mary Scanlon reminded us how important that is in relation to many reviews and that is made clear in the Scottish health plan, "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change". The maternity framework builds on that and emphasises that public and professional consultation is fundamental to the planning, development and provision of local maternity services. It is vital that women's care provides continuity, from pregnancy to childbirth and beyond. Midwives have a central role to play. They are by far the best placed to deliver the one-to-one support that women have a right to expect during such a major event in their lives. Inevitably, most expectant and new mothers' contact with the NHS takes place during pregnancy and after birth, but it is crucial to get all the interactions, including childbirth itself, right. Midwives have always been instrumental in ensuring that that happens and the framework reinforces and supports their role. Individual choice is an issue that often comes up when matters affecting maternity services and childbirth are under discussion. That is right and proper, as Nora Radcliffe emphasised. Women's experience of childbirth—and that of their partners and families—can be hugely affected by whether the birth takes place at home, in a small, homely, local maternity unit or in a specialist unit in a large hospital.

That follows on from the importance that we attach to midwives in our strategy. I hope that I have reassured members about that. Many members have emphasised the importance of informed choice, with women as equal partners in decision making. However, we must remember that pregnancy and childbirth are not risk-free. Obstetricians, GPs and midwives all  have important roles to play. They should not promote one model of maternity care over another, but it is for them to explain to individual women the risks associated with any given model of care. It is for them to provide all the information that women need to help them to make the appropriate choice and it is for them to involve women as equal partners in the decision-making process. Community-based, midwife-managed services will in many cases be the first option, not only for antenatal and postnatal care, but for childbirth. They might well offer a model for service provision in the more remote and rural parts of Scotland where the only alternative is a long journey to the nearest specialist unit, but they cannot be divorced entirely from specialist care. It is extremely important in every case to maintain links with a designated consultant obstetrician. The framework makes that clear. It is obvious that the role of the specialist maternity unit and of consultant-led care must not be sidelined or undervalued. In many ways, it is because of the advances that have been made at the high-tech end of obstetric care that pregnancy and childbirth entail so much less risk than in times gone by.

I am almost out of time. As I have said on more than one occasion, we are in the process of implementing the framework across Scotland. We are doing so in close partnership with health boards, trusts and professionals who provide services on the ground. The framework does not pretend to be a blueprint for the ideal maternity service, but it offers a set of key principles that we expect the NHS in Scotland to apply when developing its strategies for services in the areas that it serves. I commend the framework as essential reading to everyone who has participated in the debate and to anyone who is interested in how we want to take forward this vital aspect of the many services that our NHS provides.

I congratulate Elaine Smith on securing this debate to coincide with national breastfeeding awareness week. I, too, welcome the mothers and babies in the gallery, whom I enjoyed meeting at lunch time—Elaine also organised that meeting. As Elaine Smith said, this debate is about choice. The choice of feeding method is a deeply personal decision and is to be taken by the mother herself. Whatever that choice, it must be respected. The important thing is to ensure that women are provided with the information, support and advice to be able to make an informed choice and to follow that choice through. The Executive is 100 per cent committed to that objective. Susan Deacon has taken a direct personal interest in taking forward work in this area. We are committed to the promotion of breastfeeding throughout Scotland and to the target of having 50 per cent of women breastfeed their babies at six weeks by 2005. As part of our drive towards that breastfeeding target, the Executive funds and supports the Scottish breastfeeding group and the national breastfeeding adviser, who actively promote breastfeeding. Studies have compared the health of breastfed babies to the health of babies fed on artificial formula milk. There is now a large amount of research showing beyond doubt that breastfeeding gives babies vital health advantages. I will not go over all the detailed evidence, as it has been covered by Elaine Smith, Irene McGugan and others. Elaine Smith referred to the interesting and important research being done at Ninewells hospital in Dundee, and we look forward to further evidence from that. Recently published data show that the common reasons for general practitioners seeing nought to four-year-olds are the very ailments that can be helped by breastfeeding. Various speakers also reminded us of the health advantages to women of breastfeeding. The second part of Elaine Smith's speech referred to the disappointing figures on breastfeeding. Indeed, as she reminded us, the Scottish figures are the second lowest in Europe. In view of that, our target is challenging. That is why we have set in motion several initiatives and policies to reach the target. The most recent policy document on this subject is "A Framework for maternity services in  Scotland", which was issued in February. It emphasises that "Maternity services should promote, support and sustain breastfeeding". It deals with what hospitals should do, which I will address in a moment. It also says that health boards should have an adviser on infant feeding and should actively nurture the setting-up of peer breastfeeding education and support groups. Social support has been shown to increase successful breastfeeding. That is why the development of peer and social support for mothers is important. I was pleased to meet such groups from Glasgow and Lanarkshire at lunch time. Indeed, I will be pleased to take up Elaine Smith's invitation to visit the group in her constituency. Members will know that Lanarkshire Health Board is doing excellent work through community-based campaigns such as the "You can't get fitter than a breastfed nipper" campaign. Another reason for support groups is that we do not yet have a breastfeeding-friendly culture. There have been many instances of hostile reaction to mothers who breastfeed in a public setting. Elaine Smith referred to the incident in Edinburgh in which, we were all horrified to learn, a mother was told to get off a bus because she was breastfeeding. Ministers wrote to Lothian Regional Transport, as it then was, but under current laws we do not have powers to enforce anything on a bus company in that regard. Karen Gillon talked about breastfeeding in relation to employment. Last year, the Scottish Executive published "Breastfeeding and returning to work", which sets the agenda for enabling mothers to continue breastfeeding after they return to work. The document is already being implemented in the national health service in Scotland and in the Scottish Executive, in line with family-friendly policies. The Health Education Board for Scotland recently issued guidance for the private sector. The influence of the media has been mentioned. Elaine Smith referred to a British Medical Journal article, which I, too, read recently. Clearly, negative media images are extremely damaging. She also expressed her abhorrence at the fact that society accepts page 3 but takes exception to breastfeeding mothers. That might apply in particular to some of the men whom Richard Simpson mentioned. There is a horrifying article in the Edinburgh Evening News tonight that suggests that some women may be prevented from breastfeeding by their partners. I am glad that there has been a positive media example this week in the HEBS advertising campaign, which is part of our work to increase activity and awareness. I am pleased that HEBS  used some of the money from the health improvement fund to put on the advertising campaign, which members may have seen on the television. Elaine Smith also talked about the UNICEF UK baby friendly initiative, which takes me back to the work that is being done in hospitals. Scottish maternity hospitals continue to have a high level of participation in the UNICEF UK baby friendly initiative, which promotes breastfeeding in hospitals and the community. Seven hospitals have received the baby friendly initiative UK award and 12 hospitals have been awarded the baby friendly initiative certificate of commitment. Most other hospitals are implementing the UNICEF 10 steps to successful breastfeeding; some are fully participating and others are using the 10 steps for guidance only. The issue of the marketing and promotion of formula milk was raised. We can certainly control what happens in hospitals—I do not believe that formula milk is being promoted in hospitals and, if it is, we can take steps to stop it. Clearly, however, we cannot control wider advertising, which is a reserved matter anyway. Equally, the issue of milk tokens, to which Mary Scanlon and Richard Simpson referred, is reserved to the Department of Social Security. However, I remind members that breastfeeding mothers can get free milk for themselves.  My time is up, so I will conclude by repeating that the Executive attaches great importance to breastfeeding in relation to both child and maternal health. I have outlined some of the actions that the Executive is supporting as the means of reaching our ambitious target. I hope that all MSPs will use their influence to help to bring about the cultural changes that are necessary to make that target a reality.  Meeting closed at 17:35.

We look forward to the report of the working group that was set up by the Department of Health's chief medical officer. We will wish to consider how best the conclusions of the report, which is expected this  summer, can be put into practice in Scotland.

There will be action once we have received the report, which is imminent. The report will map out the best practice that is to be implemented. We will seek to improve the quality of care and treatment by adopting some of its recommendations. The ME alliance has been involved in that work, as has the Scottish Executive. In developing services, it is important to involve ME support groups and I am pleased that several health boards are doing so.

I will be interested to read the report when it is published. Obviously, we do not have to follow all its recommendations. Research is an important issue. People can make applications to the chief scientist office in the usual way. Pauline McNeill emphasises the controversy surrounding the condition. We are determined to make progress in understanding and treating it.

Health department officials are working with health boards to prepare a report on the use of the health improvement fund. I will ensure that that information is placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre as soon as it is available.

Food allergy and food intolerance are important matters and I will ensure that I raise Helen Eadie's point with the Food Standards Agency Scotland when I visit it in Aberdeen next week. I am sure that the food labelling action plan, which will be produced later this year, will contribute to dealing with the problems of allergy and intolerance. More generally, the health improvement fund focuses on many objectives, including the improvement of diet. That is why we have introduced initiatives such as the provision of free fruit for infants and healthy eating in schools. The fund focuses specifically on child health and in particular on reducing child health inequalities.

I congratulate Tavish Scott on securing this debate. I have no difficulty in offering my full endorsement of the terms of his motion. I very much agree that primary care professionals who provide a service in rural, remote and islands areas face particular pressures when compared with their colleagues in urban settings. Those challenges are being addressed in a number of ways, through measures that have been in place for some time and through new measures that we have introduced more recently. I will speak later about the work of the remote and rural resource centre that was set up by this Administration. In so doing, I will say more about recruitment and retention in remote and rural areas. Before that, I want to say a little about primary care in general and something about the court ruling with reference to which Tavish Scott began his speech. Clearly, that ruling may impact on remote and rural small practices—although it will not affect many other localities if there are not larger premises nearby. It will be an important issue for consideration as part of the current  consultation on a pharmacy strategy for Scotland and will have to be discussed with the Scottish Pharmaceutical General Council as part of the negotiations on pharmacy pay. Our overall commitment to primary care is clear. "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change" highlights the paradox that although public attention focuses on hospitals, 90 per cent of contacts with the NHS begin and end in primary care. Contrary to what Mary Scanlon suggested, "Our National Health" underlines the importance of primary care. It commits us to continue to develop a range of service improvements, which will make primary care more accessible and flexible. To do that, we have introduced a range of measures—there are many more in the pipeline—to improve primary care. They include the recently announced additional £18.5 million for personal medical services, about which I will say more in a minute; the £33 million that is being invested in new primary care premises through the primary care modernisation fund; the significant expansion of information technology, to which Margaret Ewing referred; the development of NHS 24, in close co-operation with GPs, which was welcomed by Mary Scanlon and Richard Simpson; and £10.8 million for a public health practitioner in each local health care co-operative. Work will be done on access to primary care services and the strategy on LHCCs is imminent. I could say more on primary care in general, but I must move on to the specific issues facing GPs in rural areas. GPs serving rural communities receive the same fees and allowances as their urban counterparts. They also receive support through additional payments and schemes, which have been introduced over the years in recognition of the particular circumstances of practice in rural areas. First, the long-standing payment inducement scheme provides extra support to medical practices in the most remote rural and island areas. Secondly, the Scottish rural practice fund helps to compensate GPs whose patients are scattered over a wide area. Thirdly, the associate allowance enables single-handed rural GPs to employ an associate GP. Fourthly, rural GPs can apply for special locum allowances to cover the time that they spend away from practice to attend educational courses and to assist with the cost of out-of-hours cover. Personal medical services, to which Tavish Scott referred, can also help to address recruitment and retention difficulties within primary care teams. An additional £18.5 million over three years for PMS was announced earlier this year. I emphasise that those are extra resources over and above the extra money to which I have already referred and the current enormous expansion in health budgets.  More than one member referred to the recruitment issue in Helmsdale. I visited the Highlands on Monday and was pleased to meet various people from community councils in Sutherland who drew the issue, among other matters, to my attention. Arrangements to fill the vacancy at Helmsdale are a matter in the first instance for the Scottish Medical Practices Committee and in the second instance for Highland Primary Care NHS Trust. It is a complex issue, which I cannot go into, but I assure members that we are putting in place new accountability review procedures, so when I say that it is the primary responsibility of those organisations, that does not mean that we are not taking an interest in that matter and in others. One of the key issues is the high on-call commitment, to which Tavish Scott referred. Richard Simpson highlighted the importance of out-of-hours co-operatives. A review of out-of-hours services in Scotland was completed in October 1998 and a number of key recommendations have been implemented since. Funding was allocated for further research and we are now considering the subsequent report. The report of the out-of-hours review identified the need for additional support for rural GPs out of hours. The Highlands and the Western Isles were two of the areas that benefited from additional funding. The motion supports the remote and rural resource centre that is based at Raigmore hospital in Inverness. As I indicated, I have no hesitation in offering my endorsement of it. There has long been a need for a body to handle specific solutions to the problems that are associated with delivering health care in the less populated parts of Scotland. That need was reinforced in the chief medical officer for Scotland's 1998 acute services review. We have made the vision that is outlined in that review a reality by providing £8 million over three years to establish the remote and rural areas resource initiative. It has been operational for more than a year and is making its presence felt across a wide range of issues affecting remote and rural services. The recruitment and retention of staff and education and training tailored to their needs feature strongly, as does the development of new rural service models. One example is a pilot project that involves rural paramedics and GPs administering medication to prevent thrombosis. The value of that in rural areas is evident when we consider that a 30-minute delay is equivalent to the loss of a year's life expectancy. Following consultation with the Executive, the initiative is also establishing a solutions group, whose remit is to explore and facilitate the introduction of innovative methods of delivering  health care in remote and rural areas. The solutions group will consider options for redesigning primary care and community services in remote and rural areas and will consider such matters as PMS models, out-of-hours provision and the introduction of family health nurses.

Am I allowed to?

Tavish Scott referred to some matters with which I have not dealt. I will want to reflect on issues such as relocation costs. My time is almost up. I referred to the family health nurse. We should be proud of the fact that we are piloting that new model of community nursing practice alongside the World Health Organisation and 16 other European countries. The Scottish pilot is examining the role of the family health nurse in remote and rural areas, with pilot sites in Highland, Orkney and the Western Isles. That innovative new model will prepare nurses to work alongside their GP colleagues better to meet the needs of our rural communities. We are all aware of the idea of the primary care team as an advance in primary care. I thank Tavish Scott for drawing these matters to the chamber's attention. Much has been done, but I will reflect on the points that he and other members raised to discover what further progress can be made.  Meeting closed at 17:52.

The debate has been important and wide-ranging. I welcome the fact that Nicola Sturgeon and Mary Scanlon welcomed the many on-going initiatives. Indeed, there are so many initiatives it will be very difficult for me to sum up the debate in seven minutes. I presume that I have seven minutes.

Thank you for the extra minute, Presiding Officer. Nicola Sturgeon was right to say that the underlying problem is poverty, but she was wrong to say that there have been no improvements in child poverty. Even between 1996-97 and 1998-99, there was a reduction in the percentage of children living in poverty in Scotland from 34 per  cent to 30 per cent. That figure is unacceptable, but shows the progress that was made from the very start of the new Labour Government. Addressing inequalities is at the very heart of our health strategy. Mary Scanlon drew attention to what Professor Phil Hanlon said about how we need to be careful that our action in that respect does not have a perverse and contradictory effect. We set up the Public Health Institute Scotland under Professor Hanlon in order that health interventions could be evidence-based. That addresses the point that was made by Keith Harding. Professor Hanlon was closely involved in the selection of demonstration projects, such as Starting Well and Healthy Respect, which deal with some of the problems that have been raised today and which are targeted in particular on the reduction of health inequalities. Nicola Sturgeon referred to free dental check-ups. Of course, dental treatment for all children is free. On top of that there are the initiatives that have been referred to during the debate, such as free toothbrushes and toothpaste and enhanced payments to dentists for treating young people in deprived areas. We also have a target that 60 per cent of five-year-olds should have no dental disease by 2010. That is one of our many targets, which is why Mary Scanlon's amendment is unnecessary. We have many targets and time scales in place already. Ben Wallace raised that issue and I will give him an example: this autumn, 60 health visitors and 30 school nurses are to be trained as part of a new model of public health nursing. That is why we are not going to accept the Conservative amendment.

I have enough to cover without getting into a debate about adult health. The SNP amendment refers to free fruit. Like Pauline McNeill, I praise Glasgow for its pilot work on that initiative. The health improvement fund reflected the priority that we accord to children and young people and to tackling inequality. That was made clear in the guidance. Health boards were told to address the issue of free fruit, as well as supporting breakfast clubs and salad bars in school settings. They are also improving the  general well-being of children, improving their diet, and stepping up work to improve sexual health and general lifestyle. The health interventions were all based on careful discussions about what is most effective. Those are priorities based on evidence. We have made our choices. As the SNP never makes choices, but simply adopts ours and adds on a few more, it is unnecessary for us to accept the SNP amendment. We are already involved in the kind of activity to which it refers.

In a little while, if I have time. I have many points to which to reply. Mary Scanlon and Jamie Stone referred to maternity services in Caithness. I remind them that no decision and, indeed, no proposal has been made on maternity services in the area. The maternity services framework recognises the needs of more remote and rural areas. Any local plans must be tested against the framework, which is fundamentally woman-centred. Mike Russell and Irene Oldfather referred to community schools. Health initiatives are under way in those schools. I remind members of the health-promoting schools; over time, we intend all schools to become health-promoting schools and a unit is to be set up to drive that forward.

I am still dealing with Mike Russell's first point. Perhaps he will forgive me if I refer to his point about head lice, which is a matter to which we attach a great deal of importance. We are currently setting up a working group to produce national guidance and a leaflet in order to unify the approach to head lice across all NHS boards. Given the fact that I have replied to two of Mike Russell's points, I should move on to address points raised by other members. If I have time, I will take an intervention from Mike Russell later. Mary Scanlon and Donald Gorrie referred to access to health services by homeless people. I announced recently the appointment of the health and homelessness co-ordinator, who will drive that work forward. More generally, the child health support group is doing a great deal of work, which will result in Susan Deacon announcing the child health template shortly. Part of the group's work is laying out the key components of integrated child health services, and assessing and meeting children's needs are a key part of the group's work. Adam Ingram drew attention to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. I commented on that at question time. I am aware of the articles in The Herald and of Professor Steve Baldwin, and there will be further discussions when the Scottish  intercollegiate guidance network guidelines are published. Donald Gorrie asked about housing and health. That has been made a priority by the Executive. We have the central heating initiative, and we know the priority that is attached to addressing fuel poverty in general. Lloyd Quinan raised the important subject—and I do not complain about that—of autistic spectrum disorders. Research is being done by the Medical Research Council, and services are being developed as part of the learning disability review. Pauline McNeill reminded us of the importance of sure start Scotland, as did Margaret Smith, and asked that its funding be continued. It will be funded with £19 million in each of the coming two years. Elaine Smith and Mike Russell both referred to mental health, which is a priority in general and for children. One of the recent initiatives that we have taken is to ask the Scottish needs assessment programme to produce guidelines for best practice in mental health services.

I have only one minute, so I must continue. Elaine Smith also referred to breastfeeding. We have set up the national breastfeeding advisory group, and are keen on initiatives such as that in Elaine Smith's part of the world, Lanarkshire, called "You can't get fitter than a breastfed nipper." Irene Oldfather referred to underage smoking.

I am in my last minute. We have targets for that, and the Lord Advocate is reviewing guidance on using test purchasing by children. Irene Oldfather also referred to local health care co-operatives. They are important to the objective of improving child health services. We will announce a strategy on that soon, with child health as a key focus. I do not have time to deal with all the UK initiatives that Susan Deacon was right to remind us of. There were many measures in the budget to help children who are living in poverty, not least the sure start maternity grant, which will increase to £500 next year. While we need those UK changes to address poverty, the Scottish Executive is proceeding with a large number of initiatives: the national maternity services framework; the health improvement fund; public health practitioners; health-promoting schools, to which I referred; the child health  service template, which will be launched soon; and new performance management arrangements, which will require health boards to show how joined up their child health services are, and whether they are meeting children's clinical and emotional needs. Clearly, child health is a new priority for the Executive, and children's services right across the Executive—through the children's change fund, sure start Scotland and many other initiatives—are at the top of our agenda. An important start has been made on addressing problems of child poverty and child health inequalities. I hope that the whole chamber will acknowledge that today.

Later this month, the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network—SIGN—will publish evidence-based guidance for health professionals on the diagnosis, assessment and management of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children. The guidance will be made available to all relevant health professionals.

I am aware that this is a controversial area and that a number of people have expressed concerns—I spoke to the Scottish Association of Mental Health on the subject last week. However, I would prefer to wait to see what the SIGN guidance says. SIGN will be considering a lot of the research evidence and taking account of best practice. I am told that it will cover non-pharmacological treatments as well as the issue to which the question refers.

I congratulate Robert Brown on securing the debate and on bringing these important matters to our attention.  The Scottish Executive recognises the extremely valuable work of health visitors and nurses in the community and the dedication they show in caring for their patients. The most effective way of delivering services is often to do so in the patient's home or in the community. That is why we have targeted funding to increase the number of community nurses and have recently announced plans for new public health nurses to address Scotland's health challenges. We are equally keen to do everything we can to support those key staff in their vital work and to ensure that they do not find themselves out of pocket as a result. We are already taking steps to address the concerns Robert Brown raised and to put in place measures to deal with the difficulties health visitors and nurses face, although I accept that there is still a long way to go to ensure all the progress that members seek. Let me make it clear from the outset that, where parking charges are unavoidable, there is provision for NHS staff to claim reimbursement from their employers. I assume that that always takes place and would want to know if it did not. More generally, car parking arrangements are essentially a matter for individual local authorities in exercising their responsibilities under the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984. That will be a disappointment to Donald Gorrie, who wants me to be able to do everything. The statutory power lies in that act. I will explain that in more detail, as Robert Brown asked me to elaborate on the point. We are keen to encourage concessions for staff while they are carrying out NHS duties in the community, not least because of the problems  Elaine Thomson described, including the time wasted looking for parking spaces. Local authorities already have powers to make traffic regulation orders for a variety of traffic management purposes. That could include the issuing of parking permits for use by community nurses and health visitors when making visits. The City of Edinburgh Council, for example, issues about 350 such passes to NHS trusts for use by health visitors and community nurses. Those passes allow community nursing staff exemption from certain parking restrictions and enable them to stay for longer periods when certain time restrictions apply. We want that example of good practice to be adopted throughout Scotland and will write to all local authorities, reminding them that they have the powers to implement similar schemes. In law, the decision rests with local authorities, but we hope that they will react positively and make parking permits available for use by health visitors and community nursing staff throughout the country. We will also ensure that trusts and health boards are advised of those provisions. Elaine Thomson referred to what happens with general practitioners. I should clarify that point, because GPs do not in fact have any legal exemption from parking restriction, although the British Medical Association issues doctors with "Doctor on call" stickers so that they can be easily identified. As Mary Scanlon reminded us, a review of car leasing and mileage arrangements is in progress—I am not sure that it has been going on since 1988, but I hear what she says about the time it is taking. A UK working group of Department of Health officials, NHS managers and staff representatives has been looking at how we can simplify and modernise the existing formula for mileage allowances to provide fair reimbursement of staff expenses that are necessarily incurred on NHS business and to reflect wider environmental policies. I cannot give a precise date for the conclusion of the review, but it will be this year. The Scottish Executive will ensure that the review fully addresses the needs of the service in Scotland, for example in relation to services in rural and remote areas. I would be pleased to receive details of the figure of £700 that has been mentioned so that that information can be fed into the review at this late stage. As an interim measure, mileage allowances for NHS staff were increased from July last year. Those interim increases are especially beneficial for staff working in the community who currently receive a regular user allowance. Additionally, in more remote areas such as the  Highlands and Islands, a number of trusts and boards operate petrol card schemes to ensure that they take advantage of average mainland petrol prices. A problem is that some trusts and boards do not take up such schemes; I encourage them to do so. Those measures demonstrate that the Scottish Executive takes seriously the needs of NHS staff in relation to their working conditions as well as financial matters such as pay and reimbursement. We believe that an investment in staff is an investment in patient care. We are developing new models of care in our communities and matching our ambitions with targeted additional funds to increase staff numbers in these key areas. We recognise that the conditions and provisions for travel reimbursement, too, need to be changed and we have set action in train to ensure that they are. That is just one of the many aspects of pay and terms and conditions of service that need to be reviewed. We are considering all aspects of pay and conditions as part of the UK talks on pay modernisation that are in progress. We are demonstrating by our actions and our investment that we are committed to improving terms and conditions of service for all staff in NHS Scotland in the short and the long term. I end by thanking members for drawing these matters to the attention of the Parliament. I will watch progress on these matters with keen interest and I will certainly intervene where I have the power to do so.  Meeting closed at 17:58.

Latest census results show that 6 per cent fewer people were waiting for discharge in January this year than in September last. That improvement, when winter pressures on the NHS and on social services were at their height, reflects the high priority that we have given to reducing delays.

I agree that there has been excellent work in Fife on joint working. That work  was especially targeted at keeping people at home, but I note that Fife also put some of the additional money into extra nursing home places. Over the winter, we gave £34 million specifically for delayed discharge, over and above what was already the largest increase in the health budget for many years. Fife, like many other areas, has made good use of that money.

We are certainly not complacent, but it is remarkable and possibly unprecedented for delayed discharges to be reduced over the winter. We take that seriously, which is why have established for the first time a census of those who are waiting in hospital for discharge. The median wait over the winter period declined by 10 days, which is highly significant. There is a long way to go, but Nicola Sturgeon ought to acknowledge the progress that has been made.

Mary Scanlon is right—we attach great importance to the elderly. However, mental health is also a priority for the Executive. While progress has been made in that, I acknowledge that much more must be done. More money has gone into mental health in general over the past year—I think it increased by 7 per cent in the NHS sector—and, while I accept that there is still a lot to do, that progress ought to be acknowledged.

Richard Simpson is right to highlight those who are waiting for the longest period—that is a serious problem. There are sometimes particular reasons why people wait for a long time in hospital and I undertake to consider that issue in detail. We would like to reduce the maximum waiting time for people in hospital.

Will Shona Robison give way?

This has been a complex debate, dealing with matters of great importance. Margaret Smith and Richard Simpson made the point well that it is the care and treatment of people who have hepatitis C that is crucial now. We cannot change the events of the past, but we can change the future. Various members have mentioned the many initiatives for people who have hepatitis C. Margaret Smith referred to combination therapy, which is becoming more widely available. That should continue. Reference was also made to the SNAP report, which contains many excellent recommendations and which I praised during the members' business debate on hepatitis C a few weeks ago. Margo MacDonald referred to information and prevention, and the Executive has allocated £7 million for the prevention of blood-borne viruses. Over and above that, £12 million has been granted to fund a recombinant clotting factor, which will soon become available to all haemophiliacs, although there are temporary supply difficulties. Mary Scanlon referred to the Haemophilia Society, in which context I have two points to make. First, Susan Deacon met the Haemophilia Society before the report was written. Secondly, written evidence was taken both from individual patients and the society. However, as Mary Scanlon also reminded us, this debate does not relate only to people who have haemophilia. Cathy  Jamieson would like to make that point, so I will give way to her.

Cathy Jamieson makes an extremely important point. The debate is not just about those who have haemophilia, nor just about blood products, although that is what the SNP motion refers to. Clearly, it is about people who have received blood transfusions and—as Mary Scanlon reminded us—people who have contracted hepatitis C by other means, such as surgery. Beyond that, it is about many other medical conditions. The crucial question that we must ask is how we are to exercise judgment concerning who deserves compensation and who does not. That question and the wider issues that have arisen today have important implications.

Nicola Sturgeon can refer to only one decision, which was clearly exceptional—that is why she always refers to it—whereas I am talking about the general principle and the way in which distinctions will be made.

No, I do not have time. I have only half a minute left. Richard Simpson made the important point, which I too made in my opening speech, that we must reflect on the consequences for the NHS of awarding compensation. The result of what is being suggested may be to make the NHS incredibly risk averse; as I said, that may have adverse effects on clinical practice and patient care. What might seem the fair, reasonable and sensitive human response to the individual could—when it is analysed fully—prove deeply damaging to a far wider range of people in the long run. Members should reflect on that fact, even if they do not agree with it on first hearing it.

I welcome the opportunity to debate this important and sensitive issue. I am conscious that, in a short debate, we will be unable to do justice to the complexities of the issue. For that reason, I am pleased that the Health and Community Care Committee continues to examine the matter in greater detail. Primarily, this is not a legal or a political issue; it is a human issue. Susan Deacon and I share absolutely the concern that has been expressed about the human consequences for individuals who suffer from hepatitis C and their families. Those individuals must receive the best possible care and treatment, which is why we have targeted additional investment and effort to the causes, treatment and prevention of hepatitis C. We recognise also the particular tragedy of those  who contracted the infection through blood transfusions and blood products when medical and scientific knowledge was considerably less advanced than it is today. As members know, Susan Deacon was especially concerned at the suggestion that the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service could or should have acted sooner in the 1980s to introduce the heat treatment necessary to eliminate hepatitis C from the blood-clotting agents that are essential to the health, and often the survival, of many people with haemophilia. That is why she commissioned an investigation into the sequence of events in the mid-1980s. That examination found that, given the level of scientific knowledge at the time, the SNBTS could not have eliminated the risk any sooner than it did. The report, which was published last October, found no evidence of negligence or of a failure to act. I am therefore disappointed that Nicola Sturgeon is still suggesting that fault was involved. I refer her to the independent expert, Professor Mike Greaves, professor of haematology at the University of Aberdeen, who said that it was "a carefully researched and detailed report" and "a thorough and balanced assessment". As politicians with an interest in health—and especially as health ministers—we have a responsibility to do all that is in our power to reduce the risks involved in medical procedures and treatments. Risk, however, can never be eliminated. Sadly, a potentially life-saving drug, blood transfusion, operation or other procedure can often have tragic consequences through an individual adverse reaction or, as in these cases, an inadvertent or unknown side effect.

Perhaps later on, but I am up against the clock. All medical treatment involves, to some extent, the calculation of risk, including the risk of not undertaking the treatment. Every health care system and every health care professional has to grapple with how that risk is managed. Successive Governments of different political persuasions have adopted the general view that the NHS should not offer compensation in cases of non-negligent harm. Time and again, politicians and the medical profession have revisited the issue but on each occasion the same conclusion has been reached. The contrary view not only has cost implications for the NHS but, more crucially, might have adverse effects on clinical practice, the development of drugs and therapies and patient care throughout the health care system.  Nicola Sturgeon is right to indicate that the recent judgment by Mr Justice Burton in the English High Court is significant, in that it does not concern itself with negligence. It is a long and complex judgment—the summary alone covers 40 densely printed pages. Members who are interested will want to read it for themselves—it is not for me to give an authoritative summary of the case—but the main point is that the court found in favour of a group of plaintiffs who had contracted hepatitis C through transfused blood. It is worth pointing out that the SNP motion, which refers exclusively to those contaminated by blood products, bypasses everyone in that category. The case was brought under the Consumer Protection Act 1987, which came into effect in March 1988. Under the terms of the act, the National Blood Authority was judged to have provided a defective product. A judgment in an English court on specific cases within that jurisdiction is not binding on a Scottish court, although any Scottish court, when faced with similar circumstances, would have regard to it.

I am pushed for time, so I will take one if I have time at the end. The Executive is considering carefully what the implications of the judgment might be for a small number of similar Scottish cases. We are also working jointly with other health departments to consider what the wider implications of the judgment might be for the NHS. The matter, rightly, merits careful consideration. However, it is clear that the ruling deals with different circumstances, different treatments and a different time period from the cases referred to in the motion and in Nicola Sturgeon's speech, and indeed from those that Susan Deacon examined in the report to which I referred. I recognise that many observers and certainly anyone affected would ask, "Why not just provide compensation for the relatively small number of cases affected?" or perhaps, "Why not give some financial redress to all those who have been made ill by blood transfusions and blood products, or even to all those who have been made ill by other medical treatments and procedures?" That is, in a sense, precisely the point. If that door were opened, how many people—now and in the future—would be affected? How would we judge who, when and how much to pay?

That is the only example from the NHS that Nicola Sturgeon can give, because variant CJD was not related to NHS treatment. It was exceptional, but no political party said that the principle should be changed because of that example. Nicola Sturgeon may remember that, at the time, people felt that HIV was different and that people were going to die very soon. Particular circumstances were involved. Where negligence is proven, the long-established situation in the NHS is clear cut. Well-established arrangements for compensation and other action exist where negligence has been the cause of harm. However, what about cases in which someone is adversely affected by accident because a doctor could not have known any differently, science did not know, a patient reacted adversely to a routine procedure or, quite simply, because medicine is not a precise science and every day, by necessity, risks are taken to try to save a life or cure an ill? Would we want to create a climate in our health care system that made it risk averse? Would we want to discourage the development of new drugs and therapies because of what they might do? Would we want new treatments to be denied to people because they might involve a risk? I hope that, even in the short time available, we can reflect on those broader issues while continuing to be sensitive to the real human experiences of those who, understandably, look to us for action. I move amendment S1M-1865.1, to leave out from "calls" to end and insert: "notes the Report produced by the Executive in October 2000 on Hepatitis C and Heat Treatment of Blood Products for Haemophiliacs in the mid 1980s ; further notes the continuing deliberations of the Health and Community Care Committee on this issue and the recent ruling of the English High Court in the case of a number of NHS patients who have been infected with hepatitis C through blood transfusions, and encourages the Executive to examine constructively the implications of this ruling."

Audit Scotland, on behalf of the Accounts Commission, prepared and published "Commissioning Community Care Services for Older People: Applying a Best Value Framework" in October 2000. That provides local authorities with a framework for commissioning services for older people based on the Accounts Commission's best-value performance management and planning audit. Audit Scotland has undertaken to follow up councils' progress in adopting the framework.

This is a complex issue, but clearly, best value, as I indicated in my answer, is the key to progress. There will be further developments with regard to best value, which the Minister for Finance and Local Government will announce in due course. People forget that best value is not just about cost; it is also about quality. That is why this is a complex area. We cannot simply look at what is cheapest; we have to look at quality. That is at the heart of our agenda and the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill.

The drive to address the problem of delayed discharge is at the heart of our priorities. The increases for community care this year and the next two years are way beyond the rate of inflation, and are beyond anything that we have seen in the past two decades. We accept that there are still problems, but the last census of delayed discharges indicated an improvement, even though it was during the winter months. We look forward to further improvements as the new money feeds through in the course of this financial year.

As part of the Government's prepare-and-decide policy, national health service Scotland bodies were asked to undertake a measure of pre-planning for possible UK entry to the single currency. NHS Scotland bodies considered what services they might provide during a changeover and how they would convert their systems to the euro, and identified key planning activities. The exercise was a limited management pre-planning exercise that was carried out from within agreed running costs. Resources were not diverted from patient care. The exercise was similar to that undertaken by central Government in 1999.

The people who were involved would have been finance and information technology staff. The amount of work that they did would have been just a few days. The cost for the whole of the United Kingdom for all services is £10 million, so, clearly, the cost to one service in Scotland is infinitesimal. It is sad that the Conservative party has nothing to say in the forthcoming general election, except a deplorable European policy. [Applause.]

I congratulate Irene McGugan on securing this debate and pay tribute to her tenacity in pursuing the matter over several months. I realise that Irene McGugan's previous inquiries about the berry Scotland project have been dealt with by Ross Finnie. I venture to suggest that, contrary to what John Swinney said, the involvement of Ross Finnie and health ministers is a reflection of our determination that the project should be a cross-cutting matter. I want to talk later about coronary heart disease, diet and the soft fruit industry in general, but it is appropriate right at the start to address the berry project. We have taken a sympathetic view of the underlying aims of the berry Scotland project. That is why we have encouraged the group to prepare proposals for a pilot project in Tayside. It is perfectly reasonable and normal to run a pilot operation before deciding whether to invest a substantial sum from the public purse. After all, that is precisely what they did in Finland. The oft-cited North Karelia project, which of course involved a lot more than promoting berries, was a pilot project. I remind members that Susan Deacon visited Karelia and assures me that she enjoyed eating berries for breakfast during her visit. It is not unreasonable to seek a pilot project in Scotland, to establish what is appropriate and what works for our particular needs and circumstances. That is why I am pleased that the Scottish berry group has now submitted proposals for a pilot project. We hope that when we meet the group we will be able to work further on the proposals to develop a project that has a real chance of charting a path for achieving the twin aims of improving the health of the nation and increasing consumption of Scottish berries and berry products. As Irene McGugan and other members reminded us, coronary heart disease is one of Scotland's major killer diseases. Half a million Scots suffer from it and there were 13,337 deaths from it in 1999. Moreover, our coronary heart disease death rate is 15 per cent higher than the United Kingdom average. In view of that, we are pursuing a host of initiatives with regard to prevention, diagnosis and treatment, which we will bring together in a national plan for coronary heart disease. A key element is the £6 million demonstration project that the Scottish Executive is funding in Paisley, which is based on the same  principles as Finland's North Karelia project. Professor Vairtainen from the North Karelia project is an active adviser. I have spoken for four minutes, which is hard to believe. I will have to miss out part of what I wanted to say. We have to remember that diet is only part of a comprehensive strategy. I enjoyed Mary Scanlon's adaptation of Billy Connolly's song, but we all know that we have to take action on a range of fronts, including smoking, exercise and poverty. However, diet is crucial, and the Scottish diet action plan aims to focus the efforts of all key interests, so that the interrelated objective to improve the diet of all individuals can be properly met. The implementation of the plan's recommendations will be further supported through the appointment soon of the national diet action co-ordinator. The work of the Scottish community diet project, which has lots of local health projects, is also crucial to this issue. Increasing fruit and vegetable consumption, including the consumption of berries, is one of the most important aspects of improving diet. Indeed, the Health Education Board for Scotland has been promoting the message of five portions of fruit and vegetables a day for a considerable time. Moreover, the health improvement fund, which will involve £100 million over the coming four years, has the consumption of fruit and vegetables as one of its key priorities. More than half the money will be channelled through health boards, and we have advised that they should give priority to improving the diet of children through support for the provision of fruit for infants in pre-school settings, and fruit/salad bars and breakfast clubs in school settings. I have only one minute left, and because I ate some raspberries I am sure that the Presiding Officer will not let me have any extra time, so I will end by saying a few words about the soft fruit industry. We are well aware of the problems that are besetting the industry, in spite of the unprecedented investment of European and UK funding of about £8 million over the past eight years. The relevant EU programme is now at an end, but Mary Scanlon referred to other European initiatives, and they are being pursued. We are working with Scottish Soft Fruit Growers Ltd in its application for recognition as a producer organisation under the EU fruit and vegetable regime. We will also assist it in preparing an operational programme under the scheme, so that it continues to benefit from European funding. Also, we recently commissioned management consultants to report on the future of raspberry breeding in Scotland. The rural affairs department has issued a consultation paper on the findings of the consultants' report, and is currently analysing  responses.

I am impressed by the wide range of people who are involved, including health interests. It is a striking feature of the initiative. The rural affairs department is funding strategic research and development on pests and diseases that affect raspberry crops, because we know that those have been a problem for the industry in recent times. The Scottish Executive already is helping, but clearly, we want to work on the Scottish berry project proposals. I look forward to the meeting that will take place soon, and I hope that following it, there will be progress on this worthwhile initiative.  Meeting closed at 17:34.

On 8 March, I announced the appointment of a health and homelessness co-ordinator who will support NHS boards in their work to improve health care services to homeless people. The co-ordinator's work will be led by a national health and homelessness steering group whose membership comprises NHS, local authority and voluntary sector representatives and officials from the health and development departments. Draft guidance to the service on improving the health of homeless people and their health care services will be issued in the next few days.

Addressing the problems of health and homelessness is an important part of our priorities for dealing with health inequalities. Part of that involves ensuring that access to the services that Patricia Ferguson mentioned is as convenient for homeless people as it is for us. The guidance that will be issued in the next few days will place a new requirement on health boards to develop action plans and to involve homeless people in developing those plans. The co-ordinator to whom I referred will drive forward that agenda in the next few months.

John McAllion is right to refer to the personal medical services initiative, which results in the employment of salaried GPs, particularly in deprived areas. In my constituency,  the same excellent development of GP services for homeless people has taken place. That is a key part of what we are discussing. In my original answer, I referred to what we will do, but I remind people of the initiatives that are in place. We have given £4 million this year from the health budget to the rough sleepers initiative, and we have supported other initiatives. This week, Susan Deacon announced a new public health role for nurses and health visitors. That is also highly relevant to the agenda.

I begin by thanking George Reid for his tribute to Clare Short's work in refocusing our international development priorities on the reduction of poverty. Bill Aitken asked about a definition of poverty. It is defined in terms of internationally agreed targets, including moving 1 billion people out of extreme poverty by 2015. In turn, I want to pay tribute to George Reid's substantial work on this important issue over the years and to thank him for his very constructive approach to today's motion. Scottish ministers have not ignored this issue. Members will be interested to know that on 5 June last year, Jackie Baillie visited the Department for International Development in East Kilbride to discuss the common interests of the Executive and the department in the voluntary sector in Scotland. A number of international agencies are  based in Scotland and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, which receives Scottish Executive support, is assisting them to interface with the Department of International Development and to link with each other. It is important that Scottish ministers have consent powers in relation to Scottish statutory bodies that undertake international development work. I refer George Lyon to schedule 2, which lists those bodies, which are mainly health bodies. There is a balance to be struck between international development activity, which is reserved, and the responsibilities of Scottish ministers in relation to Scottish statutory bodies. The bill strikes that balance by requiring the dual consent of Scottish ministers and the Secretary of State for International Development before Scottish statutory bodies can undertake an international development project and by giving Scottish ministers the right to add or delete statutory bodies from the list of those that can undertaken international development work. The bill also makes particular provision for Scottish police officers. It is right and proper that the terms and conditions and pension rights of officers who are deployed on such missions should be protected while they are away from their normal force. The Scottish police are recognised for their professionalism and expertise; eight police officers from Scottish forces are currently deployed overseas. They are fulfilling an important international function. We should continue to play our part on the world stage. I thank Dennis Canavan for raising the issue of firefighters. I undertake to look into the matter. If there are problems in the bill, I shall draw them to the attention of ministers at Westminster. I hope that all members can agree with the bill. In pursuit of an important reserved purpose, it respects devolved interests and shows that we are working in partnership with the United Kingdom to tackle world poverty.

The International Development Bill is an important step forward in fighting poverty around the world. The bill establishes the reduction of poverty as the key objective of UK international development assistance. It also gives the Secretary of State for International Development a power to encourage civil society bodies to undertake international development projects and confirms the ability of a range of statutory bodies across the UK to engage in international development activity. Although international development is a reserved matter, there are four elements in the bill that need the consent of the Scottish Parliament. All four are consequential on the bill's provision to enable a range of statutory bodies, including some in Scotland, to undertake international development work. The elements in question ensure that, within the reserved purpose, devolved interests are appropriately respected. We want Scottish statutory bodies to be able to stand alongside their counterparts in the rest of the United Kingdom in providing international development assistance. It is also important that Scottish ministers can ensure that the bodies do not do so at the expense of their domestic responsibilities. The bill therefore includes provisions to create a dual consent mechanism for Scottish statutory bodies that undertake international development work. The consent of Scottish ministers, as well as that of the Secretary of State for International Development, will be required before Scottish bodies can undertake international development work. The bill will also give Scottish ministers the power to add or subtract from the list of bodies that can undertake such work. The bill includes provisions that are designed to ensure that Scottish police officers who are engaged in international development assistance are not disadvantaged in pay and pension by so doing. Police forces from Scotland may, for example, be asked to help to establish an efficient and effective police force in a developing country. Assistance could include training on management techniques, professional policing skills and respect for human rights. Police officers who are appointed to work overseas are subject to the  conditions of service for police officers on central service.

My understanding is that they will be covered. The fire service is not one of my departmental responsibilities, but I shall check and write to the member. Police officers appointed to work overseas are subject to the conditions of service of police officers on central service; that is, they are not treated as members of their parent force but their terms and conditions of service are protected and their service away from their force continues to count for pay awards and incremental progression, and for pension purposes. The officers continue to be eligible for promotion. To maintain that situation, the bill includes consequential amendments to section 38(a) of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 and to sections 7 and 11 of the Police Pensions Act 1976. The International Development Bill is about tackling world poverty. Although the motion has less lofty goals, its goal of securing the Parliament's agreement to provisions that reflect devolved interests is important. It is a good example of the UK Parliament and the Scottish Parliament working together to deal efficiently with business in which we both have an interest and where we share common goals. I move, That the Parliament endorses the principles included in the International Development Bill that Scottish Ministers' consent be required before Scottish statutory bodies undertake international development activity, that Scottish Ministers can add or delete Scottish bodies from the list of those which can undertake such activity and that Scottish police officers who undertake international development activity abroad continue to enjoy the same conditions of service as in the UK, and agrees that the relevant provisions to achieve these ends in the Bill should be considered by the UK Parliament.

I have acknowledged that further work is required. The care development group will focus on older people, but the Executive will take into account the needs of other care groups in implementing that group's recommendations.

Those are complex issues. I would have expected the SNP to welcome the fact that a detailed piece of work is being undertaken on older people. That is the correct way in which to proceed. We must first unravel the complexity of the personal care issue in relation to all the other needs of older people. We can carry that forward when the Executive receives the report of the care development group.

I join in congratulating Marilyn Livingstone on bringing this most serious, and tragically hidden, topic before us. I also commend the persuasive way in which she put the case for a national strategy. Many of the issues that arise are not within my departmental brief, but I shall try to cover as many of them as I can. There are health issues, but clearly there are housing issues, social work issues, justice issues and education issues. The importance of this debate is that, as Elaine Smith said, we must break the silence on this issue, and tear the veil from the shocking fact that so much abuse takes place in families, as Robin Harper reminded us. Girls and boys have been affected, although as Kenny Gibson pointed out, rather more females than males have been affected. I do not want to dwell on that point, but we ought to acknowledge that notwithstanding the fact that the victims are of both sexes, the perpetrators are almost always male. We ought to pay tribute to the work of the Zero Tolerance campaign, which pointed out that this is an issue of male power in general, and male abuse of power in particular. There are several justice issues. Cathy Jamieson raised the matter of criminal injuries  compensation. That is reserved to Westminster, but I know that a piece of legislation is going through Westminster—and I hope that it will be passed before any general election is called, if such should happen—which will allow for an increase of almost 50 per cent in the minimum award for rape, and the maximum payable for sexual assault and child abuse will more than double. I am sure that we all welcome that, although I accept that there are continuing problems, as Cathy Jamieson said. I also want to mention briefly the work that is being done within the Scottish Executive on victims. That work includes the proposed sexual offences evidence bill and the broader strategy for victims of crime, which is designed to ensure that victims are treated with compassion and respect and are given the emotional and practical support that they need to help them to recover. I also want to mention the money that is being given to Victim Support Scotland this year. That includes not just the normal increase but a specific sum of £260,000 to raise public awareness about the impact of crime on victims and to help to provide more training for volunteers who work with victims. That should help those volunteers to be more responsive to the needs of victims of sexual abuse. That leads on to the more general and crucial question of training to which Kenny Gibson referred. Robin Harper mentioned training teachers in particular. I hope that such training will take place within teacher education. Marilyn Livingstone and others have referred to the relationship between sexual abuse and mental health. Marilyn referred to acute psychiatric admissions and other people mentioned suicide, drugs and self-harm. Cathy Jamieson reminded us that many survivors have come through all of the terrible things that they have suffered. The Executive acknowledged the issue in the health plan by referring to the mental and other health needs that arise from the experience of sexual abuse. It said in the mental health section that dealing with such needs should be a priority. I am pleased that in a couple of months I will be launching some important research on the whole issue of people who have survived sexual abuse and how they are dealt with in the psychiatric system. While we should pay tribute to all the good work that goes on, we have to acknowledge that, as that research will acknowledge, the situation is not always ideal. There have been good developments. The mental and well-being development fund has funded a local Fife project to provide services to survivors of childhood sexual abuse. We are also developing psychological therapies that ought to  be helpful because they include post-traumatic therapies for a wide range of emotional, psychological and psychiatric problems including, for example, those arising as a result of trauma, assault and childhood sexual abuse. Work is being done on developing those areas. One of the key lessons that we must learn from children who have been abused in the past is, clearly, that it needs to be made easier for children's voices to be heard when they have been abused or have witnessed the abuse of others. That is partly why the Executive has promoted the development of a comprehensive network of children's rights officers, part of whose function will be to provide an advocacy service for young people. Dorothy-Grace Elder and others reminded us of the issue of a children's commissioner. The Executive has clearly been sympathetic and has asked the Education, Culture and Sport Committee to examine the case for that. Schools, too, are taking positive steps to help children to protect themselves through programmes of education in health and personal safety. Such programmes should be included in nursery and primary schools, which will ensure that the content is appropriate for their pupils' age and stage of development. That reminds me of a project in Dundee, which some members may know about, called the very important person project, whose launch I attended. The VIP project has done excellent work in that area. Am I down to one minute, Presiding Officer?

Obviously, I cannot cover all the issues that I wanted to cover. Our previous debate today was the stage 1 debate on the process of setting up the Scottish commission for the regulation of care. Although I mentioned at the beginning of my speech that abuse can take place within families, it is clear that abuse also takes place in care homes and suchlike. The setting-up of that new body should also help to address the terrible problem of abuse taking place in care homes. The index of persons unsuitable to work with children, on which we are currently consulting, will also help to address the problem of abuse. Since my time is up, I once again congratulate Marilyn Livingstone on bringing this important topic before us today. I have shown that some action is being taken, but I am far from complacent. I acknowledge that a great deal more needs to be done. I look forward to working with the cross-party group on survivors of childhood sexual abuse and to attending its launch straight after the debate.  Meeting closed at 17:50.

This has been an excellent debate; it has shown how effectively our new committee system is working, with six committees having scrutinised the bill. The fact bears repeating that we are discussing the general principles of the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill. I reaffirm that, contrary to what Mary Scanlon said when she focused on section 24, the central aim of the bill is the improvement of quality and standards. The bill represents a huge step forward for users of care services in Scotland. It will introduce a new and better regulatory system for care and early education and put in place the structure needed to develop a better social services work force in Scotland. It has to be right that the services that deal with the most vulnerable people in our society are subject to independent scrutiny and that the work force that provides those services should be recognised as providing a key professional service that requires proper training and regulation. Several members have highlighted the inadequacies of the current situation. Shona Robison talked about the varied and inconsistent system and pointed out that many services are not formally regulated at all. Margaret Smith reminded us that elderly people often have to move when they are in need of nursing care. That is one of the issues that will be addressed by the creation of the single-care home. There is currently also a lack of independence, a lack of coverage and a lack of user focus. There is no body to promote the professionalism of the work force and no way of ensuring fast and effective enforcement action when concerns arise. I welcome the fact that most members have acknowledged that the bill represents a big step forward. There has been considerable debate this afternoon about funding, especially our proposal  that the regulatory functions of the new commission should, where possible, be financed through fees paid by regulated providers. We believe that the cost of regulating services should be explicit and that providers should have a direct interest in ensuring that the system works as effectively and efficiently as possible. There would be little or no reduction in the cost of the commission if it did not have to collect fees from providers. John McAllion expressed scepticism about the figure of £70,000, but that indicates the kind of sum that we are talking about, even if it may not be correct to the last pound. We can certainly say that the new system will be a great deal less bureaucratic than the current one. Fees will accompany applications for registration and renewals of registration and they will have to be paid before the statutory requirement for providers to be registered and to continue to be so is met. Chasing up fees should not therefore be required. I accept that, in most cases, an element of any fee increase will be passed on to the purchasers of care, but any such increase will be minimal, as it will represent an increase in overall costs of less than 1 per cent—an increase of around £100 out of a cost of about £17,000 per year for a typical care home place. I therefore do not recognise the figures to which Mary Scanlon referred. We will ensure that local authorities have enough funding to carry out their role as both commissioners and providers of care. Contrary to what Kenny Gibson suggested, that will be covered by grant-aided expenditure beyond 2004.

Mary Scanlon's question raises a wider issue about local authorities and grant-aided expenditure, which I do not have the time to go into just now. Earlier, Mary Scanlon made another point about funding. I accept that there may be resource implications for providers in meeting the care standards. A full consultation exercise on those costs will be undertaken later this year. Margaret Jamieson and Trish Godman mentioned staff training. We will be funding initial training for registered managers and we will also look more generally at education and training  issues across the work force. We will deal with that proposal and the financial strategy for its development when we publish a paper on the modernisation of education and training for social services staff later this year. We are advertising this week for a provider to produce a training programme for registration and inspection staff, which we hope current staff will avail themselves of in the near future. Mary Scanlon's comment about Weight Watchers was rather unfortunate. However, although that organisation is not within the scope of the bill, her comment raises the serious issue of diet clinics, which are within its scope, along with a range of other voluntary and independent health care services. Although those proposals do not form the bulk of the bill, it is important to note that the provisions to regulate private health care represent the first overhaul of the regulation of the sector since the inception of the NHS. As Margaret Jamieson reminded us, although we are rightly concerned about the care home sector, we should remember that it represents only about 2,000 out of the 17,000 care services that the bill will regulate. The debate about the number of inspections should be seen within that context; for example, the current statutory minimum for child care is one inspection a year and there is no statutory minimum for residential care in general.

We will certainly want to consider that issue before stage 2. As Nicola Sturgeon knows, an inspection methods group is examining both how the whole inspection process should work—the role of announced and unannounced inspections—and self-assessment. The group will focus on ensuring that the methods we develop can effectively monitor, sustain and enhance the quality of life of people who use services. Although we are continuing to examine that issue, I remind members that this is the first time ever that all care services will have a statutory minimum of one inspection. I have only three minutes in which to cover many points. Brian Monteith mentioned HMI involvement with the commission. HMI will co-ordinate its inspections with the commission and develop links to ensure that any concerns about standards of care are dealt with appropriately. Karen Gillon mentioned dual registration. We are actively discussing that issue with nurses and  teachers and certainly intend that that should happen. Richard Simpson and Shona Robison referred to complaints. We are considering the possibility of a complaints hotline and procedures for whistleblowing. I am sure that every member will agree that our proposals are better than what currently exists. Margaret Jamieson talked about the terms and conditions for transferring workers. At the moment, there are many different terms and conditions for people working for a range of local authorities and health boards. Although we intend to have one set of terms and conditions, all workers will transfer on their current terms and conditions. A group will begin to discuss the issue later this month. I have met the trade unions involved, which have told me that they are comfortable with the proposed way forward. Keith Raffan and other members raised the issue of nannies. As Susan Deacon said—and indeed announced for the first time—we will be regulating sitter services where an agency provides home-based care for families needing additional support or respite. If there is a contract with such an agency—which could be a nanny agency—it will be regulated. However, carers such as baby-sitters and nannies who are selected and employed by the parents will not be regulated, although they will of course be covered by employment legislation on nanny agencies. I have time to deal only with the matter of location. As we announced yesterday, subject to Parliament approving the bill's principles, we propose to locate the headquarters of both the commission and the council in Dundee. I am pleased that Shona Robison, John McAllion and others have welcomed that announcement. Shona Robison said that there was no coherent argument behind our proposals for five other centres. However, I remind her that Susan Deacon referred to a new national focus for the organisation and to the issue of effective management and the relatively small number of people involved. We have also decided that the commission will have a number of local resource centres in which staff can hold meetings, conduct interviews and store records. Clearly, there is a problem of time scale. The local offices are to be up and running by April 2002—we all agree that that needs to happen. An announcement on the number and location of the local centres will have to be made before stage 2. What is not in doubt is the fact that the principles of the bill are right and represent a big step forward in improving the quality of care for all people in Scotland who use care services. I  commend the bill to the Parliament. We have waited a long time for it. I debated the issue at Westminster in the one health debate that we had in the year before the 1997 general election. I said then: "We still do not have a regulatory framework that is applied consistently throughout Scotland and seeks to provide quality and protect the vulnerable."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 26 February 1997; Vol 291, c 292.] I am glad that that is being rectified today.

I begin as Susan Deacon ended, by thanking and recognising all the people who work in primary care. I am sure that I speak for everyone in the chamber when I say that. One of the main themes of today's debate has been the changing role of people working in primary care and the empowerment that goes with that. Margaret Jamieson and Richard Simpson were two of the members who mentioned that, and the issue is referred to in Mary Scanlon's  amendment. I would say to her, however, that the measures that she calls for in that regard are already happening. The BMA survey has been mentioned; we take the concerns of GPs seriously. However, we should bear it in mind that that survey was conducted before "Our National Health" came out. The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain said that the Scottish health plan that was outlined in that document presented "a superb opportunity to improve the provision of health care in Scotland. By removing traditional and, at times, obstructive working practices and professional demarcations we can make major improvements to the quality of service delivered to patients." While referring to the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, I should respond to the point that David Davidson and Shona Robison made, about Susan Deacon not listening or consulting, by pointing out that the society wrote to welcome greatly the minister's personal commitment to engaging the profession. People should be more careful when throwing accusations about. We take the concerns of GPs seriously. However, I want to make three points about the concerns that have been highlighted today. First, as I said, the survey was conducted before the publication of "Our National Health". The briefing from the BMA today takes a more balanced approach and welcomes some of the Executive's initiatives such as NHS24. Secondly, we are dealing with many of the issues about which GPs expressed concern, including the need for more time with patients and for less bureaucracy. My third point is in reference to Mary Scanlon's comment that the doctors are speaking out as never before. I remind Mary Scanlon and other members that, in 1990, the new contract that introduced the internal market and fundholding led to a threat on the part of the BMA of mass resignation—not early retirement.

I will talk about developments in local health care co-operatives in a moment, and ask Mary Scanlon to bear with me. As I have just referred to fundholding, we should now remind ourselves about how bureaucratic and competitive the situation was, as Richard Simpson mentioned, and about the extent to which fundholding gave rise to institutionalised inequity. We have no intention of going back to that. I agreed with one point that Mary Scanlon made, when she said that the SNP was  "against everything and for nothing". I thank Nicola Sturgeon for recognising improvements in primary care and for praising the importance of primary care. However, there is absolutely nothing about primary care in the SNP's policy paper. I wish that "paperlet" was a word in the English language, as that would describe its policy document very appropriately. There was little in her speech about primary care, except with regard to LHCCs, which I am coming to. Nicola Sturgeon asks for 1,500 more nurses. In the health plan, we have already committed to 1,500 nurses over and above the previous proposals. That comes on top of the 210 specialist nurses who were recruited this winter. The subject of waiting inevitably came up. We of course recognise that more needs to be done. As the SNP is keen on quoting from our 1997 pledge card, I remind members of what it says. This UK pledge says: "We will cut NHS waiting lists by treating an extra 100,000 patients". In Scotland alone, there have been more than 100,000 extra operations since 1997. The fact that that has not led to reductions in waiting lists is because of the great increase in the volume of treatment. I am in no way complacent about waiting, but I ask members who quote pledges to do so accurately.

If SNP members are reduced to quoting from pre-manifestos, it shows how desperate they are. Our commitment to primary care is not just in our policies and proposals, but in the resources that we put in. Susan Deacon reminded us of the global figure for health: an increase from £4.7 billion last year to £6.7 billion by 2003. Margaret Smith reminded us that within that is the £33 million for the new primary care premises that are to be provided, especially in deprived areas. There is also the £18.5 million for personal medical services, which Susan Deacon announced last week. I can assure Mary Scanlon that that is additional money. Margaret Smith also referred to the excellent work of LHCCs in her constituency. We should  consider the best practice that is developing in LHCCs. In cases of best practice, GPs are working together better than ever before with other players, such as community nurses and pharmacists. LHCCs also serve as a focus for public health activity and for the important health promotion work to which Janis Hughes referred.

I merely repeat the point that, although obviously there will be some transferred money, the £18.5 million is additional to any money that would be transferred. We are awaiting the report of the LHCC best practice group. We will then produce proposals that will fulfil the commitment that we have made to strengthen the role of LHCCs. In response to Ben Wallace's point, I say that £13.5 million has already been put into LHCC development. With reference to Richard Simpson's proposals, I say that we are already involved in detailed discussions on both funding and the levers for change to which various members have referred. Several members also spoke of personal medical services. On that I pay tribute to the Conservative party, because four years ago this very month Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and I were working on the National Health Service (Primary Care) Bill in the House of Commons. In many cases, the National Health Service (Primary Care) Act 1997 has improved access and quality. It has developed new arrangements for service delivery, reduced bureaucracy and led to better and more flexible services, for marginalised groups in particular. Sandra White and Dorothy-Grace Elder raised the issue of homelessness in that regard. Sandra White mentioned the homelessness pilot in my constituency. I am sure that everybody recognises its success. Very soon we shall issue guidance on health and homelessness and name a health and homelessness co-ordinator. David Davidson asked us to apply PMS to dentistry. I assure him that that is already happening, as there are 40 salaried dentists. That will go some way to meeting the concerns that were expressed by Mike Rumbles. I assure him that progress is being made by Dundee dental school in getting students into areas of Grampian. Adam Ingram, Robert Brown and Shona  Robison all raised the important issue of mental health and primary care, of which we are mindful as mental health is one of our key priorities. We want to build on the work of the mental health framework, in which primary care may not have been highlighted enough. That is why the health plan referred specifically to the further development of extended mental health services in primary care. The health plan recognises that severe and enduring mental illness is only the tip of the iceberg and that we need to do a great deal of work in primary care to deal with the broader range of mental health problems, to which members have referred. There are good examples of best practice in LHCCs and primary care generally, on which we want to build. On Monday, at Glasgow Caledonian University—to which Robert Brown referred—I was told about a mental health promotion project by community nurses in Glasgow. That emphasised the importance of health promotion in primary care, which is a point that Janis Hughes made. How long have I got, Presiding Officer?

In other words, I have one minute left. I will repeat some of the themes of the debate. Clearly, the priority at the heart of the agenda is better access. Several members talked about primary care gateways rather than GPs as gatekeepers. I have referred to NHS24. I also remind members of the pledge that people should be seen by a primary care worker within 48 hours. Another main theme has been changing roles. Time forbids me to describe the new roles of nurses and pharmacists, but various members have referred to them. We all recognise the importance of empowering those primary care workers in new ways. As Susan Deacon said, much of the content of today's debate is not the material that grabs headlines—we can but hope that we will be proved wrong—but it makes a real difference to the patient's journey and the quality of their life. I hope that I have convinced members that we are in the business of proposing solutions as well as identifying problems. It is unfortunate that the SNP is so engaged with the latter but not the former. Lest I am thought to be too soft on the Tories, however, I remind members that many have short memories, but we do not. It ill befits the party of bureaucracy, whose actions led to the threat of mass resignations by the BMA, and which talks under William Hague's leadership of creating a two-tier service and hiving off large sections of the  NHS, to criticise us for not having made all the improvements that were necessary in 1997. We have made a great many improvements. We have made an important start and I am sure that the people will ensure that we are allowed to carry on with the task.

I have no hesitation in endorsing a motion that praises the contribution of Scotland's voluntary hospices—a motion that Trish Godman spoke about so movingly. No one can be in any doubt about the magnificent job that those hospices do. I welcome this opportunity to place on record the Executive's appreciation of the fine work that is undertaken by hospice staff. The Executive acknowledges the outstanding contribution of the many volunteers in our hospices, whether providing services to patients or helping to raise funds. If the voluntary hospices are to remain in the vanguard of service development, they need to be sure about their funding. They need to know that their funding will allow them to provide agreed services and to provide services of the very high quality that we associate with them. They need security if they are to plan future developments. That is what the hospice funding agreement is intended to provide. The basis of that agreement is management executive letter MEL (1994) 104, to which the motion refers specifically. Although  that letter is now nearly seven years old, its terms are still in force today. That is something that we can all be proud of. In spite of the political and constitutional changes that those years have seen, we as a country have remained staunch in our support of our voluntary hospices and what they stand for. We expect NHS boards to work closely in partnership with hospices to ensure that people's care needs are met. As Mary Scanlon reminded us, that is reaffirmed in "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change". The target of health boards meeting 50 per cent of agreed running costs remains in force. Changes in the types of service that are provided by hospices have meant that, in some cases, what the hospices are keen to do has got out of kilter with the range of services that health boards are willing to fund.

In a moment. I appreciate the concern that, on average, health board funding of hospices' annual running costs stands at 39 per cent. I also appreciate that that average masks a fairly wide variation. The Executive therefore welcomes the joint efforts by the health department and the Scottish hospices forum to review the baseline—the agreed level that Richard Simpson referred to—against which the 50 per cent target should be calculated.

I am glad that Mary Scanlon has acknowledged the continuing work of the forum and the department in terms of the baseline. She will realise that the autonomy of health boards in making funding decisions often comes up. The significant thing is that the target is still in place. We are keen to work with the Scottish hospices forum to develop a framework that, while promoting consistency for hospice funding across Scotland, will be flexible enough to take account of local circumstances. We want to promote a partnership between health boards and hospices without inhibiting innovation on either side. Before I talk about specific issues relating to the Children's Hospice Association for Scotland, I want to respond to a couple of specific points. On the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill, I repeat what I said to the Health and Community Care  Committee yesterday. There is a commitment to establish a separate division within the Scottish commission for the regulation of care to cover independent health care. That will include the regulation of hospices.

I have only seven minutes and I may run out of time. I will take Dr Ewing's intervention in a minute, but I want to stay on the issue of quality. Not only the commission will work on quality: the Scottish partnership agency has agreed to establish a joint specialist palliative care group to develop national standards for palliative care. It is also preparing a plan with the health department for managed clinical networks in palliative care. On quality, a lot of work is going on. I must move on to the children's hospice. Susan Deacon visited Rachel House in December 1999 and was extremely impressed with the quality of the facilities and the dedication of the staff who provide such a wonderful service there. I am pleased to be able to take this opportunity to congratulate CHAS on its outstanding work in what is now widely recognised as a centre of excellence. When Rachel House was being set up, the former Scottish Office provided a grant of £750,000 to help with the building costs. It also gave a grant of £500,000 to cover the first two years' running costs, to make sure it got off to a secure start. The grants were on condition that further public funding would be based on agreements that CHAS would negotiate with health boards and local authorities. CHAS accepted that condition and began negotiations with health boards through the good offices of Tayside Health Board. Those negotiations have been on the basis of £125,000 as the overall contribution from health boards. I have had no indication that CHAS is unhappy with that negotiated figure. The problem may lie with the local authority negotiations. Perhaps that explains the unacceptably low figure of 9 per cent to which Trish Godman referred. I understand that it has not been possible to devise a mechanism that allows CHAS to negotiate with one local authority on behalf of all. CHAS has therefore been pursuing agreements with each local authority and I believe that it is close to achieving agreement, but the consequence so far has been that it has had no funding from local authorities. I am pleased that local authorities have recognised their responsibility and the benefits offered by Rachel House. I hope that the agreements will be concluded in the very near future.  I am concerned that the motion's reference to a funding shortfall may create the impression that CHAS does not have the money to meet the running costs of Rachel House. I am not aware of any such suggestion by CHAS. We all know that such facilities are expensive to run, but thanks to the great generosity of the people of Scotland, the overall income of CHAS is secure. Along with Trish Godman and Shona Robison I congratulate the Daily Record on all the work it has done. As Trish Godman said, the situation will radically alter in the near future as a second children's hospice is established on the banks of Loch Lomond at Balloch. I understand that it will focus on the needs of adolescents and I wish CHAS every success with that new venture. I am out of time, but I know what point Winnie Ewing was going to make—and other members have made it. I will convey to Sam Galbraith the opinions that have been expressed on that matter today.  Meeting closed at 17:57.

We have made it clear that we accept the Sutherland principles. The challenge now is to work on the detail and to translate the principles into applicable and understandable practical arrangements.

As it did yesterday, the Opposition is trying to dance on the head of a pin and confuse older people about this most important matter. Nicola Sturgeon did not listen to my answer. We all welcome the exceptionally able group of people who have agreed to serve under my convenership. The group will consider the detail in the first instance, but it will also deal with the very real and important task of translating principles into action. While the Opposition tries to confuse, we are determined to translate aspiration into action and rhetoric into reality.

I can assure Richard Simpson that this will be a most inclusive process. As the parliamentary answer that revealed the names of the group said, we are determined to consult widely, particularly with older people in Scotland. I will consult older people's groups and other mechanisms will be used to ensure that the  consultation is wide and inclusive. My only worry about Richard Simpson's suggestion of naming the groups we will consult is that we may exclude somebody. In principle, I entirely agree with what he says.

If Mary Scanlon had listened to the answer, she would not have had to ask the question. Sir Stewart Sutherland would be the first person in the world to admit that he has not said the last word in detail about personal care. He said as much in his report. I am delighted that Sir Stewart Sutherland will be one of the people who will give advice to our group as we work over the next six months.

It is clear that Keith Raffan has introduced another dimension to our work. As the remit of the care development group makes clear, we are focusing on older people in particular. We have a range of issues to consider and have not focused solely on personal care. Unlike the Opposition parties, we are examining all the other aspects of care for elderly people, particularly the crucial issue of the development of services. That will be our focus, but the work to which Keith Raffan refers will have to be done.

Phil Gallie can change his initial question, but I cannot change my initial answer, so here it is. There is no report called "Just Like Us" but the report on services for people with learning disabilities entitled "The same as you?" was launched in May last year. Good progress is being made in implementing its recommendations and Ayrshire and Arran Primary Care NHS Trust has received the same guidance as all other national health service bodies.

I am sure that Phil Gallie has read that excellent report, even though he did not get its title correct. It received more backing in the Parliament than any other that I can remember in the past two years. I think that the people of Scotland have approved it because users and carers were involved in its production to an unprecedented extent.  The report came with a £36 million change fund. No hospitals for people with learning disabilities will be shut until appropriate facilities are available in the community. The loud and clear message from people who have been in such hospitals and from their carers is that their settings are not appropriate and that we ought instead to have appropriate facilities in the community. In Edinburgh, for example, we have progressed a long way down that road. Anyone with concerns about this issue should examine the excellent community facilities that are now being used to replace traditional hospital beds.

I would like to deal with some of the substantive issues of the report that I did not have time to cover in my opening speech. I hope that I will have time to do so and to respond to several of the points that have been made about the service issues that the report raises. Before I do so, however, I am afraid that I will have to address the issue of motions and amendments. My usual calm unflappability has been sorely tested by some of the words that have been flying around the chamber this afternoon. Without criticising my colleagues, I could probably claim to have made the most positive Executive response ever to a committee report. I made it clear at several points in my speech that, of course, the Executive is acting upon the vast majority of the recommendations—in some cases because we have arrived at the same conclusions, albeit by a different route. However, it is absolutely clear that we cannot act upon every recommendation in detail, in this case or in general. Whatever Mike Rumbles says, that is what the wording of the amendment means.

I will take an intervention in a minute. An issue of principle is involved. No one has supported the committee system of the Parliament more than I have. I am committed to the partnership between committees and the Executive that was embodied in the founding principles of the Parliament. However, calling for every recommendation of a report to be acted on in detail is not part of such a partnership approach  and does not reflect the spirit of partnership. That is not the way to make legislation in the Parliament.

I object to the fact that speakers have misrepresented that reasonable procedural point time and again.

The debate has been turned into one that is solely about personal care, which I never said was the reason for my amendment.

I would have thought that Nicola Sturgeon knew that the care development group will not only make proposals for the implementation of free personal care, but consider many other important issues, some of which I referred to. I am genuinely amazed at how any member can object to the work that the care development group will do and to its being referred to in an amendment. I fail to understand the basis of the arguments that have been made and I do not want to spend any more time on the issue.

I want to move on to the substantive issues. If I have time, I will take an intervention, but I will not give up time that should be for talking about mental health and services for the elderly to pursue the dancing on the head of a pin that we have seen this afternoon. I remind the chamber that the report deals with community care in general, services for the elderly, and—very important—mental health services. It is appropriate that we pay attention to that. The report recommends that there should be  12-monthly reports on the mental health framework. For the first time, there will be an annual report—which will soon be on the web—from the mental health and well-being support group, which has been monitoring the implementation of the framework. The report also recommends that there should be mental health crisis services in each area. I remind members that we discussed the development of crisis services in "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change". According to the framework, there ought to be a mental health crisis service in each area. However, there is sometimes dispute about the nature of that service, which is why it is crucial to involve the users of services in the definition of crisis services. Another recommendation concerns the need to ensure the development of equitable access to information services and to individual and collective advocacy. I refer again to the health plan, in particular chapter 5, which is on involving people. Because of earlier discussions, I do not have time to quote from it, but it contains considerable detail about how we intend to proceed with the plan in general terms to give patients and users a stronger voice and to involve people and communities in the design and delivery of health services. In particular, it outlines how we will develop the agenda of more patient and user information and the obligation on all health boards to ensure that there are integrated and independent advocacy services. We share Mary Scanlon's concerns about delayed discharges, which is why the attack on delayed discharges has been a key priority for local authorities and health boards during the winter—that will continue. Kay Ullrich made a related point about money to deal with people who are waiting to go into more appropriate accommodation. "Appropriate" is the key word for community care. We agree with the Health and Community Care Committee that we especially want more home care; however, in some cases, we also need more residential care. That is a call on resources—in the care development group, we will consider all the calls on resources for elderly people. During the debates on community care, I have consistently said that, while we want to develop free personal care, we have to consider all the other service developments simultaneously. That is precisely what the care development group will do—for some unaccountable reason, members have a problem with the reference to that in the amendment. Nicola Sturgeon referred to the recent report on nutrition for the elderly. We were very concerned by the findings of that report and, as a matter of urgency, we are acting on those findings. Page 28 of "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change" details the specific action that we are  taking to address that problem. I refer to recent work by the chief nursing officer, who has gone round every health board area in Scotland to address the issue. In addition to that, the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland will monitor nutrition as a core care standard. The Scottish Health Advisory Service will pay particular attention to nutrition in its inspections. Last but not least, the commission for the regulation of care will be responsible for the first inspection against national standards of nutrition and other crucial aspects of care standards. I am sorry that I had to spend so much time on the procedural point at the beginning, but I conclude by reminding Duncan Hamilton of what I said in response to his question. Of course we accept in principle the Sutherland view of personal care. Indeed, in certain details we may be able to go beyond it—perhaps, for example, sitting with or assisting dementia sufferers should be included in the definition. The key point is that we accept the principle, although we have to work on some of the details. However, as I said to Duncan Hamilton, the more fundamental challenge is to translate the principle of Sutherland into an applicable, understandable and doable system of charging and non-charging—that is precisely what we will do, along with achieving other objectives that we have outlined. I hope that members welcome the care development group. I am sure that the members of the Health and Community Care Committee will especially welcome the fact that their adviser, Professor Alison Petch, will be on the group.

I am having genuine difficulty following the course of this argument. Does Mike Rumbles accept that the Health and Community Care Committee's report has 45 recommendations and that the motion asks us to carry out and implement—in detail—every one of them? It has nothing to do with free personal care for the elderly.

rose—

Surely Mary Scanlon realises that the Executive's amendment has nothing to do with free personal care. As I said in my speech, all the amendment does is point out that the motion is asking us to implement every detail of 45 recommendations. Our response to the Health and Community Care Committee report is more positive than any other Executive response to a report in the history of this Parliament.

rose—

I am genuinely mystified. I will try for the next hour to understand the basis of that argument. When I was asked whether I had any reservations about details of the Health and Community Care Committee report, I signally said nothing whatever about personal care. Let me also correct Nicola Sturgeon. We have not said that we want a take-note motion; we have lodged an amendment that says that we note and welcome the report, which goes further than any Executive response to a committee report has ever gone.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Susan Deacon regrets that she cannot be present today; she is attending a meeting with UK ministers in London to discuss CJD-related issues. I am sure that all members recognise the importance of that. In the community care debate on 16 November 2000, I said that I looked forward to the Health and Community Care Committee's conclusions. I also said that I was sure that not only would those conclusions contribute to our thinking about policy, but that they would intensify our determination to drive forward change with urgency and focus. I have not been disappointed and I congratulate the committee on its report. I welcome the themes that are highlighted and the direction of travel that is mapped out. I hope that we can go forward together to accelerate the progress that must and will take place. The report is not just about community care resourcing, standards, organisation and service delivery in general—it has specific reference to older people and to mental health. I am pleased to reaffirm that older people are a top priority for the Executive, and to restate that mental health is one of the top three clinical priorities of the NHS in Scotland. Both matters are certainly at the top of  my agenda for the coming months. The report talks about three aspects of resources: first, the overall amount; secondly, the balance and distribution of resources; and thirdly, the bringing together of resources in a single funding stream. We agree that, as the report states: "There is an imbalance in the proportion of funds directed to support people in their own homes as compared to residential or nursing home care." That is why the heart of the three-year investment package that Susan Deacon announced on 5 October 2000—which will rise to £100 million a year in 2003-04—was a massive expansion of care for people in their own homes, including intensive home care, rapid response teams and more short breaks. That is why she also announced £5 million for this financial year for additional equipment and adaptations, on top of the £19 million extra this financial year to deal with delayed discharges, which the committee highlighted. The announcement that was made on 5 October meets the demand for above-inflation increases in community care funding and more than meets the concerns of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities about what it described to the Health and Community Care Committee as a £20 million under-resourcing of community care. However, the extra resources are not the end of the story. On 24 January, Susan Deacon announced that additional resources for long-term care would be a top priority for the Administration. All those measures require the co-operation of local government. The new resources are being given on the basis of local government's delivery of agreed outputs. I agree with what Margaret Smith said about local government. In the new Scotland, local government cannot turn its back on the clearly stated priorities of the Scottish Parliament. On the third aspect of resources, to which I referred a moment ago, I welcome the committee's recommendation that "Mechanisms should be created to ensure that single funding streams and delegated responsibility are put in place in all areas." Our response makes it clear that "The Executive will shortly be consulting on legislation which will facilitate single funding streams and will allow us to ensure that all areas adopt this practice. We propose to bring forward this legislation as quickly as possible in the form of a Long Term Care Bill." Other recommendations about single assessments, joint equipment stores and strategic care management are related to that central proposition. We welcome those recommendations  and will ensure that they are acted on. The care development group will advance some resource and service issues. I am sure that members of the Health and Community Care Committee will welcome the fact that their adviser, Professor Alison Petch, is a member of that group. Without reading out the care development group's whole remit, I remind members that we shall examine existing service provision to identify gaps, deficiencies and duplication that might need to be addressed. We shall examine the current deployment of resources from all funding streams for the care of older people and make any recommendations for change that are thought to be necessary. Centrally, we shall draw up proposals for the implementation of free personal care for all, along with an analysis of the costs and implications of doing that. As Margaret Smith's speech made clear, that was a central recommendation of the Health and Community Care Committee's report. I quote the two key sentences from the report: "Clearly the decision to make personal care available free of charge means money is no longer there to be spent on other aspects of community care. However, the Committee received strong indications that this is an important issue of principle for the people of Scotland." That encapsulates perfectly that free personal care is right in principle, but that it does have an opportunity cost.

We need to translate the principle of Sutherland—which we accept—into an applicable, understandable and doable system of charging and non-charging. That relates also to the part of the care development group's remit on working with the chief nursing officer's group to develop a person-centred, holistic, needs assessment process. We accept the principle of free personal care—the definition in Sutherland is broadly right, but we must translate it into a clear assessment tool so that we can have a system of charging and non-charging. Sir Stewart Sutherland recognised that as much as we do. My reference to a system of charging and non-charging relates to the fact that housing and living costs are paid for even under the Sutherland recommendations. That takes me to the committee's recommendation that steps should be taken to ensure uniformity throughout Scotland on charging for the provision of support services. As  we indicated on 5 October, we support the initiative by COSLA to develop guidance on charging policies to deal with inconsistency and—crucially—we shall take a reserved power in the proposed long-term care bill to ensure that progress is made. There are several other aspects in the report that I cannot deal with in detail, but in my remaining two minutes I want to refer to several other important areas. First, the Health and Community Care Committee "wishes to ensure greater consistency in the quality of services." Its report acknowledges the central role in that regard that will be played by the Scottish commission for the regulation of care, which will be set up through legislation when the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill completes its progress in the summer. The Health and Community Care Committee also states that we should always be "informed by evidence based best practice". Members will know that we accepted the recommendation of the joint future group that we should improve the collection and dissemination of good practice. I take this opportunity to thank the members of the joint future group for all the work that the group has done. Members will know that there is considerable overlap between the recommendations of the joint future group's report and the recommendations of the Health and Community Care Committee.

Mike Rumbles should appreciate that the normal purpose of a motion on a committee report is that the Parliament notes it. This is the first time that the Executive has welcomed a committee report in an amendment. I hope that Mike Rumbles and others acknowledge the positive response that I have given to the Health and Community Care Committee's report. Members should step back from the report and think in general about how legislation is made. If they think that every last detailed recommendation should be adopted as policy by the Executive, they are taking an untenable position. I more or less support the whole report, but we are being asked to implement every last detail.

That is very much in the detail. For example, I could point to recommendation 44, which concerns the involvement of social work in the training of GPs in their post-graduation year. I am told that that would be difficult, given existing time restraints. That illustrates a detail. An Executive cannot be bound by every last detail of a committee's report. It is perhaps important that I should have dealt with interventions. No doubt, I will come back to them. I wanted to say something about mental health but, as my time is up, I shall perhaps do so in my winding-up speech. I move amendment S1M-1639.1, to leave out from ", and calls upon" to end and insert: "and welcomes the recommendations contained within the 16th Report 2000 by the Health and Community Care Committee, Inquiry into the Delivery of Community Care in Scotland (SP Paper 219) and further notes the announcement made by the Executive on 25 January 2001 and the establishment of the Care Development Group regarding the care for older people."

The Scottish Executive is determined to ensure that older people, whether at home or in care homes, are protected from abuse. To achieve that, the Executive is taking a number of measures, including developing new care standards and setting up a new commission to regulate care services and a council to regulate the social services work force. The introduction of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 will also introduce new protection for the most vulnerable people.

The helpline is one issue that can be taken into account when we consider the new complaints procedure as part of the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill. We are determined, through the bill, to drive up the quality of long-term and other forms of care, which is why we are introducing a system with more independence, more consistency and more user focus. That will include a better complaints procedure and, for the first time, inspection against national standards of medication procedures and a range of other issues.

A wide range of information is currently held centrally on the national health service in Scotland. That includes information about the number of patients with different conditions, the treatment provided, clinical outcomes, NHS staffing levels and financial information. Such information is used to meet the needs of clinicians and managers in the NHS and to ensure accountability to Parliament and to the public. Information held centrally is reviewed regularly to ensure that it meets the needs of all users.

As I indicated, the matter is under review. Work on several health topics is under review at the information and statistics division. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton is right that there is a potential impact on prevention and treatment; that is clearly one of the criteria that must be used when we decide what information to hold centrally. At the same time, a balance must be struck as there are cost implications, and if too much work is done on collecting statistics, it could be a burden on the NHS. The general point that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton makes is correct.

We recognise that it is a national problem; that is why we have said that we want a national solution, which is clearly outlined in "Our National Health: a plan for action, a plan for change", which was published in December. The drive towards completely clean hospitals is at the heart of the proposals in the plan; that will clearly involve monitoring the effectiveness of our policies in that respect.

"Our National Health: a plan for action, a plan for change" commits the Scottish Executive and the national health service to take steps to work closely with patient support groups to ensure that the needs of those with chronic conditions are met effectively. In the case of CFS/ME, the Executive will consider the issue of good practice guidelines on treatment, taking account of advice, which is expected later this year, from the working group set up by the chief medical officer in England.

There is great controversy in the medical profession about the illness. Whatever the causes of the illness, we all recognise that it is serious and causes great distress and pain to the sufferers. The member's question will be answered to some extent once we have worked on the good practice guidelines later in the year. We recognise that a better framework is needed for the condition. That is why we are waiting to see what guidelines emerge in England;  we will take account of those guidelines when we draw up our own.

Margo MacDonald raises two issues. The first, to which I gave an answer in response to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's question, is about statistics. The second concerns the diagnosis of the condition. The issue is complicated and I do not want to tread on controversial medical ground. I have stated the importance that we attach to making progress on ME and I made a similar announcement in a recent debate on hepatitis C. We want to take action on the two serious conditions to which she refers, but it is difficult for us to have a debate on them because of the complexities and controversies involved.

Although the Executive deplores the circumstances of today's debate, we are keen to have detailed discussion on the subject. That is why the Executive has invited Professor Michael Langman, chair of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, to a meeting in Edinburgh next Tuesday morning. We have invited both the Health and Community Care Committee and the cross-party group on autistic spectrum disorders to attend, as well as health professionals. That will be a helpful opportunity to learn at first hand why the independent experts are in favour of MMR and against the single vaccine approach. Offering single vaccines as an option is not the simple solution it is represented to be. Dr Wakefield—to whom both Margaret Smith and Dr Simpson referred—has suggested there should be a 12-month gap between the three vaccinations. However, there is not a shred of evidence to inform that advice. For 12 or 24 months, the child concerned would be exposed to infection by mumps, measles or rubella, which can result in death or serious illness. The potential consequences are not confined to that one child but, importantly, may affect any other unprotected child or adult with whom that child is in contact. Lloyd Quinan refers to the precautionary principle, but there is nothing precautionary about the unnecessary exposure of infants to potentially serious infections. Children having to have three vaccinations, rather than one, would suffer increased trauma at 12 to 18 months of age, and would require three booster doses, instead of one, at three and a half to five years of age. Nicola Sturgeon asked for choice, but there would be enormous difficulties in presenting a single vaccine option to parents. I remind members that 93 per cent of parents in Scotland take the MMR option for their children, and that most of them have been supportive of that particular vaccine. Providing an alternative would immediately place a question mark against MMR. Far from being reassured, parents would be utterly confused by being offered a choice, and children would be put at unnecessary risk.  We must ensure that parents are given the best possible advice and information about MMR and single antigen vaccines. That precise point was made by James Kennedy of the RCN, to whom Nicola Sturgeon referred. We have a responsibility to present the facts in a responsible, measured way. That is what the Executive will continue to do. The key point is that MMR is a proven measure and there is no basis for linking it to autism. I therefore ask members to support the amendment.

It is regrettable that Tommy Sheridan has brought forward the motion in this manner today. We must be mindful of the public health implications of anything that we say on the subject and we would be well advised to pay heed to the overwhelming weight of medical opinion in this country and throughout the world. Some members may have seen today's press release, which deplored Tommy Sheridan's proposal, from the Royal College of Nursing, the Royal College of General Practitioners, the British Medical Association, the Faculty of Public Health Medicine, the Royal College of Physicians and the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health. As John Garner, chairman of the BMA in Scotland says, there is "a very clear link between low rates for vaccination uptake, increased incidence of life-threatening complications from measles and the use of separate vaccines. Parents who wish to exercise the precautionary principle should arrange for their children to receive the MMR vaccination." On the alleged link between MMR and autism  and inflammatory bowel disease, the fact is that vigorous scrutiny by a number of independent expert groups has established that the evidence does not support any such association. Both the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation and the Committee on Safety of Medicines, which advise UK health ministers on those issues, are unequivocal that, on the scientific evidence available, there is no causal link of that kind.

As I say, it is regrettable that the subject has been brought up in a 30-minute debate. I have three minutes, so I am forbidden by the nature of the debate from taking interventions. The evidence to support the safety of MMR is much greater than that for the single vaccines. MMR vaccines have been through a licensing process that requires safety and effectiveness to be carefully reviewed before a licence is granted. Nor is there any evidence that single vaccines are more effective. There is every reason to expect that they are less so. The MMR vaccine is now used in more than 30 European countries as well as in the USA, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. Since its introduction, more than 250 million doses have been administered, with dramatic reductions in the incidence of the three diseases and in the deaths caused by measles. The World Health Organisation regards MMR as "a highly effective vaccine which has such an outstanding safety record". I cannot speak in detail about the recent Finnish study, but some members will know that, when MMR was introduced in 1982, the Finns set up a countrywide surveillance system specifically to identify serious adverse effects associated with it. By the end of 1996—and 3 million doses delivered to 1.8 million individuals later—the authors concluded that "no cases of autism were associated with MMR during this 14 year follow-up". Tommy Sheridan calls for research. That is precisely what is happening now in the Medical Research Council. We are funding a major study, with the UK Government, into the causes of autism. The Executive recognises the real concerns of parents. Parents are bound to be confused when conflicting reports appear in the media. That is why we regard it as important that parents are provided with the best possible advice on MMR and single antigen vaccines. We are determined that they will get that. I urge members to support the amendment in my name and to oppose Tommy Sheridan's  motion. I move amendment S1M-1624.1, to leave out from "the increasing" to end and insert: "that the MMR vaccine commands the support of all the major health organisations in the UK, that it is recommended by the World Health Organisation, that it is used in over 30 European countries, as well as in the USA, Canada, Australia and New Zealand and that the two UK independent expert committees, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation and the Committee on Safety of Medicines, remain unequivocal that, on the scientific evidence available, there is no causal link between MMR vaccine and autism; further notes that there is in progress a major study funded by the Medical Research Council into the causes of autism, and agrees that, in the best interests of all Scottish children, there is a need to present to concerned parents the facts about MMR and single antigen vaccines in an objective, accurate and responsible way."

I congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on securing this debate today. It is entirely appropriate for her to represent the views of her constituents on local health proposals. Equally, it is inappropriate for me or Susan Deacon to comment at this stage on specific local plans—it was unworthy of Roseanna Cunningham to attack the minister on that ground.  The Executive's job is to set the framework for the local plans and it is up to local health bodies to translate that national framework into local action. As John McAllion said, I am clear about the fact that we need acute services reviews and that they must not be driven by money. As the national review of acute services made clear, the objective of acute services reviews is modern, high-quality services with the correct balance between hospital and community services. They also offer an opportunity to assess, systematically and objectively, how the location of services balances local access with the scope and delivery of specialist services. The balance between hospital and community services is also critical for maternity services. I note what Richard Simpson said about Ayrshire, which, although it has one centralised maternity unit, also has excellent community services. I am not saying that Ayrshire should be the model for the whole of Scotland—decision making must be local—but we have to beware of being alarmist because, clearly, the service in Ayrshire is entirely safe. I am slightly disadvantaged because the framework on maternity services will be launched tomorrow and, obviously, I cannot talk today about its specific contents. I can say, in general, that it adopts a woman and family-centred approach to care and support and has been planned in partnership with women. I am also pleased to hear that Tayside Health Board will examine that framework as part of its on-going work. I am told that the health board will consult stakeholders and consider—significantly and importantly—cross-border issues in conjunction with Forth Valley Health Board.

Many maternity service reviews are being conducted at the moment. The point that Ben Wallace has made could be made of all of them. A lot of work has been done by the health board and I have been assured that it will examine the framework. Although I have said that decisions that affect local communities are best taken at a local level, it is clear that the Executive has great interest in how those decisions are made. That is why "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change", which came out in December 2000, pledged that "we will establish an expert group supporting and advising local NHS Boards in managing changes in the configuration of services and advising the Health Department of the  appropriateness of local reconfiguration". Roseanna Cunningham expressed concern that the NHS in Tayside has not fully engaged the public in its consultation exercise. Full, genuine and meaningful public consultation is of paramount importance in developing proposals that will have far-reaching consequences for everyone who lives in Tayside. The idea that change can be imposed without the support and involvement of the many stakeholders is unsustainable.

Many views have been expressed today about the effectiveness of the consultation. I suppose that I had some involvement in that, in that I was on the Health and Community Care Committee when it produced its report on Stracathro hospital, as referred to by Ben Wallace and others. Looking back, I think that the committee took a balanced view. Among the recommendations in its report was the following: "The Committee strongly urge the Trust and the Board to maximise efforts to consult timeously all  levels of staff at Stracathro and the public in Angus now and at all stages of the Acute Services Review." The committee also acknowledged that the health board had made significant efforts to consult the public. Looking at the matter from outside, it appears to me that there have been good developments—Richard Simpson referred to recent developments and consultation. I am not here today to announce that the consultation has been perfect; I merely note that the Health and Community Care Committee took a balanced view, and that its conclusion may well be reasonable. There is room for a great deal of improvement in the way in which health boards consult. That is why the Executive, in "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change", pledged to ensure that statutory guidance on formal consultation will be reviewed to ensure that it meets the needs of modern health care systems and takes into account the changes to NHS planning that are  announced elsewhere in the plan. The Executive also pledges to provide guidance, training and support to local NHS leaders to enable them to involve the public effectively in the management of changes to local services. Presiding Officer, can you tell me how long I have?

While I fully understand people's support for their local hospitals, that has to be weighed against the need for appropriate quality of care and the balance of benefit for the community as a whole. What takes over in an area when services move has to be considered. There has been much discussion about what may emerge in Angus. I am told that there are proposals for a new community hospital there, and I am also told that the people of Angus will be consulted on the precise location of their service. To an extent, the answer to Roseanna Cunningham's point is that people in different parts of a large area will take different views about where they want services to be located. That has been evident in this debate, with conflicting speakers representing different areas.

Two members wish to intervene. I will give way to John Swinney.

That issue will form part of what is eventually presented to the Executive. In principle, if public funds are needed for a capital development in Angus, that money will be found. Many issues of funding have arisen in the debate, and I do not have time to address those in detail. We all understand that the task force was sent in because of massive trust shortfalls. That was nothing to do with the Health and Community Care Committee, whose report did not refer to money—although I stress that am a great supporter of the Health and Community Care Committee. That is the background to some of the financial problems. I remind members that funding to Tayside increased by 7 per cent this year, and will  increase next year by 5.5 per cent.

I acknowledge the point that Shona Robison makes about the deficit. Clearly, the board and the trust are also saying that the two exercises are quite separate from that point. There are complex arguments about the deficit in Tayside that I would pursue, but I think that the Presiding Officer will not allow me to. In her motion, Roseanna Cunningham calls on the Health and Community Care Committee to undertake an inquiry into the proposals. It is not for me to tell the Health and Community Care Committee what to do. I merely observe that when I was a member of the committee, we took the view that we would be interested in matters such as the process of consultation but would not interfere in local decision taking, which, appropriately, is for local health bodies. I feel bad about not giving way to Mr Rumbles.

If my memory serves me correctly, I think that we referred specifically to consultation in Angus. I will not go down that path because my time is almost up. We will encourage the health board and its partners to work urgently, openly and transparently. When the extra work, which I have been assured will take place, is completed, we expect the board to take decisions—however difficult—that balance competing demands but fundamentally improve the quality of services for everyone in Tayside.  Meeting closed at 18:02.

indicated agreement.  Motion moved, That the debate be extended by 10 minutes.— [Mrs Margaret Ewing.]  Motion agreed to.

Will the member give way?

At the beginning of the debate, Nicola Sturgeon supported the home care package that Susan Deacon announced in October. Does she understand that the £25 million for free personal care would be diverted from the funding for the home care package?

Nicola Sturgeon and Margaret Smith referred to my previous views. I am happy to refer the whole chamber to the speech that I made on 28 September, when I said that free personal care was a priority, but so was the expansion of home care and respite care and the ending of delayed discharges, so that everyone can get appropriate care wherever they happen to be. That is the big picture that Margaret Jamieson was referring to.

I have just told members  that nothing has changed. The considerable resources that we have put into services for older people must meet all those priorities. I remind members of the £100 million announced by Susan Deacon on 5 October 2000 and of her commitment yesterday to make additional resources for older people a top priority in future. We are determined to move forward on a broad front, increasing the quantity of services, improving the quality of services, dealing with the systems issues and addressing equity of charging. Mary Scanlon referred to the Health and Community Care Committee. There was substantial agreement between the Executive and committee members, particularly on systems issues. It is not only today's issues that are relevant to charging. I remind members that, on 5 October 2000, we said that we would try to address unevenness of charging across Scotland, and we will take a reserved power to ensure that that happens. Today, however, we are focusing on Sir Stewart Sutherland's recommendation on personal care. The important point to make is that we have started a process that will push forward the boundary between what is free and what is to be paid for. We cannot define the precise end point, but I remind members of the Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia press release that said that there had been a major breakthrough. I also tell George Lyon that what is proposed is certainly not a London solution, because the journey that we are going on is quite different from the journey south of the border.

I have already dealt with my views, all of which are on the record. I cannot spend any more time on that issue, although I should remind Bill Aitken that I left the Health and Community Care Committee on 1 November. One of the tasks of the development group, as Dr Simpson's amendment states, is "to consider the practicalities, costs and implications of providing free personal care". I thank Keith Raffan for supporting that objective. The development group is not a review group, but a group focused on action and implementation over a short time scale.

On 5 October, we announced our response to the report and we are now pushing it forward. We have had two excellent announcements for older people, one yesterday and one on 5 October. I appeal to the Liberal Democrats to support the process that we have started and to have confidence in the group. They may not be reassured by my chairing it, although I hope that they are, but perhaps they will be reassured by the presence on the group of Mary Marshall, who is the director of the dementia services centre at the University of Stirling and who was a member of the royal commission. Perhaps they will also be reassured by the words of Sir Stewart Sutherland, who has not taken the attitude of some Opposition members, but is willing to work with that group. It would be entirely consistent with what the Liberal Democrats said in their Scottish Parliament manifesto and in their new manifesto for the UK general election for them to support the group and to support Richard Simpson's amendment.

I think that I am out of time. Is that right, Presiding Officer?

Okay.

I congratulate Alex Neil on securing a debate on such an important matter and welcome Capital C to the gallery. It is a group that I am well aware of, as it lobbied me on the issue some years ago, as  an Edinburgh MP. As a result, I had a meeting with Professor Peter Hayes. Progress has been made since then, not least because of the group set up under the Scottish needs assessment programme, known as SNAP, and its report. That expert group comprises doctors and other health professionals, including Professor Hayes. SNAP was asked to undertake the review by the deputy chief medical officer—the person Alex Neil referred to in a different context—reflecting our concern about the developing problem and the comparative lack of knowledge of many aspects of the infection. The SNAP group's aims were to describe the emerging epidemic; to collate current knowledge on prevention, investigation and treatment; to describe the current status of the services available to meet the challenge; to make estimated projections of the implications in the Scottish population and of the services required; and to make recommendations. A copy of the SNAP report is available in the Scottish Parliament information centre and I commend it to members. The SNAP group identified the transmission routes for hepatitis C. Injecting drug use and sharing needles and equipment has been by far the most common route in Scotland. Other routes, which are much less common in Scotland, are contaminated blood and blood components, prior to the introduction of screening for hepatitis C, as mentioned by Cathy Jamieson in relation to her constituent; unprotected sexual intercourse with a hepatitis C-positive partner; from mother to child during pregnancy; from patients to health care workers through needle-stick injury; and from contaminated equipment used in skin and body piercing. I repeat that of those routes, injecting drug use is by far the most significant and injecting drug users are the main vulnerable group to be targeted by prevention efforts. The SNAP report makes 20 recommendations, most of which are directed at health boards. I should explain to members that the purpose of SNAP reports is to provide boards with a review of an area of health care and to give them a template against which they can reassess their services and reconfigure them as necessary. SNAP issues its reports in draft to health boards as well as to the Executive and other health and voluntary interests. SNAP then issues the report findings after taking account of comments. The hepatitis C report was issued in final form in September last year. The key issue now is for health boards to implement its recommendations. Those recommendations cover all aspects of the response to hepatitis C, including prevention, detection, treatment, surveillance and research. That underlines that progress will have to be made simultaneously across a wide front.

I do not think that there is a gap between the SNAP report and the national strategy, which Mary Scanlon suggests. SNAP is an expert group; we accept its advice and recommendations, which are at the heart of the national strategy. The proposal in the motion is for a screening programme. The SNAP group considered that question explicitly, but concluded: "systematic population screening of high risk groups is not justified at present, but counselling with the opportunity for testing should be offered to people in high risk groups as an integral part of discussion on the management of their risky behaviour." The expert advisory group on hepatitis, which is a UK body, has also not seen fit to recommend a screening programme.

I cannot give an instant reply to that, but we will reflect on the idea. In the light of increasing evidence that the newest drug therapies are proving effective, I agree that efforts should be made to detect those with long-standing infection who do not inject drugs or have ceased doing so, and to offer them treatment. In France—which Alex Neil referred to—such targeting of vulnerable groups, I think, occurs. The SNAP report recommended that a national workshop on the prevention of transmission among injecting drug users should be convened. That was held in November. The event was useful, but the discussions confirmed that no quick fixes are on offer. Progress must be made to reduce the amount of drug injecting and sharing of injecting equipment. In December, Iain Gray announced national targets for those reductions. The Executive will now require local targets to be set. Success in meeting targets will require renewed health  promotion efforts and provision of information in appropriate formats to high-risk groups. An obvious opportunity for that is provided by needle and syringe exchanges, to which Keith Raffan referred. The provision of clean equipment also tends to discourage equipment sharing. The SNAP report and the HIV health promotion strategy report, which was published last week, recommend that health boards review and, if necessary, enhance needle exchange provision in their areas. SNAP also recommended that consideration be given to introducing regulation of body piercing. Mary Scanlon referred to that. I am glad to say that I shall formally announce tomorrow the issue of the Executive's consultation paper on that subject. I have only one minute left, so I will be brief. The Executive is providing record levels of funding to health boards through their general allocations. As promised in "Our National Health", we have decided to increase by £7 million over the next four years the resources provided for boards' HIV prevention activities.  We have told boards that, as the HIV health promotion strategy report recommended, they may apply those resources to the prevention of other blood-borne viruses, of which hepatitis C is the most significant at present. The recently announced £100 million package for tackling drug misuse will include £6.3 million over three years for local and national public awareness initiatives. There will be full consultation to ensure that we have the best know-how on improving the quality of information and the messages that we convey on drugs prevention and education. I reiterate that the issue is important for the Executive. We endorse the findings of the SNAP report and are determined that they should be implemented throughout Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:47.

Proposals on how to move the network forward were received late last year and officials met representatives from those organisations in November to discuss their outline plans. We are considering how best to achieve the right focus and balance in the network's approach before reaching conclusions.

I agree that we had an excellent debate on autistic spectrum disorder last week. As I announced in that debate, we expect a key early priority for the network to be a mapping exercise to identify gaps in services. That initiative will be complemented by two other important developments: we have asked the newly created Public Health Institute to conduct a needs assessment on the issue and by June of this year we expect partnership in practice agreements to have been made between local authorities and health boards to chart and plan developments in services.

I congratulate Janis Hughes on securing this debate and on all the work that she has done on this issue, along with her colleagues who have spoken today. The Glasgow acute services review is taking place in the context of a national review of acute services, which provides the framework within which local acute services reviews are taking place. The purpose of the reviews is to ensure that people across Scotland have access to modern, high-quality services and that there is the correct balance between hospital and community services. The reviews offer an opportunity to assess strategically and objectively how the location of services balances local access with the scope and delivery of specialist services Inevitably, there are difficult choices and decisions to be made in the Glasgow acute services review, as in most other reviews. Where real benefits and quality improvements are clearly demonstrated, the Executive is prepared to back them. Ultimately, the outcome of an acute services review must be investment, quality and the development of excellence. However, as we have said on numerous  occasions, decisions affecting local communities are best taken by those who provide the services locally in partnership with those who use the services. Therefore, it would be inappropriate for me to become too embroiled in the details of the Glasgow situation.

I will come to that point shortly. The principles that I am following are consistent with the principles outlined by the Health and Community Care Committee, whose members made it clear that they were interested in the processes rather than in the detailed proposals that were being made. The role of the Executive is to ensure that national frameworks are in place to encourage the development of modern NHS services. The document, "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change" sets out our clear determination to ensure universally high national standards in Scotland. To that end, we will establish an expert group to support and advise health boards in managing changes in the configuration of services and to advise the Scottish Executive health department on the appropriateness of local reconfiguration.

I do not mind giving way, although the Presiding Officer will remind me if my time is running out.

I have acknowledged that there is a problem, which is one reason why we are setting up the expert group.  Mary Scanlon and other members mentioned consultation. Concerns have been expressed about the consultation process in this and in other acute services reviews. Improvement brings change, but the idea that it can be imposed without the support and involvement of the many different stakeholders is unsustainable. It is vital that the public and interested organisations are genuinely involved, which is why we made several proposals in "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change" to address that issue. In particular, and to answer directly the point raised by Mary Scanlon, one of the plan's proposals is to "review statutory guidance on formal consultation to ensure that it meets the needs of modern healthcare systems and takes into account the changes to NHS planning announced elsewhere in this Plan." I remind members of a second proposal, which is to "provide guidance, training and support to local NHS leaders to enable them to involve the public effectively in the management of changes to local services".

How am I doing for time, Presiding Officer?

Does that mean that I have two minutes left?

I will have to move on. If I am quick, I will take an intervention from Margaret Jamieson at the end. Janis Hughes reminded us that clinicians and patients in Glasgow have to make do with buildings that are coming towards the end of their usefulness and that are often difficult to negotiate. In five to 10 years' time, we want state-of-the-art health services that provide the people of Glasgow with the services that they need and deserve. It is important that the health board and its planning partners make progress on the acute services review within a reasonable time scale. I have some information on funding in Glasgow but, in view of the Presiding Officer's comments on the time, I will simply remind members of the fact that the GGHB's allocation is increasing by 7.7 per cent, on top of the extra £73 million that it has received this year.

As I have not taken an intervention from Margaret Jamieson, I will certainly not take one from Kenny Gibson. I must move on. Janis Hughes called for an  option appraisal of all the sites considered by GGHB as part of its consultation exercise. An option appraisal of some kind is always required to support the eventual proposal that the health board will make to the Executive. I understand that the health board decided at its meeting on 19 December that detailed option appraisals would be carried out on three possible options for acute services south of the river. I am also told that the board is proposing that a reference group—including MSPs, a local health council representative, NHS staff, and board and trust senior managers—will oversee that work. Robert Brown asked how robust the option appraisals would be. There may be a role in that for the reference group, but it will clearly be for MSPs to decide whether they want to be involved in it. There will certainly be a role for the Executive, because the outline business case must demonstrate robust option appraisals. I am pleased that we have had the opportunity to have this debate. I am sure that the health board will have listened carefully to the views that have been expressed.  Meeting closed at 18:30.

I welcome the support from a large number of speakers for the principle of banning tobacco advertising on a UK-wide basis. Nicola Sturgeon asked what would happen if the bill were not passed before the UK general election. I can give no guarantees about that, but I can remind her that the measure was a Labour UK manifesto commitment. In response to Ben Wallace's point, the only reason that the bill was not introduced earlier was because of the European directive; detailed regulations had been worked out for implementation. Clearly, we will have to review the situation if the general election comes first. I remind Nicola Sturgeon, however, that many speakers have said that the issue is not only about timing, but about the effectiveness of a ban and the ability to enforce it. Point-of-sale advertising was mentioned by Nicola Sturgeon and Margaret Smith. I agree with them that regulations on such advertising must be tightly drawn. Such regulations will be a matter for the Scottish Parliament. As I indicated at the Health and Community Care Committee, we will soon consult on the matter. We are minded that there should be regulations on the size of units for selling cigarettes in shops, on their position and on the size of the name on the units. We also think that such units should carry health warnings. Members of the Scottish Parliament who want the regulations to be even stricter will be able to express their views. Nicola Sturgeon referred to the so-called sponsorship loophole. I remind her of clause 9 of the bill, which is quite strong. It says: "A person who is party to a sponsorship agreement is guilty of an offence if the purpose or effect of anything done as a result of the agreement is to promote a tobacco product in the United Kingdom." It is impossible to get round that by using the name rather than the product. I understand that  there is concern about one of the comments in the explanatory notes, for which there may be reasons that arise from the European convention on human rights. On brand sharing, we recognise that the legislation needs to be as tight as possible to ensure that tobacco companies do not merely transfer advertising expenditure to that type of promotion. There is no doubt that brand sharing is the most complex area on which we must legislate, both from a technical and a legal standpoint. The businesses operate on a UK-wide basis and any regulation might overlap with trading law, which is a reserved matter. Clearly, it would be ridiculous to have different brand-sharing regulations in Scotland and in England and we shall have input in that area. Keith Raffan asked about broadcasting. Clause 11 excludes from the scope of the bill the BBC and all broadcasting media that are covered by codes of practice issued by the Independent Television Commission and the Radio Authority under the Broadcasting Act 1990. The advertising and promotion of tobacco products is well controlled by those bodies. Other broadcasting media will be subject to the provisions of the bill. Advertising is only one of a number of factors that induce people to smoke. However, international evidence indicates clearly a link between tobacco advertising and consumption. I urge Parliament to support the motion.

I had a most constructive session last week with the Health and Community Care Committee when it considered the Executive's memorandum on the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Bill. While the committee accepted and endorsed the arguments for a single UK bill, it felt that it would be worth while for the Parliament to have the opportunity to consider the arguments. Smoking is the greatest single cause of preventable disease and ill health in Scotland. I am sure that members would not argue with the Executive's desire to put tobacco control high on its list of health priorities. "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change" reaffirms our commitment to battling against the impact of tobacco, and demonstrates our intention to focus on prevention and enabling people to stay well and to stay out of hospital. The Executive and the Parliament owe it to Scotland and Scots to do all we can to reduce the toll that smoking takes of the nation's health. Indeed, the Executive is already introducing a comprehensive range of measures to reduce smoking levels. All those measures are important, especially in relation to persuading children and young people not to start smoking, but they will not work as effectively as they might if they need to compete with powerful and stylish tobacco advertising. At the most recent UK general election, a ban on tobacco advertising was a Labour manifesto pledge. In its first programme for government, the Executive pledged to implement the European Union directive to ban tobacco advertising. However, effecting a ban has not been straightforward due to legal challenges in the European and English courts, resulting in the decision to annul the directive. Advertising and promotional activities do not respect national boundaries. All UK Administrations have a common objective to effect a ban. It is vital to have a consistent approach throughout the UK if the ban is to be effective, robust in the face of any legal challenge and  capable of effective enforcement, and the Executive is in no doubt that a single UK bill is the right way forward. As the memorandum and supporting papers explain, the bill is comprehensive. Although the European Court of Justice ruling means that the UK no longer has an obligation to implement the measures in the EU directive, the bill follows the policy that was set out in previous consultations on implementing that directive. The bill will ban all forms of tobacco advertising and promotion, including sponsorship and brand sharing. In some instances, detailed measures will be set out in subordinate legislation, on which there will be consultation. However, the legislation also takes account of the legitimate right of those who are involved in the tobacco trade to go about their lawful business. The bill contains a number of regulation and order-making powers, some of which will be conferred on Scottish ministers. On other areas—that is, on brand sharing, distributions at nominal cost and advertising by electronic means—it is intended to legislate on a UK-wide basis. Those are areas on which it is difficult to legislate, from both a technical and a legal standpoint, and on which legislation would, potentially, be difficult to enforce in a Scotland-only context. Moreover, they may—under the technical standards directive—require notification to the EU, which would take some time. We are keen that that does not delay the introduction of wider statutory controls.

There was a European agreement on that; we hope that another directive will be introduced soon. The original directive was disallowed because it was introduced as a single market measure and was judged to be a health measure. It would be more effective to have measures such as sponsorship bans on a Europe-wide basis. We hope that that will happen, but we will not wait for Europe to decide before we take action. I ask the Parliament to support the Executive's motion. It makes good sense to work co-operatively with other parts of the UK. In lodging the motion, our overriding concern is to introduce a firm and effective ban on advertising and to do so quickly. The bill is a major step in our drive to cut the devastating toll that smoking takes on our  nation's health. I move, That the Parliament endorses the need to ban tobacco advertising and promotion in Scotland as set out in the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Bill and agrees that the relevant provisions in the Bill should be considered by the UK Parliament.

I will deal mainly with the substance of the debate, but I must refer to what Nicola Sturgeon and Shona Robison said about procedure. I think that Nicola Sturgeon answered her own point by reminding us that the bill was introduced at Westminster on 20 December and received its second reading on 10 January—the dates on which this chamber adjourned for Christmas and returned after the break. Normally, debates such as this one will take place before a bill's second reading at Westminster. In this case, that was not possible. Richard Simpson also made a comment that was off the main topic. He made an interesting point about care trusts. What he said may be his view, but it was not that of the Health and Community Care Committee. The Executive is determined to go forward through joint working and pooled budgets. I remind members that it is up to us to decide who prescribes. Patient safety will be paramount when we consider whether to grant prescribing rights to any professional group. It is also up to us to decide what is prescribed. We hope to follow Richard Simpson's suggestion of including extra prescribing rights for nurses. Members asked about one person holding the records for prescribing. The answer to that comes from information technology systems—smart cards are not necessary. Mary Scanlon and Shona Robison talked about training. Before any new category of prescriber is designated, ministers will have to be convinced that all new prescribers will be fully trained and competent to fulfil the responsibility. Nicola Sturgeon mentioned consultation. Proposals for granting prescribing rights for some medicines to a group of health professionals will be subject to wide consultation with relevant organisations. Extending the right to prescribe will help to break down the divisions between health professions and will play an important role in the introduction of more flexible team working throughout the NHS. It is in line with the commitments in "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change", which proposed change to the traditional ways of delivering services to patients. I am pleased that members have welcomed the  change to preserved rights. Keith Raffan asked about the shortfall in funding. I assure him that approximately £8.9 million of the proposed funding that will be transferred is included to top up shortfalls and to meet existing home care charges. No one will be disadvantaged under the arrangements. No one will have to change their accommodation. Some people will for the first time be able to obtain appropriate care in the community. I therefore once again ask the Parliament to agree to the motion.

The first part of the motion seeks Parliament's approval for the Westminster Parliament to legislate to end the system of preserved rights and to bring those people with preserved rights into the mainstream community care arrangements. The second part proposes the introduction of enabling powers that may be authorised under the Medicines Act 1968 in respect of new groups of prescribers. Preserved rights are the rights to higher rates of income support for some people who have been living in residential accommodation since before 1 April 1993. When the current community care arrangements were established in 1993, people already resident in independent sector nursing or residential homes acquired those preserved rights. That was a means of reassuring and protecting existing care home residents by continuing to give them a higher rate of income support so that the choice that they had already made about their residential accommodation continued to hold sway. It also ensured that local authorities were not faced with the considerable task of assessing the care needs of existing residents. There are two principal concerns about the system of preserved rights. First, a significant number of people with preserved rights, such as younger people with learning disabilities, are locked into residential care when their needs could be more appropriately met in supported accommodation. Secondly, there are concerns about a shortfall between the fees charged by homes and the weekly benefit income of residents. The Royal Commission on Long Term Care for the Elderly considered those concerns and recommended that we should consider whether preserved rights payments in social security should be brought within the post-1993 system of community care. In our response to the royal commission on 5 October 2000, we accepted that recommendation and announced our intention to transfer funding and responsibility for the assessment and care management of everyone with preserved rights to councils in April 2002.

I have five minutes. If I  have time left, I will give way when I have got through my speech. A mixture of reserved and devolved legislation is required to make the transfer of responsibility from the Department of Social Security to local authorities. In those circumstances, there are clear benefits to having a single bill to cover England, Scotland and Wales. A single bill will make it much more straightforward to ensure that the transfer is clear and consistent across the United Kingdom. Were we aiming for separate Scottish legislation on the devolved aspects, we would have to wait for the outcome of the DSS provisions in the Westminster bill. Achieving the transfer in a single UK bill ensures that there is no possibility of a gap between the end of DSS preserved rights and the commencement of new responsibilities for local authorities. That will avoid disadvantage to those people with preserved rights in Scotland. Otherwise, we would have to ask the DSS to continue the scheme in Scotland only for the interim period. I therefore ask the Parliament to agree that the provisions for those devolved aspects of the preserved rights transfer be made through the Health and Social Care Bill. The second strand of the motion proposes the introduction of enabling powers in respect of new groups of prescribers that may be authorised under the Medicines Act 1968, which is reserved. Extending prescribing rights to health care professionals other than doctors, dentists and some nurses is in line with the recommendations of a UK review that was carried out in 1997. The "Review of Prescribing, Supply and Administration of Medicines" concluded, after wide consultation, that the introduction of new groups of prescribers would benefit patients. The proposed enabling amendments provide the legal framework for such an extension. Amendment of the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978, as proposed in clause 44 of the bill, will enable Scottish ministers, through regulations, to give newly authorised prescribers NHS prescribing rights in Scotland. The Medicines Act 1968 and the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978 are being amended in parallel so that the changes that they make possible are available for implementation throughout the UK. It will be for the Executive to decide whether and to what extent that legislation should be enacted in Scotland. The first and most important consideration will be the absolute need to ensure patient safety. Moreover, we must ensure continuity of care, avoid fragmentation of services and safeguard patient choice and convenience. Before any new health care groups are designated as NHS prescribers, ministers will have to be satisfied that there is a clinical need,  that any new prescribers are properly trained and that their skills can be kept up to date. Health care professions that might be considered for prescribing rights include pharmacy, chiropody and physiotherapy. The motion also provides for Scottish ministers to determine the medicines and appliances that each group of prescribers may prescribe. That is a commonsense measure, given the very different areas of health in which the new groups of potential prescribers practice. With all those safeguards in place, I believe that extending the right to prescribe will help to break down the divisions between health professions and will play an important role in the introduction of more flexible team working across the whole of the UK. Will the Deputy Presiding Officer let me give way to Alasdair Morgan now?

The critical factor is that we should deal with the motion before it is dealt with in committee at Westminster. Because of the time scale, it was not possible to deal with it here before the bill was given its second reading at Westminster—the bill was introduced just before Christmas and had its second reading in the first week back after Christmas. I move, That the Parliament endorses the principle of transferring to local authorities in Scotland the responsibility for the funding and care management of people in residential care and nursing homes with preserved rights to higher levels of income support as set out in the Health and Social Care Bill; also endorses the principle of introducing enabling powers to extend recognition to specific groups of healthcare professionals for the purposes of dispensing NHS prescriptions written by them and of determining the list of medicines and appliances which they may prescribe and which NHS community pharmacists may be paid for dispensing, and agrees that the relevant provisions to achieve these ends in the bill should be considered by the UK Parliament.

I congratulate Lloyd Quinan on securing this important debate. His motion reflects the interest and concern that many of us have in ensuring that  people with autistic spectrum disorders are correctly diagnosed as early as possible and that they and their carers receive the support that they need to live more healthy and enriched lives. As Lloyd Quinan graphically described, autism is a devastating condition. It is without clear origins and it is poorly understood by scientists and the public alike. There is scant evidence of remedies that work and little appreciation of the lifelong consequences, which Lloyd Quinan highlighted. For that reason, the Medical Research Council announced in April last year that it would fund a major research project to find out what causes the condition. That project, one of the largest ever undertaken on the subject, will last two years and will involve scrutiny of more than 2 million people's health records from more than 300 locations throughout the United Kingdom. The scale of the study will allow consideration to be given simultaneously to all the risk factors, which was not possible in previous smaller-scale studies. The study has just started and we envisage that there will be Scottish elements in it. The Scottish Executive health department is fully engaged in MRC policy, but the chief scientist office would also be pleased to receive any quality research proposals on autism—proposals that are innovative and do not duplicate the MRC study.

As I said, the CSO will be pleased to receive bids. That is how research works in the Scottish Executive. I will now address the issue that was highlighted by Margaret Ewing, Tommy Sheridan and others—the MMR vaccine. Lloyd Quinan did not want that to dominate the debate, so I will make only three points about it. First, in a UK context, the view of expert advisory committees—which advise UK health ministers and Scottish health ministers—is unequivocal that on the scientific evidence available, there is no causal link between MMR vaccine and autism. However, the joint committee on vaccination and immunisation continues to keep that under review. Secondly, it is important that the international context is that that view is shared by the World Health Organisation. MMR is used extensively throughout the world; in the USA, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and in other European countries. I understand from the Medicines Control Agency that no country in the world recommends that MMR be given as three  separate vaccines.

I think not—I am halfway through my time and I have a great deal of material to get through. I do not want the debate, as Lloyd Quinan said, to be dominated by the MMR vaccine. Thirdly, it is crucial that the confidence of parents is not undermined. We must remember the risks of lack of protection. Although it goes against the general spirit of the debate, I have to say that it was utterly irresponsible of Fergus Ewing to draw an analogy with BSE and CJD, on which the medical authorities of every country in the world accept a link. In contrast, the medical authorities of every country in the world say that there is not a link between the MMR vaccine and autism.

No. I have spoken for four minutes and I only have another three. The Presiding Officer might be generous and allow me a bit more time. On the rapidly increasing incidence of autism, I accept that there is a dilemma—as Margaret Ewing emphasised—about how much is causal and how much is diagnostic.

I cannot take interventions, because of the time.

I will not get through my speech if I take interventions. It is possible that there has been a genuine change in the incidence of autism, but we have insufficient data on which to decide. There has certainly been a widening definition and greater awareness and detection of the condition. Our priority is to ensure that youngsters who have the condition are diagnosed early and are offered tried and tested interventions. The needs of the autistic child, adolescent and adult are many and diverse and no single care agency can hope to meet all the needs effectively. I accept Tommy Sheridan's comment that we are starting from a low base, but I believe that the learning disabilities review was a major step forward. Donald Gorrie highlighted that one of its recommendations was a call for changing attitudes  among the public and professionals—that is important. Secondly, resources of £36 million were put into learning disabilities in general by the review. Some of that will go towards autistic spectrum disorders. The main recommendation of the report, "The same as you?", is the establishment of a national service network for children and adults who have an autistic spectrum disorder. The network will aim to bring together statutory agencies, professionals and voluntary organisations that have an interest in autism. In particular, the review recognised that support services were patchy throughout Scotland. Therefore, a key early priority for the national network will be to undertake a comprehensive mapping exercise. That will enable the network to identify gaps in services and training needs and to set out how best practice can be developed in assessment, diagnosis and care support. To draw all that together, we have reached agreement with the Public Health Institute for Scotland to carry out a needs assessment of autistic spectrum disorders. That will address the scale of the problem and the adequacy of support services. We are considering a proposal that was submitted jointly by the Scottish Society for Autism and the National Autistic Society on how to move the network forward. I assure Mary Scanlon that we will make an announcement soon. The network will link with the partnership in practice agreements that each local authority and health board is to put in place by June this year, which will set out how local services for those who have an autistic spectrum disorder are to be developed and delivered. As in all areas of care, a multi-agency approach is required—an approach that seeks to fill the gaps, where they exist, and to provide seamless care that matches needs and expectations. Such a joint approach is being developed—as Mary Scanlon said—in the Borders. It is being funded by an award under the Executive's mental health and well-being development fund. The initiative in the Borders is to establish an early detection programme for children who have a high risk of autism and to direct children to early assessment by a multi-agency team. The project also aims to ensure that the child and the family receive co-ordinated specialist follow-up support and care. There has been a 50 per cent increase in detection, commonly by the age of two and in time to intervene early to help parents and children alike. The project has also been instrumental in the decision to award some £117,000 to enhance the special education support that is needed by a number of children in the area. We await the next outcome report, but we are encouraged by what we have been told so far. If that work represents best practice, then our challenge will be to roll it  out for the benefit of all people who are affected and their families and carers. The national network will, I am sure, wish to examine the project for any lessons in good practice. Do I have two minutes left, Presiding Officer?

That is two minutes, so I cannot say too much about either respite care or education. The Executive has highlighted additional resources for respite care for local authorities, which will benefit the people to whom Irene McGugan referred. Members referred to education—first Elaine Smith, then Kenneth Macintosh and Brian Monteith. Clearly, schools have a role in detection, assessment and management of autistic spectrum disorders. I must refer some of the more specific points—such as those that were raised by Elaine Smith—to the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs. However, we have allocated £5 million a year to local authorities for in-service development and training of teachers and other professionals who work with children with special educational needs, including autism. We have also allocated £500,000 to six projects that are aimed specifically at supporting children who have autistic spectrum disorders and their families. Thirdly, Enquire—an independent national advice service that is based, as it happens, in my constituency—was launched last year by Children in Scotland to provide information and advice to parents, children and young people. The key to addressing the needs of people who have autistic spectrum disorders is a strategy that aims to understand more about the condition, to detect young people who might be affected at the earliest opportunity and to offer high-quality, integrated services that place the child, adult and the family at centre stage. I pay tribute to all those who have come to the debate and to all the voluntary organisations whose commitment and dedication improve the quality of life for people with autism. We are dedicating energy and resources to making progress across a broad front to improve understanding, diagnosis and care support services. I recognise, however, that we have a very long way to go. I hope that the debate has contributed to the journey.

I cannot refer specifically to matters that are the subject of legal proceedings. The Executive has already taken action to increase the quality and availability of appropriate care and will continue to do so.

The first answer is always general. I could cite many details, if the Presiding Officer allowed me to, which have been cited in recent parliamentary debates. The reality is that the Executive has launched major initiatives this winter to deal with the problem, and the latest census of those who await discharge will take place next week. Anecdotal evidence on winter planning from the many contacts that we have made suggests that the pressure of delayed discharges has been reduced as a result of the extra resources that the Executive allocated this winter. Up to 700 beds have been opened and many extra places have been made available in nursing homes and community services. There is also a role for local authorities and, in that context, it is most important that local authorities spend nearer to their grant-aided expenditure for both residential care and home care services for the elderly.

I have highlighted the issue of GAE spending on the elderly. The considerable new resources that we announced on 5 October—up to £100 million for care of the elderly—will be allocated under a new system. A number of outputs for that money will be agreed between the Scottish Executive and local authorities and we will ensure that the money is spent on the many services for the elderly that Susan Deacon outlined on 5 October.

It is clear that the assault on delayed discharge is right at the top of the list of the Executive's priorities for health and community care. As Richard Simpson indicated, those who wait the longest must be dealt with as a matter of the greatest urgency. The Executive is utterly committed to that, in terms of the announcement that was made on 5 October and future policy developments.

Once again, we have had a most useful debate. Members' business debates have made a massive contribution to the new politics in Scotland. The debate highlighted the importance of joined-up policy, to which Fiona Hyslop referred. I congratulate Cathy Jamieson on highlighting this most important topic. I also congratulate East Ayrshire Council on developing a community safety strategy in the way that has been described. The themes of today's debate remind us of two key themes from "Our National Health", the action plan that was published last week. The plan emphasised the importance of promoting health and preventing illness. The debate reminded us that we cannot sensibly deal effectively with our public health problems if we isolate them from their wider context of social and economic deprivation. As Alex Neil and others reminded us, there is a  clear link between the accidents that have been discussed today and social deprivation. A recent paper noted that, between 1981 and 1995, the most deprived groups of the population experienced double the rate of injury mortality that the most advantaged groups experienced. That relationship did not change during those 15 years. Other research suggests an even larger gap. The motion refers to road safety. We can take some—but only a little—encouragement from recent statistics. However, the Executive has set new targets. By 2010, we want a 40 per cent reduction in fatal and serious casualties as a whole and a 50 per cent reduction in accidents involving children. Those targets are underpinned by a Great Britain-wide road safety strategy called "Tomorrow's roads: safer for everyone". Today, we heard of further initiatives that will help to achieve those objectives, such as the home zones, which we approved this afternoon. I also remind members of the safer routes to school initiative, into which the Executive has put more than £5 million. Margaret Jamieson highlighted the importance of fire safety. The Executive and the Scottish fire brigades actively promote community fire safety through paid publicity and educational packages and the provision of direct advice and assistance. Moreover, smoke alarms have provided a huge boost to home safety; even wider use will pay dividends in lives saved. However, Margaret Jamieson correctly reminded us of how many people have alarms that are not working. She referred to Strathclyde fire brigade's suggestion on the installation of sprinklers in new and refurbished homes. I cannot give an immediate response to that, but I am sure that consideration will be given to that important proposal. On accidents at home, some statistics may help to add context to the debate. Tragically, 47 accidental deaths of children under 15 were recorded in 1999. That was an improvement on the 67 deaths in the previous year and higher figures earlier in the decade. However, as Mary Scanlon reminded us, fewer deaths can coexist with more accidents. As Cathy Jamieson pointed out, we need information to inform our strategies. I agree with the reference in the motion to the need for greater sophistication in the accident data that we collect. That is an area that will be given further consideration. Many speakers referred to a group that is especially prone to accidents: the elderly. The accidental death rate among over-75s in 1998 was nearly five times higher than among those between 65 and 74, who themselves experienced a higher rate than the other age groups. Health boards and local authorities have recognised for some time that there must be a continuing effort to  minimise the incidence and severity of falls and other accidents in the home. Indeed, various initiatives at local level have been launched to make an impact on that problem. Maureen Macmillan and Richard Simpson emphasised the importance of home helps in that regard. A further initiative has come from the Health Education Board for Scotland, which recently produced a report on preventing falls among the elderly. Following that report, a group is seeking to develop a strategy document, which should be helpful for health boards, local authorities and voluntary bodies that are active in this area. Among other things, it is likely to recommend improved capacity building, the development of suitable printed materials for local agencies and training for health visitors. Richard Simpson referred to that earlier. Health visitors are important both for the elderly and for children, who are another key group in accident prevention. The training of health visitors is important, and we all look forward to the paper that will be published in January on the public health role of health visitors and nurses. How long have I got, Presiding Officer?

Is that all? I will have to hurry, as I know that Cathy Jamieson will want me to respond to the point that she made on the statutory duty. Many bodies are involved in this issue—I had intended to give an example of an initiative on accidents involving children by the Castlemilk community health project and to refer to the support given to ROSPA by the Executive, especially for its work with children. Cathy Jamieson called for a statutory duty on local authorities. As she acknowledged, it is not self-evident that such a duty would appropriately rest on councils alone. Other central and local agencies—notably health boards—have a part to play. In fact, a wide range of bodies have a legitimate interest in some aspects of home safety: centrally, the Health and Safety Executive and the Department of Trade and Industry; and, locally, health boards, the police, the fire service and voluntary bodies. However, consideration will be given to what Cathy Jamieson said. It should not be implied that legislation is required to produce action. We have heard today of the 10 councils that have appointed home safety officers on a full-time or part-time basis. There is no bar to other councils following suit, and I certainly hope that they will. This has been an important debate and I assure Cathy Jamieson that the Executive's mind is by no  means closed, either to her central recommendation or to the many other important suggestions that have been made. I am sure that we all agree that there are no quick-fix solutions in this area. We must progress on a broad front nationally and, critically, at local level if we are to make progress in reducing the heavy toll of accidents that has been highlighted today.  Meeting closed at 17:00.

The Scottish Executive is in regular contact with the UK Government on a wide range of issues. Immigration and asylum is a reserved matter, as is agreement to international conventions.

As I indicated, specific agreement to international conventions is a matter for the Westminster Government. However, the Scottish Parliament has a responsibility for a wide range of issues to ensure that the children of asylum seekers and refugees are treated in exactly the same way as any other children. We have many things to do to promote that. As I indicated last week, we must send out positive messages. More specifically, through our actions and through the Scottish asylum seekers consortium—of which the Executive is a member—we must ensure that all refugees and asylum seekers have equal access to health services and education and that they have access to the same protection by the police and the criminal justice system as others have.

I gave such an undertaking in response to Shona Robison's question last week. She referred specifically to the children of asylum seekers, but I am happy to meet representatives of any asylum seekers. Indeed, as I said last week, I visited asylum seekers in Glasgow during the summer—I would certainly like to continue in the same vein.

The decision of the United Kingdom Government to have a review of the voucher system will be widely welcomed. However, the specific matter of vouchers is a reserved area. In answer to Irene McGugan's question, I referred to a range of issues that are the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament—it is a very large range of issues. We must stick to the issues for which we have responsibility, just as the Westminster Government must stick to the areas  for which it has responsibility.

I met the Secretary of State for Health, along with representatives from Wales and Northern Ireland, on 28 November 2000. Susan Deacon has had frequent meetings with the secretary of state and other ministerial colleagues in the past year. At the most recent meeting, we discussed NHS winter planning arrangements throughout the UK, including the use of the additional resources for the NHS and local authorities and the record numbers who have been immunised against flu this year.

I noted the publication of the report this week, but I have not yet read it. Clearly, I will want to give it serious consideration. The report said that not everybody who suffers from such a disorder has been diagnosed as such. That problem needs to be addressed, along with the issue of service provision. However, to a considerable extent we have dealt with that through our learning disability review.

There are several routes for the disbursal of the £100 million. Some of it will be disbursed centrally, some will be channelled through health boards, and about £30 million of it will be disbursed through local authorities. Historically there have sometimes been problems of local authorities not using money for the purposes for which it is allocated. The Executive is addressing that issue. It is doing so with the new community care money, through agreed outputs. We want to adopt the same approach with the money for the drugs programme. The drug action teams will also have an important role in dealing with that money. That will ensure that there is complete transparency in how the money is spent.

Action against smoking is one of the Executive's central priorities and legislation on tobacco advertising will be introduced shortly. Action against smoking is a major feature of the health improvement fund. Nicola Sturgeon is trying to shift us away from the substantive issues of smoking and tobacco on to a constitutional dispute about who is representing Scotland in Europe. Scotland is stronger in Europe because it is part of the United Kingdom.

We have no plans to carry out a formal review of the Arbuthnott formula, although we will continue to examine carefully the effects of implementing it.

No health board in Scotland will have any resources taken away. In fact, every health board will get a minimum increase next year of 5.5 per cent. A lot of work went into the Arbuthnott formula and I pay tribute to the Arbuthnott committee. I also pay tribute to the Health and Community Care Committee for all the work that it did, as the formula was considered again after the committee had commented on it. Three of the important factors that were taken into account were rurality, the proportion of elderly people and levels of deprivation. Grampian comes below the Scottish average for deprivation—which is not to say that there is no deprivation—and below the average for the proportion of elderly people. That may be why Grampian health board has not done as well as some others, but the minimum increase for everyone is 5.5 per cent.

I remember the discussions and the technical arguments surrounding the matter. I do not think that the introduction of ferry kilometres would have made an enormous difference. The reality is that the island health boards, like all the others, will benefit by a minimum of 5.5 per cent. Some of the island health boards come way beyond the Scottish average as regards what they will get per head. Consideration will be given to how we review the formula. It is not a matter of this being the last word on the issue. No doubt the details to which Mary Scanlon referred can be considered in due course.

This has been a useful debate, in advance of the statement on the health plan, during which we have been able to analyse the current state of the health service. We are not complacent. I made it clear that issues such as delayed discharges and waiting times are key priorities. However, it is regrettable that there has been so little understanding on the part of so many Opposition members of the current state of the health service or of the nature of a modern health care system. Mary Scanlon made the interesting point that there has been a 10 to 20 per cent increase in emergency admissions in the past year. That is one of the problems that we have had to deal with, although I am not using that as an excuse. Mary Scanlon referred to there being more than 3,000 blocked beds, which is a misrepresentation. For the first time, we have published official figures, which indicate that 3,000 patients are ready for discharge. That is not the same as delayed discharge, the common measure of which would be the number of people waiting more than six weeks. However, 1,900 people is not satisfactory and dealing with that will be a key priority. Mary Scanlon also referred to £44 million of health money being reinvested in writing off Glasgow's housing debt. That is ridiculous nonsense. I leave aside the fact that we now regard housing as an important part of public health. That money was from trust surpluses that would have been returned to the Treasury had they not been used in that way. Mary Scanlon asked about the complementary role of the private sector. The private sector's role is not as big here as in England, but various health boards use it when necessary. We will never go down the route of the Tory party—certainly the Tory party in England—of hiving off whole sections of the health service to the private sector.  Brian Adam made the useful comment that waiting times are a better measure than waiting lists. That is traditionally the SNP policy. He also referred to the problem in Grampian with the 12-month guarantee. I accept that that is a problem, but it is being dealt with quickly. Keith Raffan referred to lengthening waiting times—that is not true. I repeat that 83 per cent of patients on waiting lists are treated within three months. The average wait for someone on a waiting list in Scotland is 31 days compared with 90 days in England.

In 1997, there was a correlation between waiting lists and waiting times. As more patients are treated, there can be lengthening waiting lists and reducing waiting times. We are sticking with the waiting list pledge. It will be delivered, as promised, by 2002. Nicola Sturgeon talked a lot about pledges. We have delivered on all the pledges on which we promised to deliver at the beginning of this Administration. I refer specifically to the doubling of the number of one-stop clinics, which was delivered two years ahead of the target.

It is more important to get NHS 24 right, which is precisely what we have done. The other issue that Nicola Sturgeon majored on was beds. After second thoughts, she referred instead to acute beds. I remind her that an extra 400 acute beds are being brought into use this winter. That is the correct way to deal with the matter. What has been more significant in the debate is the SNP's appalling, outdated attitude to non-acute beds. Dr Richard Simpson quite rightly said that the nationalists had no understanding of a modern health care system. Are they seriously suggesting that the 2,300 people in learning  disability hospitals should stay there in order to provide the SNP with high figures on bed numbers? Keith Raffan talked about the important issue of nurses and referred to pay. Increases have been significantly above inflation for two years, but I am not complacent about the situation. He also referred to conditions. Although there have been major developments in family-friendly working, I am not complacent about that either. There is a low vacancy rate for nurses in Scotland. This year, we have employed 210 additional nurses in priority areas and, as I said in my opening speech, 10,000 nurses and midwives will qualify in Scotland in the next five years, which is 1,500 more than the figure in the plan. David Davidson said that the level of vacancies in Scotland was twice the level in England. Although that might be the case for one or two specialties to which he did not refer, the underlying reality is that staff numbers in Scotland are much higher than in England. For example, in Scotland, there are 823 nurses per 100,000 people compared with 621 nurses per 100,000 people in England. The story is the same for GPs and dentists. Last, but by no means least, I shall address the problem of delayed discharges, which we regard as a key priority. Precisely for that reason, we allocated £19 million of special money to health boards and local authorities to tackle the problem, on top of the additional winter money to provide more beds, nurses and other services. Our statement in October, which allocated £100 million to build up community services to deal with delayed discharges—because that is the right thing to do—was our key response to the Sutherland report. Ben Wallace asked whether we were fundamentally opposed to free personal care. As he sat with me in the Health and Community Care Committee for more than a year, he knows that I am well disposed to that recommendation. However, anyone who is serious about politics must realise that free personal care is a complex issue. Politics is about choices, such as choosing what we spend our money on. In October, we saw the need to build up community capacity and services, which is why we emphasised the different parts of the package of home care services.

I do not think that I am allowed to—my time is up. That is not to say that we are not well disposed to the other recommendation, which is precisely why we are reviewing the matter. An  announcement will be made in January. Once again, I caution all members not to believe everything—or, in some cases, anything—that they read in the newspapers.

As I emphasised in the previous debate on health and community care, we recognise and are acting on the problem of delayed discharges. As Susan Deacon will also say in just over an hour's time, we are determined to make more progress on reducing waiting times. However, the SNP motion completely fails to understand the changing nature  of modern health care or to acknowledge the very real progress that has been made. The health service is treating more patients than ever before. Last year, 43,000 more patients were treated than in 1997. There were 50,000 more day surgery cases in 2000 than in 1997. For example, in 1999, 57 per cent of cataract extractions were performed as day surgery compared to only 28 per cent three years previously. That trend has nothing whatever to do with cost considerations; it is championed by the leading clinicians in Scotland because the results show quicker, better outcomes for patients. That is the modern NHS: built around the patient to provide convenient services while maintaining high clinical standards. I could give many other examples, such as nurse-led clinics, which are particularly effective in the management of chronic conditions such as asthma, or one-stop clinics, of which there now 2,202. That is a pledge made by the Executive and delivered two years in advance of the target.

I am dealing with exactly those issues: beds first, then nurses, then waiting. A consequence of the trend that I have outlined is that fewer NHS beds are required. Moreover, the average length of time a patient stays in a hospital bed is also declining. In 1990, for example, the average length of stay in an acute Scottish hospital bed was 6.9 days and now it is 5.2 days. The average occupancy rate of acute hospital beds has risen from 72.3 per cent in 1990 to 76.5 per cent this year. That means hospitals are making better use of the beds. That said, the reduction in acute beds accounts for a very small part of the overall figure referred to in the motion. As one would expect, almost the entire reduction in bed numbers is in long-stay specialties. That is where the policy of caring for patients in their homes, or in the community as close to home as possible, is having the biggest impact. There has been a substantial transfer of resources and staff from the NHS to social work authorities and that must be remembered when bed and staffing figures are thrown around in debate. For example, there has been a welcome reduction of nearly 900 beds in long-stay, learning disability hospitals. Is the SNP objecting to that? That means not less care, but better care in the right place, which is the community. There is plenty of scope to increase bed numbers when that is necessary, as evidenced by the 700 extra beds being opened this winter and the 20 per cent increase in critical care beds when  required. I will end my comments on beds with a comparison with England, since the SNP likes that. We have 2.96 acute beds per 1,000 population, compared with 2.18 south of the border and we have 6.87 hospital beds per 1,000 population compared with 3.84 in England.

We are building up services in the community and that is precisely what I am about to address. I want to continue without interruption because there is a lot in the motion to which to respond. The SNP has claimed that 3,000 hospital beds are occupied by patients who are ready for discharge. The SNP is, of course, taking a uniquely narrow definition of the issue. The extensive survey of patients waiting for discharge, which was published on 4 December, shows that just over 1,900 people were waiting for more than the standard planning period of six weeks following a clinical decision on discharge. Of course, that is still too high. That is why we are taking comprehensive and robust action with the NHS and social work departments to tackle delays in discharges. We have allocated £19 million in the current financial year to local authorities and the NHS, specifically to tackle delayed discharges. That money is in addition to the specific winter money for extra beds and nurses and so on.

I must press on as I have only five minutes. The NHS and local authorities are using the extra resources to work together and develop joint, long-term solutions to tackle the problem of delayed discharges. The Executive will monitor the effectiveness of plans at all stages and we will ensure the spread of good practice in reducing delayed discharges. The problem has existed for 25 years and more, and will not be solved overnight, but solving it will be a key priority. We have already demonstrated that—not just in the delayed discharge money to which I referred, but in the £100 million package announced by Susan Deacon on 5 October. The home care packages, the rapid response teams and the £5 million for aids and adaptations this year will all help to build community capacity and deal with the problem of  delayed discharges. That was our top priority in responding to the Sutherland report on 5 October and is the background to our current review of personal care. Without going further into that matter at this point, I want to caution Nicola Sturgeon against believing everything that she reads in the newspaper. I will move on to health service staff numbers.

I am sorry but I do not have time to take interventions. We have been taken to task this morning on nurse numbers. It is true that total nursing staff numbers are very slightly down on 1996 levels, by about 500 whole-time equivalents. However, at the same time, the number of qualified nurses within the NHS is rising: the whole-time equivalent figure is up by about 270 since 1996 and we have funded an additional 210 specialist nurses in priority areas this year. That is on top of local winter increases, such as 240 extra nurses simply in Lothian.

I am sorry, but I have only three minutes left. The trends are even better in relation to nursing students. The number of nursing and midwifery students has increased steadily over the past four years by around 12 per cent, and the numbers will increase by a further 3 per cent this year. Over the next five years, 10,000 nurses and midwives will qualify in Scotland—that is 1,500 more than previously planned. We should remember that, on top of the numbers of NHS nurses to which Nicola Sturgeon referred, there are many nurses who work in nursing homes. There was an increase of 3,000 places in nursing homes between 1996 and 1999. I turn to the fourth point in the motion, which is waiting lists. I find that rather odd, since it was not so long ago that the SNP health spokesperson, Kay Ullrich, told us that it was not waiting lists that mattered, but waiting times.

No. I would love to give way for the rest of the day, but I have less than two minutes. From the point of view of the person on the waiting list, there is no doubt that it is the time of the wait that matters. Let us remember that 43 per cent of patients receive immediate treatment and do not join the waiting list. Let us remember that for those who have to wait, the median waiting time has declined steadily over the past three years to 31 days. The average wait on a waiting list in Scotland is 31 days compared to nearly 90  days in England. Let us remember that 83 per cent of patients who go on to a list are treated within three months. Of course I would like to see even better figures and a further reduction in the maximum waiting time, which is currently set at 12 months. However, we must wait to hear more on that later. I have described some of the significant achievements of the NHS in Scotland over the past few years. I want to take the opportunity to record our recognition of the commitment and sheer hard work of health care workers throughout the health service. I want them to know that they have our support and appreciation for the effort that they make on our behalf. Our support goes much further than words. The last figures that I want to quote are money numbers. The Executive is spending £481 million more in the NHS in Scotland this year than last. In September, we announced that health spending would go on increasing at record levels to nearly £7 billion a year by 2003-04; that means £1.2 billion extra over the next three years, on top of this year's record increase. That record investment will be combined with further reform and change to deliver more and more improvements for patients. I move amendment S1M-1453.1, to leave out from "is concerned" to end and insert: "notes the fact that the NHS in Scotland is treating more patients than ever before and welcomes the fact that funding for the NHS in Scotland is being increased by record amounts over the period 2000-04, and looks forward to further modernisation and change in the interests of patients."

I congratulate Scott Barrie on securing this debate today. As several members have said, it is an ideal topic to mark the Scottish Parliament's 100th members' business debate. I am sure that we all agree that this has been one of many outstanding successes in the Scottish Parliament. It is a sobering thought for me that when I dealt with health and community care on the front bench at Westminster, I got to discuss these matters for one and a half hours—one debate—in 10 months before the 1997 general election; in the past four weeks, I have had six members' business debates and three main debates. The motion reflects the interest that many of us share in ensuring that people with learning disabilities live a more healthy, enriched and integrated lives and play a fuller part in Scottish society. When I say integrated, I refer to the closing down of institutions and the increasing opportunities for people with learning disabilities to live along with their peers in ordinary society. We look forward to the time when all the institutions are closed. I hope that people being more integrated will help to deal with some of the problems that we have heard about today. Like Jamie Stone, I was moved by what Scott Barrie said. Like Shona Robison, I was shocked by some of the figures that he gave. They are shocking. The bullying and harassment of people with learning disabilities that he described is unacceptable and it must be tackled. Initiatives on bullying in general are taking place in schools. I was pleased to hear about the  specific example given by Scott Barrie. There is a general bullying in school initiative, co-ordinated by the national Anti-Bullying Network, which has been set up to share good practice in tackling bullying across Scotland. Moray House Institute of Education is running the network and Professor Pamela Munn is managing it. The strategy, which Cathy Jamieson outlined, of bringing bullies and bullied together should be part of the overall approach. In May this year, Iain Gray launched the learning disability review report. Two things stand out. First, it is without doubt the most inclusive piece of policy making that the Scottish Executive has ever conducted. It involved stakeholders and especially users and carers. Secondly, the review started out in the traditional route of looking at services—especially health and social care services. However, it quickly shifted to considering peoples' lifestyles—into which services should fit. The clear message emerged that we all need a better understanding of people with learning disabilities and the potential that they possess to play a constructive role in society. The review made 29 recommendations. I have time to touch on only one, which is especially relevant—the setting up of the new Scottish centre for learning disabilities. It will provide a resource to service users, carers and agencies and will promote public awareness and understanding about learning disabilities through changing negative attitudes and perceptions. That is a big challenge for the centre, but it will be one of the key elements in its remit. It will work with organisations such as Enable and the Disability Rights Commission to share knowledge and improve information services. The centre will also encourage the development of local independent advocacy services. Those could be very useful in helping to deal with the problems that we are discussing today, although the point that Mary Scanlon made about counselling services is also highly relevant. Scott Barrie also made a point about the police. Police training, both general equal opportunity awareness training and specific learning disabilities awareness training, is clearly an issue. Although such training does take place to some extent, there is always room for development and I am sure that members will have heard Scott Barrie's points on that issue. It is also relevant to the debate to report briefly on the progress that is being made. We want to keep the momentum going. Further consultation on how best to implement the report's recommendations has now been concluded. As we are currently analysing the responses, it is not yet possible to give a full summary of the outcomes at this stage.  However, I can say two things. First, we have made a start on setting up the Scottish centre for learning disabilities. Applications from organisations to run the centre have now been received and we hope to make an announcement on the successful bidder early in the new year. Secondly, I remind members that we will support implementation of the recommendations over the next three years through a £36 million change fund. Although the detail of how the fund will be applied is still under consideration, we hope to make an announcement on that soon. Like all of us, people with learning disabilities wish to be seen as valued members of society, respected and acknowledged for their contribution. The Scottish Executive is committed to making this happen. Today, I want to pay tribute to everyone who supports people with learning disabilities, many of whom are in the voluntary sector and who, as sufferers or carers, have seen and experienced the harm that intolerance and prejudice can cause to people who are vulnerable. I congratulate Values Into Action on producing and launching its A-to-Z booklets "Let's Keep Safe" and "Let's Report It". In addition to being user friendly, they contain valuable advice for service providers to consult. Like other members, I read—and was impressed by—both documents. I am sure that the new Scottish centre will find their production helpful as it takes forward its own awareness-raising activities. I commend these booklets to all agencies responsible for providing the person-centred care and services that people with learning disabilities have a right to expect in the new century.

It would probably be courteous to respond briefly to the amendment now. Although we are pleased that Tory members welcome the announcement of the review, we think that the last six words of the amendment will mean quite different things to different people. Furthermore, we feel that the reason that is outlined in the amendment for conducting the  review should not be the only reason. Health and public order considerations are also very important. However, although we do not accept the amendment, we welcome the fact that there is agreement on the substantive issue of the review.

I welcome this opportunity to engage the Parliament's support for our plans to develop a new alcohol misuse strategy, in the form of a national action plan. I know from the debate last month on Donald Gorrie's motion that there is considerable interest in this issue among members. I will start by examining some of the issues with which we must grapple and then outline how we propose to take things forward. Drinks containing alcohol have been part of the social and cultural fabric of societies across the world since ancient times. Alcohol has long been associated with relaxation, individual enjoyment and community celebration. For most people in Scotland, it does not create problems, but there are worrying trends in excessive and irresponsible drinking, particularly among our young people but certainly not confined to that group. It creates problems not only for the individuals concerned but for society as a whole. There is no doubt that if we are to look objectively at alcohol consumption and tackle alcohol misuse, we have first to acknowledge and accept its place in Scotland's social and cultural fabric. We then need to recognise the complexities of the issues involved. The response needs to be many faceted, as is the problem. There are no quick or simple solutions. There is a positive side: in moderation and at the right time and place, alcohol can be included in healthy lifestyles. Moreover, the production and distribution of alcohol plays an important part in the Scottish economy. For example, the Scotch whisky industry provides direct employment for more than 11,000 people and indirect employment for a further 30,000. On the negative side, excessive drinking carries a heavy toll in illness, accidents, anti-social behaviour and criminal acts of violence. From health complications to career and relationship breakdowns, alcohol has the potential to ruin lives. Its costs in personal, social and economic terms are great. Unfortunately, that is often hidden or unheeded. Alcohol is undeniably linked to road deaths, lower achievement, poor physical and mental health, family breakdown and poor  employment prospects. Sadly, 14—yes, 14—appears to be a milestone, with most teenagers having begun to drink by the age of 15. There is also evidence to suggest that youngsters who smoke and drink are more likely to experiment with illegal drugs. Scottish health survey figures that were published this week suggest that 33 per cent of men and 15 per cent of women are exceeding the recommended weekly limits. Those figures suggest that we need to do far more to make people aware of the health and other consequences of regularly exceeding the recommended limits. Some studies suggest that there may be as many as 3,000 to 4,000 alcohol-related deaths each year. Alcohol misuse also contributes significantly to crime levels through offences such as being drunk and disorderly in public and through offences—especially violent offences—committed under the influence of alcohol. Alcohol misuse is not, of course, a new phenomenon. Successive Governments have attempted to tackle the problem. Some measures have been successful—most notably in drinking and driving. There are already many initiatives to address alcohol misuse. The Scottish Advisory Committee on Alcohol Misuse, which brings together representatives from all key sectors—from the health sector, local authorities, the police, the drinks industry, the licensed trade and the voluntary sector—was set up last year to advise on the development of the new strategy. Among others, the committee has focused on two key issues: service provision for those with alcohol problems and an evidence-based approach to prevention and health promotion. As members who were present at the earlier debate will know, I have now taken over the chair of that committee to give its work added political impetus. As I said during the earlier debate, work is continuing on the development of a nationally recognisable proof-of-age card, through pilots being conducted in Glasgow and Angus in co-operation with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and Young Scot. Moreover, the Executive is still supporting the work of alcohol misuse co-ordinating committees that were set up locally to ensure that measures and services are in place to tackle alcohol misuse. Those local partnerships involve representatives from all key interests—in health, local authorities, police and licensing. In addition, we are funding schemes such as server intervention programme Scotland, which provides training for licensees and their staff, and—in partnership with the Health Education Board for Scotland and the Scottish Council on Alcohol—Drinkwise. Overall, £2.5 million has been made available over three years  to help support the development of a strategy.

One thing that the Scottish advisory committee is considering is the level of services that are provided locally. The £2.5 million is for strategic development. A lot of money is spent on that in health board, local authority and voluntary sector budgets. I am not being complacent; I want to point out that a lot more than £2.5 million is being spent. We want to have an overview of that and, clearly, the development of services will be a key part of the action plan.

As I said, that is something the advisory committee is considering. I will ensure that we get some figures on that in the near future. I recently attended my first meeting as chairman of the advisory committee at which, to inform prevention efforts, members took evidence from a range of experts on the factors that might encourage alcohol misuse and those that might protect against it. It gave us a fascinating insight. There is no doubt that marketing and the media influence behaviour, particularly among young people. Where do we go from here? When considering national action, we are not starting with a blank sheet of paper, but we need to build upon, develop and reinforce all the good work that is going on. The Executive plans to bring all the various strands together into a comprehensive plan for action, which will act as a framework for action for all concerned at national and local levels. We also wish to consult much more widely. I am pleased to announce that, early next year, we will begin an inclusive consultation process to take  place over six months leading to the production—by the end of next year—of a comprehensive action plan on alcohol misuse. It will emphasise the partnership nature of policy development on alcohol misuse and help us to shape the shared action plan.

I will give way in a moment. I must make some progress first. We must all bear in mind that we are dealing with complex social policy issues. There are many influences that impact on our drinking patterns. If we are to make progress in reducing the harm caused by alcohol, it is vital that we ensure ownership of the strategy and that the views of all with an interest are taken into account in its development. Action is not for the Executive alone, but for many groups—individuals, parents, all those who work with children and young people, industry, the retail and licensed trade, employers, the national health service, local authorities, voluntary organisations, the police and last, but by no means least, the Scottish Parliament.

I was told that I had 15 minutes to speak.

That is a major problem. There has clearly been a breakdown in communication. I will make two brief announcements. There is strong support for an overhaul of current licensing law. Licensing laws have generally stood the test of time and are not systematically failing. Nevertheless, we have looked carefully at all the arguments. I am pleased to announce that we have decided that the time has come for a comprehensive review of licensing laws. An independent committee with a fairly wide- ranging remit will conduct the review. Full details of the membership of the committee and how the review will be conducted will be announced in due course. I am also pleased to announce that the Executive will launch a new television commercial set in a hospital casualty department on a busy Friday night. The commercial graphically illustrates the strong links between alcohol and the results of alcohol-induced violence. It does so by locating a bar behind the accident and emergency reception desk, which continues to serve drinks as injured patients move around it. The aim of the commercial is to demonstrate the cost to us all of inappropriate drinking and to encourage us to see that type of behaviour as socially unacceptable. I hope that members will recognise that we have listened to what has been said before. We wish to engage with the Parliament, the alcohol misuse field and the public in general, in reaching the final shape of our action plan. The Executive is committed to act and trusts that others will play their part also. I move, That the Parliament endorses the Executive's plans to work towards the publication of a national action plan to tackle alcohol misuse.

In her statement on 5 October, Susan Deacon announced additional provision, which builds up to £100 million extra for older people for the national health service and local authorities in 2003-04. Local authority allocations for community care will increase by more than £85 million in 2001-02, rising to more than £120 million in 2003-04, much of which will benefit older people. Payment for personal care is currently being reviewed.

The Executive is already implementing the vast majority of the Sutherland commission's recommendations. I note what the Health and Community Care Committee said, but it was honest enough to acknowledge that free personal care for everyone would have a knock-on effect on other community care budgets. As I said, the issue is under review. To some extent, there must be a trade-off between building up services in the community—which will benefit everyone—and helping the minority of people who pay for personal care.

Those figures were sent to Margaret Smith only today. Like all members, I shall want to examine them with great care. As Margaret Smith's committee acknowledged, to some extent a choice must be made between building up services and helping people with care costs. We are already helping people through free nursing care. A definition of nursing care is being worked on, which I hope will meet some of Margaret Smith's demands for a definition that relates to the level of dependency. That might well be a way forward. As I said in my first answer, the wider issue continues to be reviewed.

An announcement of the result of the review will come soon, in January—not least because we shall also respond to the Health and Community Care Committee then. I acknowledge the arguments that have been made, but I remind Nicola Sturgeon what the Health and Community Care Committee said about the knock-on effects on other community care budgets. In the real world, we must make choices. I think that everybody is keen, in principle, on Nicola Sturgeon's recommendation, but we must make choices. There are trade-offs. That is the difficult judgment that we are considering.

The findings of the report by Save the Children and the Scottish Refugee Council were presented only at a conference at the beginning of last week. The report contains a number of recommendations, some of which are for the Scottish Executive. We shall study carefully those recommendations that are directed specifically at the Executive.

I would be very keen to meet the children. Over the summer I visited refugees in Glasgow. Shona Robison knows that, because we visited them together. I have a strong personal interest in the issue of refugee children. The Executive has a role to play in this area. We will examine the specific recommendations that are made in the report and respond to them in due course. We are already doing some of the things that have been suggested, such as creating positive images. I often tell people about a schoolgirl who came to my surgery with her family—she was the only member of the family who spoke English—and said: "We did not come here for the money. We came here because we were going to get killed". That encapsulates the tragedy that faces so many asylum seekers at the moment.

We do not see people moving into Scotland as a threat. We should remember that a large number of asylum seekers will remain here and will, in the near future, be Scottish citizens and highly valued members of Scottish society. Whenever people talk about asylum seekers, they should bear that in mind.

The necessary provision will be contained in the regulation of care bill that we hope will be introduced before Christmas. The plan would be to commence the provision on 1 April 2002, the expected start date for the new system for regulating care services.

The proposal certainly will not increase charges, but will support the interests of older people. As their condition changes, they will be able to stay in the same place but receive a different level of care.

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing this debate, and I am grateful to all members who have contributed to it. During the debate on primary care dental services on 25 October, Iain Gray and Susan Deacon made it clear that we are committed to an effective and accessible NHS dental service for all who wish to use it. I acknowledge, however, that there are some problems with access to NHS dental services in some parts of Scotland that need to be addressed. Mike Rumbles referred to his own constituency in that regard this evening. In the primary care sector, where around 90 per cent of dental patients are treated, most general dental practitioners are independent contractors to the NHS. I find it regrettable that in some parts of Scotland there has been a reducing commitment to the NHS by some general dental practitioners. Looking at the figures, however, it appears that the percentage of those who are registered with an NHS dentist in Grampian is only marginally less than the Scottish average.  Mike Rumbles referred to unrealistic fees. That is not the only issue, but I must tell him that increases in service fees have been recommended by the independent review body on doctors' and dentists' remuneration, which reaches decisions on increases, taking into account all the evidence submitted by the British Dental Association and the UK Department of Health. On a related matter, Ben Wallace suggested extending the commitment payment scheme for NHS dentists. That has just been introduced. The first payments were made this month, and more than £2 million will be paid this year. The same review body will comment on further remuneration. The problem of access is one of a number of issues that will be considered by the implementation support group that has been set up to take forward the action plan for dental services in Scotland. The group had its first meeting on Monday, and comprises a cross-section of experts with an interest in dental issues. To achieve improvements in dental provision, we need to have the people to deliver them—the right number of people with the right skills in the right place. Apart from the action plan, we issued in September a discussion paper on planning the dental work force, which proposes that the target for dental schools should now be an output of 120 graduates per year, which Mike Rumbles referred to. I remind him that that is a considerable increase over the past few years, and we are aiming to keep the output at 120. We have been able to arrange with the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council to implement that target. We are also close to achieving the target of providing postgraduate vocational training places for all Scottish graduate dentists—that did not exist in the past. We can influence where that training takes place, and we will look at the north-east in that regard, which may partly answer Mike Rumbles's point about extending out from Dundee, although I hope to have other things to say about that in a moment. I will turn now to the hospital sector, which was referred to in general terms by Richard Lochhead, and with specific reference to restorative dentistry by Mike Rumbles. Although 90 per cent of dental treatments are in primary care, hospital specialists are a vital part of the service. We are aware of the concerns in Grampian, in particular about the number of specialists in restorative dentistry. There are 22 such specialists throughout Scotland, or one per 230,000 population, which is better than the guidelines recommend. They are based in the four main cities, and provide outreach services to other health board areas. As with other dental specialties, there is a geographical imbalance between population and the number of  specialists, and we need to deal with that through managed clinical networks. Those are currently being discussed for orthodontics and oral-maxillofacial surgery, and restorative dentistry will follow. Those networks ought to involve new links between Dundee and Aberdeen.

The discussion paper to which I referred earlier proposed significant increases in the number of professionals who are complementary to dentistry to enhance the dental team. Clearly, we will consider those measures, and all the others in the discussion paper, in the light of the comments that we receive. As well as getting the numbers right, we regard the quality of training as vital. Dentists can register to practise on graduation, but the NHS insists on one year's postgraduate training. In Scotland, we have successfully piloted two-year general professional training, and one of those pilots took place in the north-east. I can tell Mike Rumbles that we will consider making permanent and expanding that pilot, which would help to meet his point about making new links. We have also funded 10 additional training places for the community dental service, which provides a substantial proportion of its services to remote and rural areas. However, many dentists prefer to remain close to the area where they did their undergraduate training. Although that is not an argument for a dental school in Aberdeen, it means that the local trusts in Grampian, with support from the board and the Executive, must make particular efforts to recruit and retain staff. To aid that, we are encouraging both dental schools to consider outreach training, which will give undergraduates experience in rural areas and in hospitals away from the dental schools. That could help to meet Mike Rumbles's concern about new links between Dundee and Aberdeen. Mike Rumbles raised the issue of salaried dentists. The trust is working on proposals for a salaried post to provide two days of dental cover at Alford and three days in Aberdeen. That is in addition to the three salaried dentists who already operate in Aberdeen. It is open to the trust to apply to Scottish ministers to appoint further salaried dentists when and where the need arises. I referred to the Scottish dental access grants at last week's question time, when Mike Rumbles asked about dental services. Thirty access grants have already been awarded, and some have gone to practices in Grampian.  As Mike Rumbles and other colleagues may know, the trust has embarked on a series of consultations involving the public, local practitioners, the health board and Dundee dental school. One of the local health care co-operatives has been appointed lead for Grampian-wide primary care dental services. Several ideas are being pursued, including how to provide NHS dental services at Alford, to which I referred. Significant efforts are being made to recruit locums and permanent dentists to the area, including the major recruitment campaign that I highlighted.

I hear what Ben Wallace is saying. I am told that an advertising campaign is going on and that, in January 2001, adverts will be placed, but I will check on what Ben Wallace has said about that. To reply to Mary Scanlon's point, a bid will be put in for capital moneys for the Dundee hospital postgraduate centre for the coming year. In the light of the recently published "An Action Plan for Dental Services in Scotland" and the associated on-going work, I hope that I have made it clear that we are determined to make a positive difference to dental services throughout Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:43.

The Scottish diet action plan provides the framework for improving children's diets, to which milk makes an important contribution.

The diet action plan provides an excellent statement of policy, but the task is to drive forward implementation. I am delighted to hear that progress is being made in Ayrshire through partnership. Extra resources have been put in from the health improvement fund and from the milk subsidy scheme to drive forward this important aspect of health policy. A range of initiatives is on the go. We want to encourage in particular the development of initiatives such as the excellent community food initiatives that exist in so many parts of Scotland.

Last week, the Executive announced £380,000 to provide milk to a large number of people in nursery and primary schools in Scotland. I am sure that that has been welcomed throughout Scotland, but I am disappointed that it has not been welcomed by Fergus Ewing.

I congratulate Adam Ingram on securing this debate. I pay tribute to carers in general and specifically carers of people with mental health problems. I acknowledge the enormous contribution that they make to society. Some of them are in the gallery today; I welcome them. As we have heard, some are also in the chamber. We would like to acknowledge the forceful and moving speech made by Cathy Jamieson. That carers' issues are being given the higher profile they deserve is a tribute to the years of campaigning carried out by organisations nationally and locally. Among those, I congratulate Margaret Paton and her colleagues in Trust: A Carers Connection on their commitment to support carers of people with mental health problems who live in Ayrshire. Every carer faces a unique set of circumstances. Carers of people with mental health problems need to have particular skills and sensitivity. I heard what Adam Ingram said about the carers strategy being irrelevant to mental health carers. I would submit that all carers share some important needs. I will talk briefly about the general strategy, but I accept that most of the debate will be—and ought to be—on the specific needs of those who care for people with mental health difficulties. The main  themes of the strategy are information, services, legislation, standards and monitoring. It goes without saying that all have relevance in different ways to carers of people with mental health difficulties. In particular, we know that carers want more support and better information to allow them to make real choices about how they run their lives. I will briefly remind members of the funding that has been put into the carers strategy. We have asked local authorities to spend £10 million a year on supporting carers. As the statement at the beginning of October made clear, there will be new investment to fund 22,000 extra weeks of respite care for older people. Finally, there has been the more recent announcement of £500,000 over the next three years for voluntary organisations to help with the implementation of the carers strategy. If we bear that general background in mind, I will now turn to Adam Ingram's specific points about mental health carers. Cathy Jamieson and David Mundell echoed Adam Ingram's opening comment about the specific problem of the social stigma attached to mental illness. We all recognise that that is an issue for people with mental illness and their carers and that we must address it on a broad front through educating the population about mental health and mental illness. Adam Ingram pointed out that carers of people with mental health problems do not identify themselves as carers. Although we accept that, it is equally an issue for other carers. Furthermore, I accept that that might be an argument among others for specific mental health projects—I note and welcome the fact that there are such projects in Ayrshire and other parts of Scotland. I also agree with Adam Ingram's point about training and general information and support. It is clear that carers of people with mental health problems have specific needs. That said, I must make a distinction between general information and particular information about certain individuals, which is the most controversial issue he raised. Carers need information to help them understand the health needs of the person they are caring for. Health professionals should be proactive in seeking patient consent to share information with carers. However, if a patient refuses, that is their right and professionals are obliged to respect that choice. Although that is made clear in guidance from the General Medical Council, it is also right in principle. The particular issue of schizophrenia will be dealt with in the clinical standards on schizophrenia that the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland will issue in the next few days. Debate will continue on that issue; indeed, there  are other issues where there is conflict between the patient or user of the service and the carer. However, we must accept that the patient and the user of the service has to take priority. If that proves a controversial idea, no doubt we can discuss it further. David Mundell asked us to make mental health a priority and hoped that we would have more debates on the subject. Although I am not entirely in control of the debates, I certainly welcome other members lodging motions on the matter. I should affirm that mental health is one of the Executive's top three health priorities. I must also pay tribute once again to the Health and Community Care Committee, which has done a lot of work on mental health, particularly through its inquiry on community care.

That is the challenge for us all. Health policy in general is now about translating the rhetoric of good policy documents into implementation on the ground. We have developed some mechanisms—I shall refer briefly to the mental health and well-being support group—but more work remains to be done on the performance management of mental health services and the general way in which we hold health boards to account for what they do. Issues arose in Ayrshire some time ago about how much money was spent on mental health services. Members who know more about it than I do may want to intervene. Comparative progress has been made and the Executive will look closely at the health board in Ayrshire, or anywhere else, if it thinks that mental health is not being treated as a priority—although I am not suggesting that Ayrshire Health Board is not making it a priority now.

I would not be so rash as  to give that guarantee, nor would it be in my power to do so, but people who have seen the report of the mental health and well-being support group into mental health services in Ayrshire—of whom Adam Ingram is one—will know that we can point to increases in budgets for mental health services, both in the local authorities and the health board. Nevertheless, the support group referred to the difference between the announced intended revenue growth and what has happened. I hasten to add that it did not say that there had not been some expansion in resources, but it issued that caveat. It is important to acknowledge that carers and service users are central to the framework for mental health services. That framework is designed to help health, social work and housing services and the voluntary sector to provide integrated and comprehensive health and social care services for people with mental health problems. The mental health and well-being support group was set up earlier this year to encourage and advance the framework's implementation agenda and its ambitions throughout Scotland. The group will offer support, advice, encouragement and examples of best practice to those who are involved on the ground. The group is an important initiative and its reports are important documents that I hope people will pay attention to in their own areas. On the general issue of money—I have mentioned the case of Ayrshire—I can point to some extra money for mental health services. The forecast expenditure for mental health this year is up by 8 per cent in local authorities and by 3 per cent in the NHS. More significant, the mental illness specific grant—which has been frozen for some time—will rise by 5 per cent next year, to £19 million a year. A further £5 million has been announced for improvements in NHS mental health accommodation and £2 million has been announced for the mental health and well-being development fund. Ayrshire has claimed £275,000 from that fund and will submit further bids, I am sure. There is more to providing support than simply resourcing services, important though that is. I pay tribute to all those who support people with mental health problems, many of whom work in the voluntary sector and have mental health problems themselves. We are determined to continue the work that we have started, to give mental health the priority it deserves. We may not be able to make everything perfect but, by continuing to work together, we can and will make a difference.  Meeting closed at 17:34.

The annual target of 120 dental graduates was set with full consideration of all issues. The target takes account of the estimated disease pattern over the next 10 years and maintains the quality of education in the teaching hospitals at Glasgow and Dundee. It was also set to maintain the balance of the whole dental team, taking into account the number of students and graduates  expected in other areas such as dental hygiene and dental therapy.

The recently announced dental action plan reaffirmed the Executive's commitment to an effective and accessible NHS dental service for everyone who wants it. We put our money where our mouth is by putting considerable extra resources into that objective. I am aware of the problems in Mike Rumbles's area and in other parts of Scotland. We are keen to promote salaried posts and give direct access grants where there is unmet patient demand. Thirty such grants have already been given to the value of £750,000.

The implementation group on the access plan will make progress on access. We hope that the extra resources plus the new salaried posts and the direct access grants will achieve the desired purpose. If we do not make the progress that we want to make, other matters may have to be considered. That is not yet necessary.

The dental plan also takes full account of training dentists and the other related people such as hygienists, which I referred to in my response to the original question. I will look into the specific example of Dundee that she has given. Dental training is focused on Dundee and Glasgow. We are committed to funding and building up those centres.

Margaret Jamieson is to be congratulated on drawing Parliament's attention to the plight of tinnitus sufferers. The motion has received all-party support both in the Scottish Parliament and at Westminster. The issue is of interest and concern  across the political spectrum, including in the Executive as was recently demonstrated by the contribution that we made to the funding of the recent Scottish tinnitus conference that Margaret Jamieson referred to. I am told that there are seven continuing and 14 recently completed research projects investigating different aspects of tinnitus. They are funded on a UK basis. Margaret Jamieson talked about the approach to the MRC with a specific proposal for tinnitus research. The MRC is independent of both the Scottish Parliament and Westminster and makes its own funding decisions. Having said that, it would be appropriate for us to draw its attention to the widespread support for today's motion. I will certainly do that. About 20 per cent of people—1 million Scots—will suffer from tinnitus at some point in their lives. All three members who have spoken have mentioned the large number of people who are affected and the serious nature of the condition. We should remember what Mary Scanlon said about the fact that people sometimes wrongly make light of the condition. I hope that no one who is paying attention to the debate will do that again. Although persistent tinnitus is more common with age, it is a misconception that it is confined to the elderly. Studies show that it can happen at any age, even in quite young children. Tinnitus is caused by damage to the tiny hair cells in the inner ear, which respond to sound waves. A false message is sent by the damaged cells to the brain and the sufferer hears a noise which is not there. There is no doubt that tinnitus is a common, distressing and often debilitating condition. When a specific cause can be identified, sometimes treatment can be curative. For example, avoiding exposure to loud noise, drinks containing caffeine, alcohol and other precipitating factors can be helpful. If the cause is an ear infection, completing a course of antibiotics will clear up the infection and usually the tinnitus will disappear in a few days and may be no more than a minor irritation to the patient. Unfortunately there is no evidence, yet, that drug treatment for tinnitus is effective. Many preparations have been prescribed over the years, including antihistamines, antidepressants, anxiolytics, massive doses of vitamins, anticonvulsants and local anaesthetics. However, they have met with variable results. We know that tinnitus is often a feature of Ménière's syndrome. There are a number of medicines licensed for the principal symptoms of that condition but drug treatments aimed at treating tinnitus alone have had little reported success. That said, there are measures available that help tinnitus sufferers. They include maskers, which block out the noises of tinnitus, hearing  aids, which suppress tinnitus by amplifying background noise, and relaxation techniques. Margaret Jamieson has rightly drawn attention to the importance of research. We know that some researchers working in the area believe that the cure for tinnitus lies in drug treatment. For example, there has been interest in giving lidocaine, which is a local anaesthetic, to tinnitus sufferers to damp down the false signal that underlies the condition. However, to be effective, the lidocaine has to be given either intravenously, which carries considerable risk of causing abnormal heart rhythms, or by injecting it directly through the eardrum. Understandably, many patients found the second method too distressing and withdrew from the research project. I agree that it is vital that research efforts in this area should continue. Against that background, it must be remembered that only a quarter of people who suffer from tinnitus seek medical help. The family doctor knows the patient's medical, occupational and social background. Examination may show a treatable cause, such high blood pressure. If the situation merits and the patient wishes, the general practitioner can refer the patient to a national health service consultant. Traditionally, that consultant has been an ear, nose and throat surgeon. Margaret Jamieson talked about the small number of audiological physicians in Scotland. That may be one reason why referrals are routinely to a surgeon. After the debate, I will examine the matter of the number of audiological physicians.

I do not have information to hand about that aspect of the matter, but I will certainly examine it. Sophisticated examination and investigation techniques can sometimes demonstrate a treatable cause for the tinnitus. Surgery is rarely indicated and is limited to very serious problems, such as a tumour on the auditory nerve. Cutting the nerve relieves the tinnitus but has the permanent and unwelcome effect of making the patient permanently deaf in that ear. The NHS also provides support, counselling and pharmacological treatment for sufferers who become depressed and introspective as a result of the tinnitus. In Scotland, the chief scientist's office is not directly funding research in this area and would be pleased to receive research applications. At present, Scottish Executive funding for research is awarded through that office. The Scottish Executive health department will continue to keep  itself informed of any national developments in the field. I give an assurance that we will give careful consideration to all the points that have been raised. I hope that we can work together to achieve the aim that we all hold in common, which is to improve the support and services for all who suffer from this distressing and often debilitating condition.

I appreciate that the issues raised by Duncan McNeil today are mainly related to justice rather than to my area of responsibility. It was intended that the Deputy Minister for Justice would wind up. Unfortunately, Iain Gray has had to attend another engagement this afternoon and I am therefore responding. However, some health matters arose and I will respond to those first. Most research is driven by external bodies such as the Cancer Research Campaign and the drug companies. Clearly, however, cancer is a priority for the Executive and I am sure that the chief scientist's office would welcome applications for research into this dreadful condition. Mary Scanlon mentioned the Newcastle trial, which is a good example of a small-scale trial. It will proceed to a larger-scale trial in the near future. I was concerned to hear what Mary Scanlon said about health and safety checks following her conversation with Professor McVie. I will follow that up now that it has been drawn to my attention. I congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing this debate today and on putting forward the case in such a moving manner. The Executive recognises the plight of sufferers of mesothelioma and their families. It is a dreadful disease, and where it is caused by the fault of others, sufferers should, of course, be able to obtain compensation for their loss and suffering as quickly as possible. No one could say otherwise. In recognition of that, the Government of the day introduced the Pneumoconiosis etc (Workers' Compensation) Act 1979 to provide a UK-wide compensation scheme to cover this and similar diseases. Since that act came into force in 1980, more than 12,000 claims have been made, more than half of which have been settled. The total cost of the scheme in the UK to the end of March this year was £72.5 million. The average cost of payments to sufferers and dependants respectively is £15,169 and £6,561. No separate figures are available for Scotland. However, the scheme has limitations. It was designed as a safety net for cases where there was no longer any employer against whom a claim could be made. Many claims against employers are taken to court under laws dealing with  liabilities for personal injuries, just as other claims for industrial injuries or diseases are. It is those cases that Mr McNeil is primarily concerned with today. I have listened to what he has said, particularly about the length of time that those cases take to reach a conclusion. These cases are not always easy to resolve. It is inevitable that time is needed to do what is necessary to prepare the claims and to deal with all the complexities. However, I am concerned that cases should proceed as quickly as possible to resolution. It is utterly unacceptable that employers or their insurers should deliberately delay in the hope that the sufferers of this terrible disease will give up or, in some tragic cases, die before the cases can be resolved. It is particularly unacceptable if the purpose of employers or their insurers is to alter the make-up of the claim or to reduce its value. Even though the Damages (Scotland) Act 1993 has amended the law to transmit to the executor of a deceased person the like rights to damages, the effect of the current provisions is that a claim by the executor does not necessarily have the same value as the claim that might have been pursued by the deceased would have had. There is a balancing mechanism that enables relatives to claim damages for loss of support, distress and anxiety, grief and sorrow, and loss of society, but they tend to be less than the full original claim. Such an approach by employers or their insurers would deprive the sufferer of the benefit, support and care that would be available as a result of any award of damages. Ministers will consider carefully evidence of any delaying tactics. I acknowledge what Mr McNeil said about the use of blanket denials. As I understand it, some employers simply deny all liability and all the factual statements that claimants have made. That means that in every case the claimant is required to prove every fact and all elements of the monetary claim for damages. Employers who take that position leave themselves open to an application for a summary decree on the grounds that a defence to the action has not been disclosed. It is difficult to believe that, in cases where a blanket denial is used, the employer is completely unable to agree to anything that the claimant says. It is surely in the general public interest that employers should seek to minimise the differences between them and the claimants, to narrow down the areas of dispute and to seek routes to speedy settlement, notably on the amount of damages. Although the management of the claims by the court is a matter for the court to decide under its own rules and practices, I urge all those who are involved to ensure that cases proceed as quickly as possible. There is no reason why cases cannot  be dealt with reasonably expeditiously. The rules and administrative practices of the Court of Session, where most cases are raised, allow 13 weeks for the parties to state their case in written pleadings, and 19 weeks thereafter to prepare for a proof or jury trial. The 19-week period is a target that has been agreed by the Lord President and ministers. Accordingly, the court is ready to hear cases after about 32 weeks, which I consider to be sufficient for even the most complex issues that are involved to be properly focused. I am aware that most cases take longer than that to reach a conclusion. That is usually because the court has been persuaded on the application of one of the parties that it is in the interests of justice to allow more time for case preparation. That is not a matter in which I can directly interfere, although it would be appalling if such applications were used as a device by employers or their insurers to delay. Other matters, such as the availability of chosen counsel, can also result in delay. There is more to consider than just the approach that is taken by employers when met with a claim. Although it would not be proper for me to seek to influence the private nature of relationships between parties and their legal representatives, I would expect all those concerned to recognise their responsibility to the public and their clients to take cases forward as quickly as possible. It is open to the court to make an interim award of damages in certain circumstances but only where employers admit liability. That may be a matter for further consideration. It has been suggested also that more use should be made of juries to assess these claims. The right to seek a jury trial exists in the Court of Session. The case of Gibson v McAndrew Wormald, reported in the 1998 Scots Law Times at page 562, is an example of an asbestos-related case being sent to a jury. However, the appropriate mode of inquiry is again a matter for the court to decide and there is a view that the complexity of these cases renders them unsuitable for lay jurors to determine. I can understand that view but it is a matter for the court, and properly so. More generally, I also support the proposals contained in a report of a working group, chaired by Lord Coulsfield, aimed at speeding up the resolution of reparation cases in the Court of Session, including cases of this sort. Those proposals are out to consultation at the moment, and ministers will do what they can to support the initiatives being considered. Lord Coulsfield's proposals involve the court taking a more active part in ensuring that time limits for case preparation are adhered to and include setting a date for the hearing of the case at  a much earlier stage in the proceedings than is done at present. They also call for a fuller disclosure of the position of defenders or employers, particularly with regard to the quantification of compensation. The whole point is to encourage parties to settle earlier, because in more than 90 per cent of cases that is what ultimately happens. In conclusion, I would like to say that I fully understand and share the concerns raised by Mr McNeil. While I recognise the difficulty of these cases for the courts, and I am satisfied that the courts seek to deal with the cases as quickly as they can in many cases, I urge all concerned, particularly employers and their insurers, to seek all means to speed up a solution of such cases.  Where possible, I would hope that those concerned could negotiate settlements. At the very least, they should co-operate with the courts in minimising the delays in bringing such cases forward. The courts obviously recognise the need to take steps to speed up procedures for cases such as these. The work of Lord Coulsfield's group is an initiative that I welcome and fully support.  Meeting closed at 17:47.

The information requested is not held centrally. The "Review of Executive Expenditure on Tackling Drug Misuse", published earlier this month, gave a snapshot of the position for 1999-2000. The report indicated a total spend of £141.5 million on specific and generic programmes; a further £191.42 million was identified as drug misuse-related costs from other programmes. The report identified that 16 per cent of the overall spend went on prevention, which covers schools and health education, community education, health promotion and other related matters, and that more than one third—38 per cent—went on treatment and rehabilitation work.

The Executive has launched a drug action plan. In the next three years, many changes will take place. We will seek more clarity from the drug action teams about how the money is spent. There will be more emphasis on monitoring how the money is spent. Most important, there will be a major injection of £100 million for the drug action plan. That will allow more community-based initiatives, a major expansion of rehabilitation services and more emphasis on education and prevention, following an evidence-based approach.

The snapshot figures that I gave tried to capture the voluntary sector as well as all the other parts of the drug programme. However, we shall certainly try to get a more comprehensive picture and to monitor more closely what drug action teams are doing with the considerable extra resources that are being provided over the next three years.

In responding to Shona Robison's intervention, I referred to another member of the Health and Community Care Committee—who if I may say so has been on it for a longer time than Shona Robison—who asked for a measured response. I do not know whether Shona Robison is aware of the procedures of the Parliament in relation to responding to reports. We are doing many things in the interim, but the correct response to a report is to take time to respond properly.

I was almost overcome by nostalgia during some of this morning's speeches. For example, Margaret Jamieson reminded me of the huge white folders that I spent last Christmas reading, and Margaret Smith waxed lyrical about  the multidisciplinary team that she still leads. Perhaps the most touching moment of all came when Mary Scanlon described what must surely have been the high point of the new politics: when she, Duncan Hamilton and Margaret Jamieson went together to the Western Isles. I regret that I was not with them. All those comments lead me to the main point that the committee members were making: it is regrettable that we could not have their collective wisdom on the subject for a debate such as this. However, the point about the timing of the debate has already been made by many members.

I am also mindful of Mary Scanlon's request for us to make a measured response. Indeed, she asked us to take time over it, and that is precisely what we shall do. Of course, having a debate two weeks from now would not have prevented committee members from using their collective wisdom. On a slightly less new-politics note, I was pleased and slightly amused to hear Mary Scanlon castigating the SNP in Angus for failing to protect local authority home care. Strange things happen in the Scottish Parliament. Many other members made interesting and important contributions to the debate. John Scott emphasised the importance of choice and of sheltered housing. I echo those points. Not only do we need more sheltered housing; we need more very sheltered housing. That is the way that we would like to see a lot of community care going. John Scott was right to say that choice is important. Although we want to shift the balance of care towards home care, there will be a continuing need for nursing home and residential care, and people ought to have a choice.

Kay Ullrich has overstated the point, but I shall certainly give attention to the matter that she mentioned as part of my new work. I saw Christine Grahame rising to intervene a moment ago, and I shall now deal with some of the points that she made in her speech. She also emphasised the importance of home care. She supports it, Sir Stewart Sutherland supports it, and, of course, the Executive supports it, as I said  at length in my opening statement. She also referred to money and mentioned the sum of £10 million. However, as Richard Simpson reminded us, the delayed discharge money is, in fact, £19 million. Perhaps Ben Wallace should remember that point too. Christine Grahame raised an important point about money being directed towards older people, and there is an historic issue about grant-aided expenditure not always being spent on them. Local authorities need to address that point, but Christine Grahame should also recognise the new basis on which we have allocated that new money. It is given for specific outcomes, which will be closely monitored.

Yes. We considered carefully the bids that were made. Some people complained about a delay, but we wanted to ensure that plans were in place and we will continue to monitor them. We will also monitor the money that has been given to health boards for winter and for delayed discharges. That addresses Ben Wallace's point. The further we move into winter, the more closely we will monitor the use of that money. As Ben Wallace said, the Conservative amendment talks about free personal care being "the best way forward". I repeat that we are reviewing that issue, which is an important matter in its own right. However, free personal care would not help solve the problems that we are discussing this morning. Indeed, it could be argued that if the money that we are putting into home care and the other areas that I have mentioned were used to provide free personal care, the problems would be exacerbated. That is not to say that the funding of personal care is not an important issue; it is simply to say that it is not at the heart of this morning's debate.

In September, when I was still a member of the Health and Community Care Committee and a back bencher, I made a speech  on that very matter. I cannot repeat that speech in one and a half minutes, but perhaps Nicola Sturgeon could read it at 11.15. Hugh Henry and Margaret Jamieson made the important point of principle that this is not just about money: it is about the best way forward. As Hugh Henry said, structural and organisational issues are of fundamental importance. One of the key principles that I outlined in my opening speech was that we want joint and seamless working, to ensure the maximum use of the community care pound. Tricia Marwick made a hard-hitting speech, as is her wont, in which she said, exaggerating somewhat—as is also her wont—that we were turning our backs on some of the most vulnerable people in society. I remind her once again of what the SNP has collectively forgotten this morning: that action is being taken now. That action includes the £10 million that has been made available to health boards for the winter, the £10 million for dealing with flu, the £5 million for aids and adaptation and the £19 million for delayed discharge.

I do not think that I am allowed to give way in the last minute of my speech.

I will give way to Tricia Marwick.

With regard to home care, there are regional variations and regional choices to be made. However, from the debate this morning the current direction of travel is clear. It is self-evident that building up home care is at the heart—

The member is stretching the Presiding Officer's patience. Extending home care is at the heart of the Executive's priorities. The announcement of 5 October was all about that.

I really am in my last minute now.

I remind members, with particular reference to the wording of the motion, that, besides the £25 million that has been allocated, £19 million is available to the NHS and local authorities now, for this winter, to deal with delayed discharges. That money will be available again in the next three financial years. We have not yet seen the full effect of the money in action. We wanted to be sure that plans were right, so the money was released to health boards in August and to local authorities in October. It will take a little more time to bring about the improvements that we have promised, but we will track the outcomes and ensure that the money is used to good effect. I do not suggest that the money will solve all the problems. Earlier, I reminded the chamber of Susan Deacon's words about this being a three-decade-old problem that we will need two or more years to deal with. However, we should remember and acknowledge the money that is being invested and the action that is being taken now, for this winter. We have made a good start. We are committed to continuing improvement and we shall press forward with urgency.

The SNP motion is right in pointing out that there are still problems with delayed discharges and in recognising that there is a need for more home care services. Where it is wrong is in totally ignoring all the proposals that have been brought forward specifically for this winter, quite apart from the major resources and improvements for future years that were announced on 5 October. It is nothing short of astonishing that the SNP front benchers—and presumably its back benchers as well—have no knowledge at all of the many measures that have been put in place for the coming winter. We have already put in place a range of specifically targeted measures backed by significant amounts of new money to strike at the heart of some of the problems that have bedevilled the national health service and community care during previous winters. Those measures will establish a firmer base for future service development.

As I will make clear in a minute, far more than £10 million has been allocated for this winter. Before I describe the preparations that have been made, I would like to pay tribute to the Health and Community Care Committee for the  work that it has done, which we acknowledge in our amendment. We are all looking forward to seeing the committee's conclusions. I am sure that its report will not only contribute to thinking about policy in this area, but intensify our determination to drive forward change with urgency and focus.

In a minute. We have made clear our intended direction of travel: to provide maximum benefit to the maximum number of people, especially those in greatest need. We want a person-centred approach that focuses on the needs of individual service users. There will be a drive towards joint, seamless, multi-agency and multidisciplinary working, to ensure the most effective use of the community care pound. In particular, we want joint resourcing and management of all services for older people by 2002 at the latest.

I want to make two more points before I take an intervention from Nicola Sturgeon. We are determined to improve the quality of care, through our "Aiming for Excellence" proposals and by tying new resources to outcomes. We are also determined to shift the balance of care towards care at home, which all the evidence and research suggest most older people want.

In response to John Swinney last Thursday, the First Minister made it quite clear that the Executive is reviewing its policy on the Sutherland report. There is an important debate to be had about the funding of personal care. However—and this point is also relevant to the Conservative amendment—free personal care would not help us to solve the problems that the SNP is bringing to our attention this morning.  Today's debate is not about the Sutherland report. If pressed, I will restate the Executive's position on the report, but that would be a waste of time. Before I describe the specific measures for this year, I will remind members of the important announcement that was made on 5 October, which embodied the principles that I outlined a moment ago. For the three years starting in April 2001, we will have flexible rapid response teams in every part of the country to support up to 18,000 older people at home. There will be free home care support for those who need it for up to four weeks following discharge from hospital. There will be 1,000 additional long-term home care packages for those in greatest need and 22,000 extra weeks of respite care. There will be a local service in every part of the country for shopping, laundry and minor household repairs. Formal guidance on charging for home care will be issued, to be used if the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities initiative to reduce variation does not achieve the desired result. Perhaps the thought of all those significant new resources and initiatives has taken the Opposition's eye off the ball in the current year. I assure the Opposition that the Executive's eye is firmly fixed on what needs to be done now for this winter.

If I have time, I will take another intervention, but I want to devote the second half of my speech to what we are doing now for this winter. Back in the spring, the Executive recognised the need to learn from the experiences of the NHS and local authorities last winter and to make full and adequate preparations for the coming winter. It should come as no surprise to anyone that additional capacity in health and social care will be needed over the winter months. We know that winter puts real pressure on the NHS and on social services. We are talking about day-to-day events. Hospital admissions always rise in the winter. Flu can strike unpredictably. Icy weather leads to accidents and broken bones, and staff get sick more often. The Executive's aim is to ensure that these events do not cause health and social services to break down. To ensure that the NHS manages its way through the inevitable pressures, in July about £10 million was allocated to the service so that it could take forward winter planning work and put appropriate arrangements in place. That was new money within the wider allocation for modernisation that was allocated to all health boards at that time.

I must press on. I have only four minutes to cover a lot of territory.  A winter performance group was established in the spring and it reported in August. A seminar held in September acted as a springboard for further work by health boards, trusts and local authority social work departments. We now have winter plans from all health board areas—with input from trusts and social work departments—which are being assessed by a service-led panel. A great deal of work has been done by all agencies to make preparations. Examples of the services are: ensuring that complementary general practitioner and pharmacy services are available out of hours, over weekends and at Christmas and new year; expanding use of rapid response teams; a review of hospital admissions procedures to ensure that potential admissions are dealt with in the community wherever possible; expanding the number of acute beds and associated staffing; increasing the number of critical care beds; and reviewing plans for elective procedures to allow capacity for emergency admissions. A winter panel has also been established to review winter planning arrangements and monitor developments ever more intensely as winter unfolds.

I have talked to Dr Toft on more than one occasion and have the highest respect for him. It is generally recognised that he is in a minority on many aspects of health policy. Dr Bill O'Neill, the Scottish secretary of the British Medical Association, said: "We have never been better prepared for winter than we are this year . . . I think we have had better planning and we are better prepared this year than we have ever been in the past." I was going to say more about flu immunisation but, as I have only two minutes left, I will just remind members of the £10 million that has been put into the programme for it. I hope that every member of the Parliament will take seriously the message that is being promoted through our television and newspaper advertisements and encourage all their constituents who fall into the appropriate categories to take the time to go to their GP and have the flu jab. Nicola Sturgeon made a point about not knowing the numbers for delayed discharges. The Executive has ensured that we will soon know the numbers because the first ever census has been taken. At the end of November, we will have the first figures. Nicola Sturgeon gave the figure of 2,000; the unofficial figure when Labour came into power in 1997 was a lot more than that.  The SNP motion refers to people waiting for admission to nursing or residential care after assessment. We agree that there are unacceptable delays and clearly action has to be—and is being—taken. We have allocated £19 million in the current financial year to local authorities and to the NHS specifically to tackle delayed discharges from hospital. That money went out in response to plans that the NHS and local authorities submitted.

I have only a minute left, so I must press on. Those plans have now been improved and are being put into effect. Apart from providing resources and monitoring development, we have also set up a service-led learning network to disseminate good practice and be a catalyst for change. The final aspect of current expenditure for this year that I will mention is equipment and adaptations. We estimate that around 10,000 people who have been assessed as needing some kind of equipment or adaptation are on a waiting list. Another 10,000 or so are waiting for their assessment. That is unacceptable. Susan Deacon has already announced that we intend to allocate £5 million specifically for equipment and adaptations in the current year to help to tackle that backlog of people.

I am out of time. When the money for this year is added up, it amounts to £44 million specifically to address the problems that the SNP motion refers to. That means that the SNP's suggestion that nothing has been done and that we need to produce proposals is nonsense. We have the winter money of £44 million and we have the extra money that was announced on 5 October, which will be £100 million in year 3. Other community care announcements will be made that involve additional money. A great deal of action is being taken. We are not complacent. We recognise that the problem will take some time to deal with; it has existed for three decades. As Susan Deacon said at the Health and Community Care Committee two or three weeks ago, it may take more than a year to deal with it. Significant action is being taken this year and significant progress will be made. I reject the SNP motion. I move amendment S1M-1356.1, to leave out from "is concerned" to end and insert: "notes that the Health and Community Care Committee is  conducting an inquiry into Community Care and believes it is appropriate that the Parliament awaits the outcome of the Committee's conclusions."

The motion today touches upon a serious health and social issue, and I congratulate Donald Gorrie on bringing it before the Parliament. Like him, I view alcohol as a serious issue, and share his commitment to tackling the problem and moving it further up the political agenda. The debate is particularly timely, as the Executive is currently working towards a new alcohol misuse strategy. I assure Christine Grahame that there will be a debate before Christmas to allow us time to explore these issues more fully. Concern has rightly been expressed about the worrying trends in alcohol misuse, particularly, but not exclusively, among young people. Alcohol misuse takes many shapes and forms, and may affect the individual, families, the workplace and the wider community. However, a complex social policy is involved. Governments need to take care over what they can and should do, and over what is and is not effective. The problem of alcohol misuse is many faceted, as responses to it require to be. I am sure that all members agree that there are no quick or simple solutions. Alcohol is also different from some other substances as it can be included in a healthy lifestyle if taken in moderation, at the right time and in the right place. Drinking provides much enjoyment, and many Scots use alcohol responsibly. Moreover, we must recognise that the production and distribution of alcohol makes a significant contribution to the Scottish economy and provides employment for many thousands of Scots. Excessive drinking carries a heavy toll in illness, accidents, anti-social behaviour and criminal acts of violence. However, it was perhaps wrong of Donald Gorrie to say that it causes domestic violence, which involves much wider issues. The cost of excessive drinking in personal, social and economic terms is great, and is too often hidden or unheeded. Alcohol misuse is linked to crime, road deaths, lower achievement, family breakdown, poor employment prospects, poor physical health and, as Frank McAveety reminded us, poor mental health. Donald Gorrie and others referred to two worrying trends. The first is the trend in under-age drinking. It is sad that 14 seems to be a milestone. Most teenagers have begun to drink by the age of 15. The second is the trend that statistics show in excessive drinking. The Executive has set targets for a reduction in harmful drinking levels because of that, but the cultural issues to which Frank McAveety referred are clearly critical to that. The  Executive is taking action on a range of fronts. It would help if the Deputy Presiding Officer told me how much time I have left.

There is a relationship between alcohol misuse and wider drugs misuse. We are still considering the question whether we should develop a joint strategy. Nevertheless, we should recognise the value of addressing drugs and alcohol misuse jointly at local level in some parts of the country. Several drug action teams now include alcohol in their remits, and services may cover both. The £2.5 million that Christine Grahame referred to, which was earmarked following the public health white paper, is being used for strategic development. However, much more money than that is being used. There are services in each health board area to help with alcohol problems, while health education programmes are in place and there has been action on the criminal justice side to address public disorder issues. Nevertheless, we recognise the need to review the situation and plug the many gaps that exist. That can be taken into account in the new strategy. We are keen to ensure that everyone with an interest is taken into account in the development of the strategy. Action is for lots of groups: individuals; parents; all those who work with young people; industry; the retail trade; the licensed trade; employers; the national health service; local authorities; voluntary organisations; the police; and, not least, the Executive. We look to the Parliament to inform the strategic thinking, which is another reason for having an early debate. As members will know, the Scottish Advisory Committee on Alcohol Misuse was set up following the white paper. There are representatives on it from all the key sectors. Much groundwork is going on to provide the necessary building blocks for the new strategy. For example, in co-operation with local alcohol misuse co-ordinating committees, the advisory committee is undertaking a review of services. Work is being done by the committee on prevention and health promotion, on co-ordination and on the collection of information. In recognition of the importance that I attach to tackling alcohol misuse and to give those efforts added impetus, I have decided to take over as chair of the Scottish Advisory Committee on Alcohol Misuse. As I said, a fuller debate will give us time to explore issues in more depth, but it is clear that there is strong support from Donald Gorrie, Keith  Harding and others for an overhaul of current licensing laws. There have also been demands for firm and effective action to tackle under-age drinking and, in that context, proof-of-age cards have much support. Christine Grahame, Maureen Macmillan and Jamie Stone emphasised both the importance of alcohol education and the need for it to be more robust. If time allows, I will say a little about each of those areas. Liquor licensing and the Licensing (Scotland) Act 1976 is a complex area on which people have widely differing views. People argue for different strategies only to arrive at the same conclusions. A great deal of work must be done on that area, but we accept the need to consider a review of licensing within the context of developing our national alcohol misuse strategy. Donald Gorrie referred to the role of the licensed trade and there are many ways in which the trade could help. It could discourage the use of special promotional offers. It could encourage risk minimisation by lowering prices for low alcohol and soft drinks. It could encourage a policy of "no proof, no sale" when a young person's age is in doubt. It could ensure that the trade and its staff are adequately trained on alcohol misuse issues. On under-age drinking, a number of measures are in place to address young people's drinking. For example, many local authorities have introduced byelaws to curb drinking by young people in public places. Powers are also available to confiscate alcohol from under-18s in public places Those measures, which are backed by criminal sanctions, have a positive effect, but we do not intend to make criminals of people, whether young or old, who drink in public places. However, we wish to reduce or eliminate the nuisance element and the petty crime that are associated with drinking in public. The Executive is funding a pilot scheme of proof-of-age cards, which is being developed in co-operation with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. I wish to announce that the Executive has just agreed to fund a pilot scheme, to be run along the same lines, in Angus, in order to test that one-card approach in a rural area. It is clear that alcohol education is critical, as many members noted. A range of factors, such as life circumstances, socio-economic factors, peer pressure and fashion, must be considered. Where children and young people are concerned, we must complement enforcement measures with messages about sensible drinking and sensible choices, and health education in schools is clearly essential. As I said, the Scottish advisory committee is considering how to improve our prevention efforts.  As I have run out of time, I conclude by reiterating that the Executive is alive to the need to act. We are aware of the size of the challenge and the complexity of the social and cultural issues that are involved.  We must take the public with us in developing our strategy. I am pleased with the considerable interest that was expressed in Parliament during the debate and I look forward to working with members to develop this most important strategy.  Meeting closed at 17:38.

The Executive recognises that young carers can be a particularly disadvantaged group and that they have specific needs. We are taking a number of steps to address these needs under our strategy for carers in Scotland.

The main themes of the Scottish carers strategy relate to information, standards, legislation, services and monitoring. Action is being taken in each of those areas to help young carers. For example, a young carers information pack was produced recently and money has been given to the Princess Royal Trust for Carers to ensure that there are high standards in young carers projects. A working party has been established to find out what can be done in legislation to help young carers. There are have been several announcements recently of pots of money to help young carers. Last week, it was announced that £500,000 would be provided for carers projects, including young carers projects. Karen Whitefield can rest assured that a great deal of action is being taken to help improve the position of young carers in Scotland.

The Executive has close links with a range of statutory, voluntary and private sector bodies, which are active in encouraging increased access for disabled people to the built environment and the countryside. Local access panels play a vital part in ensuring access for disabled people and are consulted on a wide range of issues, including changes to building regulations. The proposed land reform bill will contain proposals to establish the right of responsible access for all.

I take this opportunity to acknowledge the work of local access panels and the support and training that is provided by Disability Scotland to those panels. The Executive is determined to secure the work of Disability Scotland. An administrator has been appointed by Disability Scotland to draw up a report. We are considering the best way forward to ensure that the interests of people who have a disability continue to be represented.

In the Executive, disability is a matter that is shared between the health department and the equality unit. Discussions with the Scottish disability forum have already taken place. It is true that many bodies represent the interests of disabled people in Scotland. The Executive is determined to find a way forward on the matter and, following the publication of the report by the Disability Scotland administrator, we will consider what the best way forward is.

I thank the members who have welcomed me back to the front bench. In particular, I thank Margaret Smith for her reference to the Health and Community Care Committee's attempts to knock me into shape, although the committee has been as successful in those attempts as others have been. I acknowledge the great contribution made by the Health and Community Care Committee to the debate on governance and accountability. In fact, the issues that we have debated today have been raised over a long time by not only the Health and Community Care Committee but by staff in the health service, by patients, by managers and by  members in the chamber. It was slightly odd, therefore, that Nicola Sturgeon spent the first three minutes of her speech asking why we were debating those issues. Having said that, I welcome the constructive comments made by Nicola Sturgeon and Shona Robison. I assure them that the health plan will address many of the issues that they—and many other members—raised today. I reassure them that the plan is on track and that an announcement will be made to Parliament before Christmas, preceded by a presentation to the Health and Community Care Committee. Shona Robison said that the issues we are debating today were raised a year ago, but we should remind ourselves that there has been massive consultation on the health plan and that many working groups have worked on it over many months. For those reasons, although we are sympathetic to the SNP amendment, we believe that its wording is slightly misleading, given the amount of consultation that has taken place. It is important that we progress the immediate changes without formal consultation, although it is clear that all partners will be fully involved in the longer-term plans. We agree with many of the comments made by Nicola Sturgeon, many of which had been made already by Susan Deacon. In particular, Nicola Sturgeon called for us not to shy away from more radical restructuring. In Susan Deacon's speech, which members will be able to find and check in the Official Report , she explained how the health plan would pursue that important, long-term piece of work. I also agree with many of the points made by Mary Scanlon in the debate. In particular, there needs to be more clarity on priorities. That is something that the health plan will address. I thought that Mary Scanlon was a little grudging about the considerable extra resources—more than £100 million—that were announced by Susan Deacon at the beginning of October for home care and other related services. That extra funding will address many of the problems to which Mary Scanlon referred. Those moneys are being given to local authorities on a new basis in terms of agreed outcomes. That is something that we should all welcome. Today's debate has considered the problems that we have at the moment and has dealt with the general principles and policy objectives that will help to address those problems. I will not reiterate those problems, but I shall repeat briefly that current problems relate to the complexity of the system, ambiguity over where responsibility lies, blockages, slow decision making and residual competitive behaviour. Our starting point must be to say that how the NHS is structured matters less  than how effectively it performs its principal functions. However, process of decision making is critical to that effectiveness.

We have made an important development in terms of the new money and we have a lot of information about how local authority money is spent at the moment. We do not want to get too tied up in audit trails, but we want to emphasise the importance of agreed outcomes. I shall move on to deal with governance and accountability. Certain key themes and principles have emerged in relation to governance. First, the national health service is a national service. Trusts and health boards are the NHS and I welcome the recent submission from the Scottish Association of Health Councils, which pointed out that trusts and health boards must be more clearly branded as the NHS. A second theme that has emerged is that effective, integrated decision making is key to improvement. Mary Scanlon said that David Mundell had referred to the consolidation of trusts and boards. I welcome Margaret Jamieson's reference to there being one plan, and I note and welcome Hugh Henry's words—echoed by Tommy Sheridan and Shona Robison—about the renationalisation of the national health service. I am, of course, far too new Labour to use such a word, but it has been a hallmark of the debate. Susan Deacon may live to regret that one of her good lines has been stolen rather prematurely. Another key theme has been the importance of greater clarity about roles and responsibilities, which includes the health department setting the strategic policy agenda. The corollary of that is strong local systems, and we heard the evidence from the MORI patient survey that found that people do not feel that they are involved in decision making. Patients and the public are clearly at the heart of our developing agenda for the national health service. I welcome the practical points that Irene Oldfather made about matters such as cleanliness in hospitals. I reaffirm our commitment to the modernisation of local health councils, which clearly have an important continuing role to play. I also emphasise the importance that we attach to patient information, which was mentioned by many speakers.  It is not just the patients and the public who matter. Mary Scanlon, Margaret Jamieson and Tommy Sheridan all mentioned the importance of the staff. Work has begun in the Scottish partnership forum to improve staff involvement.

One of the major themes of the health plan will be the whole patient and public involvement agenda, and more will be said about that then. The last partners, but by no means the least, will be the local authorities, which Frank McAveety mentioned. On accountability, the important general principle that has emerged today is whole-systems accountability. More specifically, we need greater clarity about lines of accountability—who is accountable to whom, and how. Accountability needs to be both upwards and outwards—or downwards, as Nicola Sturgeon put it. Again, local authorities have a role in ensuring that. Key to our proposals on accountability is the need for a clear performance assessment framework. We want a performance assessment process that focuses on patients—on the people who use the service and their experience of it. We want a framework that focuses on outcomes, not inputs. As many members have said, money is important, and it would be irresponsible to suggest that the largest public sector body in Scotland can afford to be anything other than financially sound. However, our measures of success must also accommodate people's experience of the service. This must be about achieving quality outcomes. We have consulted widely about the issues that I have outlined and others, and they will be dealt with in the Scottish health plan. We will continue to consult until we put the plan to print. However, the process will not stop there. The plan will be a staging post, not an end point. It will signal the direction of travel for years to come. We recognise that there is more to be done and will continue to involve those who will be affected by the plan: the public, patients, carers, staff and public and voluntary organisations. Today we have talked much about the NHS, local health services and local systems. However, we must always remember that the NHS does not exist in isolation, but must interact with others, not least with local authorities around Scotland. Increasingly, our work on health is interrelated with the work of other public and voluntary organisations and with the Executive's policies on housing, education, social justice and social inclusion. We recognise that, and also recognise the fact that we must do more to work with  everyone who is involved in those and other areas. We regard that as fundamental to the health improvements that we want to achieve. I know that today's messages will be welcomed by everyone who has a genuine interest in improving the health of our people and the health service that they receive. I say to all members present, and to people who are listening elsewhere, that the status quo is not an option. The Executive recognises the strength of feeling around this issue and the desire for change. Susan Deacon and I also want change. However, we must resist the temptation to go for wholesale structural change that will distract attention from the real priority—improving health and people's experience of their health service. Today marks the beginning of a process of moving forward. I want us to move forward together. We know that there are already many good examples of joint working and integrated planning. We want those to become the norm across the NHS in Scotland. Partnership working and joint working are necessities if we are to deliver the truly seamless care that the people of Scotland have a right to expect. This is not about structural upheaval, but about improving the health of the people of Scotland and achieving quality patient care for all.

Any terminally ill patient admitted to a general hospital would, like every other patient, be given the best possible care according to his or her needs.

I thank Scott Barrie for his kind words. The Scottish Executive attaches the utmost importance to palliative care. It believes that pain and other distressing symptoms must be managed effectively, whether that care takes place in a hospice, in a specialist unit or, indeed, at home, where an increasing number of terminally ill patients wish to be. The Executive does not believe that one place is better than another; the quality of the palliative care is what the Executive emphasises. The Executive has commissioned work from the Scottish partnership agency for palliative and cancer care to ensure that health boards have effective policies in place. The newly formed Clinical Standards Board for Scotland is developing standards for palliative care. It will ensure that those standards are kept to throughout Scotland.

A national health service letter in 1996 dealt with the group of patients to whom Hugh Henry refers. The letter emphasises that those patients, wherever they are, should be under the care of the NHS.

I had not planned to speak in today's debate, but I was moved to do so because of the lobby, which is the most effective that I have seen in my eight years as an MP and now MSP. Most of the debate has focused on beta interferon, but today I learned of other drugs, such as Zanaflex. One of my constituents told me that she uses Zanaflex and that if she did not she would be unable to drive. I hope that that drug is available throughout Scotland. If the minister does not know about that just now, I will look forward to receiving a written response on the matter. I also learned of other services that are so crucial and in many cases so lacking. I was surprised that physiotherapy is not more widely available and in once case not available at all. I hope that that, and the crucial matters of specialist nurses and neurologists, will be addressed. I commend the minister for referring the issue of beta interferon to the Health Technology Board for Scotland; I never thought it satisfactory that that body should determine its own agenda. I am glad that that was the first instruction the minister gave the board and I hope that it will listen to people who have used and benefited from beta interferon. That process is not always possible with new drugs, but in this case it is and I hope that those voices will be heard.

I thank the Presiding Officer for informing me that I am closing the debate for the Labour party. I am pleased to do so. Clearly, there are occasions on which Sewel motions are appropriate, and I am pleased that all parties have accepted that this is such an occasion. It is important that these new laws get on to the statute book as quickly as possible. Given the Parliament's extensive agenda—especially the tight agenda that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has—this is the correct course of action to take. The point that I want to make—on which I am sure that all members will agree, although it has not been highlighted in today's debate—is that, while we concentrate on changing the laws to deal with sex offenders, we must keep a wider perspective of who the majority of sex offenders are. We have all encountered that issue over the summer, in the various popular campaigns on the matter. There is clearly a problem with keeping such people in the community; however, we all know that the majority of sexual abuse takes place within families. When we pass the new legislation, we should keep that fact in focus. Yesterday, at the cross-party group on violence against women, a presentation was given by the very important person project in Dundee, which highlighted that fact and the importance of educating children about sexual abuse. As long as we keep that perspective, we can welcome the new legislative proposals that have been brought forward and hope that they can be passed into law as soon as possible.

I welcome the fact that older people have been made such a priority by the Executive. How many older people will benefit from the package? Following on from Nora Radcliffe's question, I welcome the fact that nursing care will not be defined in terms of who does the job. However, will the minister say anything further about how the needs of people with dementia will be taken into account?

We should all be grateful to Patricia Ferguson for raising this important subject. This debate is an opportunity to look back and to pay tribute to everything health councils have done to help create a health service that is responsive to the needs and wishes of patients, to facilitate public involvement and to scrutinise, monitor and hold to account. The debate is also an opportunity to look forward and to consider the future agenda for public and patient involvement. I think I am right to say that everyone agrees that health councils must be modernised. We must concentrate on their functions rather than on their form but, as Shona Robison said, we do not need to throw the baby out with the bath water, which has been done in England, unfortunately. We agree that the functions that I have outlined cannot be concentrated in health councils alone. There is an exciting new agenda based on the patients project. We want to do things in a different and more radical way. It is essential that there is a  statutory and independent element in the new regime that we are about to create. That is particularly important for the patient's voice, whether in complaints, advocacy or, more generally, for evidence-based work in giving, and finding out, the patient's view. There is a danger that the rhetoric of patient involvement will not be matched by the reality. I believe that health councils have a continuing and vital role to play in ensuring that our hopes and expectations are fulfilled.

I am sure that all members of the Parliament want to make care of and services for the elderly a priority. The disagreements of this morning will be about how to decide those priorities at this moment in time. Margaret Smith said in the newspapers—I am sure that she will repeat her comments in her speech—that all the evidence submitted to the Health and Community Care Committee was that we should implement the recommendations of the Sutherland report in full, including the recommendation on free personal care. Equally, other evidence submitted to the committee was that we must expand home care services, that more respite care is required—which the Executive has started to take on board—and that resources must be put into the system in order to deal with what is unfortunately called bedblocking; delayed discharge is a better term. The committee was also told that there must be more money for our broad health policy of warm homes for people, so that they do not fall ill in the first instance. People who take an even broader view of health  want more money for initiatives such as concessionary travel schemes, about which I hope to hear more this afternoon. The question that faces us is what we should do now, given the priority that the elderly have, to help the largest number of older people in the most effective way. As I considered my speech, I thought about the old truth voiced by Aneurin Bevin: "The language of priorities is the religion of Socialism." At this moment in time, if I had to choose between free central heating for all older people and free personal care, which would benefit only a minority of older people, I would have to choose the former. However, that is not to say that I do not support the latter, but, at this moment in time, we must put our priorities for the elderly in order and implement them step by step.

Politics is about choices. We can argue about public expenditure in macro-economic terms for ever, but we should accept that over the next three years we will have the most significant ever increase in public expenditure. The question that faces us is how we should spend that money. My choice is to implement the recommendations of the Sutherland report over time, which would complete the unfinished business of the welfare state. In response to Kay Ullrich's question to Des McNulty, I accept that there are issues of equity in relation to people who have Alzheimer's and that problems with joint working in the community would be eased by the implementation of the recommendation on free personal care. In the meantime, if we implement the recommendation on free nursing care, I hope that we will consider carefully the definition of such care, so that people with Alzheimer's can be helped and covered by its provision. I hope that we will also consider the charging regime, so that it becomes fairer across Scotland and loses the variations that exist at present.

I cannot speak for the Executive, but I support the implementation of the recommendation on personal care as a long-term commitment. I would have to say that the implementation of the recommendation on free nursing care would also mean a significant expansion of the welfare state. Although I commend the speeches by Mary Scanlon and David McLetchie, I find it puzzling that the Conservatives in the Scottish Parliament argue for a massive expansion of the universal welfare state, while, at UK level, they argue for the exact opposite: a contraction of the welfare state and for people to pay for more of their health treatment. That is a serious problem, and it is compounded for David McLetchie by the fact that all that he could come up with this morning to pay for a solution was fantasy savings from unified budgets, from the costs of bedblocking—although Sutherland would not reduce the costs of bedblocking—and from an underspend, all of which is at present being spent on the national health service.

I accept the revision to what David McLetchie said, although he also said all those other things. He even had the brass neck to mention savings and bureaucracy in his press release—that from the party of health bureaucracy for 18 years. If he is now saying that he would be prepared to use the significant additional resources that this Parliament will have over the next four years, he must say in summing up from precisely which budget he would take the £110 million. Looking into the future, I believe that Mr McLetchie's problems are further compounded by the fact that he is also a member of a party that, at UK level, is talking about reducing public expenditure by £16 billion. That would result in cuts of more than £1 billion in Scotland's budget. I commend his speech, but I must say that it is completely incompatible with all the other policies of the Conservative party.

The new approach to public health in the white paper "Towards a Healthier Scotland" emphasised three levels: life circumstances, lifestyle and health topics. If we are serious about tackling health inequalities, the key to progress is not to isolate those levels, and certainly not to pull lifestyle factors away from life circumstances. Lifestyle factors play a relatively small part in creating the health and mortality gap between the richest and the poorest. Even where lifestyle factors are significant, as they are in relation to smoking, for example, they cannot be addressed effectively unless the material and social constraints on behavioural change are also addressed. That radical perspective was embodied recently in Sir Donald Acheson's report, which pointed out that "without a shift of resources to the less well off, both in and out of work, little will be accomplished in terms of a reduction of health inequalities by interventions addressing particular 'downstream' influences." That insight was also embodied in the significant work of Richard Wilkinson, who came to the sobering conclusion that the income share that goes to the bottom half of the population is most closely related to a population's average life expectancy. That holistic approach to public health is embodied in the north Edinburgh health plan, which was drawn up for the greater Pilton social inclusion partnership area. The planners started  by consulting the public, which is an important part of a radical approach to public health, and they found that the most common concern was stress. The first of their seven objectives was therefore alleviating stress and promoting positive mental health; it was a weakness of the original green paper that mental health was not flagged up. I record my dismay that the excellent Pilton reach-out project stress centre is still suffering funding difficulties. The second objective that the planners highlighted was identifying, tackling and improving the life circumstances that underlie poor health. They have already begun to act on that objective by carrying out a health impact assessment of the local housing strategy. They have focused particularly on the effect of that strategy on health inequalities. The local health care co-operative has adopted the innovative idea of having welfare rights officers located in GPs' surgeries, although that is happening in Margaret Smith's constituency rather than in mine. The third objective was to ensure that local people have equity of access to health-related services. The planners focused in particular on ethnic minorities getting proper access to primary care. They also flagged up dealing with violence against women as part of the objective of promoting and supporting healthy patterns of living and healthy environments. The recent announcement on central heating is a very welcome development in relation to healthy environments. I cannot go through all the objectives in the health plan, but I would like to mention food poverty. I welcome the grants from the Scottish communities diet project and hope that more will be forthcoming. The north Edinburgh health plan and the general approach of the Executive illustrate the fact that public health is increasingly at the cutting edge of the new holistic government in Scotland that we all talk about. Public health is where health, social inclusion and equal opportunities policies meet. I hope that we can drive forward that agenda and break down the departmentalitis that has shackled Scottish government for far too long.

Will David Davidson give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what preparations the NHS is making for the forthcoming winter. (S1O-2269)

I welcome all the actions that have been taken, which have been helped by the abolition of the internal market and which the British Medical Association has described as the best ever preparations for the winter. However, there are continuing concerns because of the seemingly relentless rise in the number of emergency admissions and the need to develop community capacity. Can the minister explain the continuing rise in the number of emergency admissions, particularly in relation to respiratory diseases? Without pre-empting the Minister for Finance's statement, can she hold out any hope that priority will be given to the development of community services?

I welcome the healthy respect demonstration project, which will benefit both Susan Deacon's constituency and mine. I also welcome the superb Sandyford initiative, which Glasgow colleagues and I visited during the summer recess. Will the minister tell us how the Executive will ensure that those examples of best practice are developed throughout Scotland?

I do not want to spend the second day in a row deconstructing a speech by the leader of the Opposition, but I must say how disappointed I am that Alex Salmond neither addressed the legislative programme in detail nor suggested any other legislation that the SNP would introduce. He is perfectly entitled to make general points about the constitution, but even in an independent Scotland we would need bills on education, health, housing and justice. We still know nothing about what the SNP has in mind in those areas.

At this stage I do not know the contents of the water services bill, but I heard the First Minister say something about pensioners. Before discussing the bills individually, I was going to say that I was very encouraged by the beginning of the First Minister's speech because he mentioned social justice as the first of his several priorities and because he flagged up £100 million for pensioners. Fergus Ewing may not have been listening, but that included action on warm homes. The First Minister also said that the Executive is now less constrained by departmental boundaries than it has been in the past. A good example of the positive effects of that is the interrelationship between the departments of housing and health.  I was struck by a number of general points: the large number of bills compared with what I was used to at Westminster; the different way in which we will do legislation, of which the annual budget bill is the best example; and the fact that we are taking different policy routes from Westminster. The graduate endowment bill and the freedom of information bill, which proposes a more robust test of harm and a stronger role for the information commissioner than does its Westminster equivalent, are good examples of that. The flagship bill is, of course, the housing bill, which I welcome. I welcome the bill because it boosts the rights of tenants, strengthens the duties of local authorities towards the homeless and changes Scottish Homes from a non-departmental public body into an Executive agency. That may be the precursor to changes in the status of other bodies. There will be debate about the specifics of the bill and members will argue for the inclusion of more about private tenants and fuel poverty. I was encouraged by the First Minister's suggestion that the bill will include provisions relating to fuel poverty. In conjunction with the money that has been flagged up, I hope that those provisions will do a great deal to improve the health of people on low incomes. The scandalous fact is that 78 per cent of households with weekly incomes of less than £100 spend more than 10 per cent of their incomes on fuel. That is the definition of fuel poverty.

I have about one minute left, but I will give way in a moment if I have time. I was very encouraged by the announcement of the regulation of care bill. By establishing the Scottish commission for the regulation of care, the Executive will be implementing one of the central recommendations of the Sutherland report.

I will give way briefly.

I do not have any inside information on that, but I am certainly encouraged by what the First Minister said today. I am confident that there will be significant action on  fuel poverty in the next few weeks. I welcome the evidence (sex offences) bill, which will end the cross-examination of rape victims by the accused. I remind members of the excellent work done by Johann Lamont and others in bringing that about. This is related to the European convention on human rights. I am glad that there is to be a bill. Some of us were concerned that it was being misused in connection with the rape cross-examination issue. We welcome the incorporation of the convention in Scottish law. Although the programme is extensive, some of us will want to push it a bit further. I would like to see legislation on stalking and harassment, with a new, specific offence of harassment, following the consultation paper that was issued on the matter by Jim Wallace before the summer recess.

I, too, welcome the pensioners to the gallery and I welcome the warm deal. Will the First Minister develop and build on the warm deal in the forthcoming spending review so that more pensioners can save more money on their heating bills and be free from the illnesses and hospitalisation that so often result from cold and damp homes?

I welcome the power of arrest that is to be attached to a greater number of interdicts. I also welcome the fact that the changes to parental rights are not to apply retrospectively. How does the minister respond to the concerns of many women who are subjected to intimidation and violence that they will lose the protection against unmarried fathers that they have under the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 and that the consent part of joint registration with consent will be difficult to enforce? Chapter 5 of the "Parents and Children" document is on supporting families in transition. Can the minister confirm that the original list of organisations—Family Mediation Scotland, Couple Counselling Scotland and Stepfamily Scotland—is not exclusive, and that One Parent Families Scotland, for example, will be eligible for funding?

I am sorry to disappoint Tommy Sheridan by telling him that it is not a new Labour minister who is winding up the debate—just me trying to make some sense of what the Opposition parties have been saying today. The debate began with Alex Salmond making what I can only call an opportunistic attempt to legitimise what Bill Speirs last night called the bosses' barricades. In many cases they are the same people who drove through the miners again and again in the 1980s, so it ill behoves Andrew Wilson to compare what has been happening in the past few days to the miners' strike, and it ill behoves Alex Salmond to compare what has been  happening to the poll tax protests.

I will give way to Alex Salmond.

I was quoting Bill Speirs. This is different from the poll tax, first, because the poll tax was the most regressive of all taxes. One third of households in Scotland do not own a car. They have had to put up with bus and rail fares going up by 30 per cent in real terms during the past two decades, whereas the real costs of motoring have remained the same. Secondly, the fuel duty escalator—established by the Tories and abolished by Labour—has been an environmental issue and has saved up to 2.5 million tonnes of carbon in the past five years. As Richard Dixon of Friends of the Earth Scotland said, instead of developing serious environmental strategies, the SNP is "trying to score cheap political points by pretending to be the motorists' friend." I will move on to what Alex Salmond did not say about the oil price and duty. Oil has gone up from $10 to $34 over the past year, whereas the increase in fuel duties this year was the lowest in 11 years. I will break the habit of a lifetime by quoting the The Daily Telegraph , which said that the last budget "was the most motorist-friendly Budget in 8 years."

That takes me to my next point, which also connects with Alex Salmond's point about the hole in the finances. The simple fact is that the 2p off duty is £1 billion that we all want for public expenditure. Budgets cannot be changed in the middle of the year because of fluctuating prices and predictions. It is worth making the point, which is what Margo MacDonald was referring to, that the economics of independence that we hear from the SNP is based on fluctuating oil prices, which go from $10 to $34  in two years. That is a serious problem that the SNP has in persuading the Scottish people to go for independence. The final point that Alex Salmond made—David McLetchie also made it—is that we have the highest motoring costs in Europe. Examining the range of tax that is applied to the car-driving public, a motorist with a 1,000 cc engine pays £527 tax in the United Kingdom—that includes fuel duty and road tax. The equivalent figure in France is £640. In Norway it is £821—Andrew Wilson was unwise to mention that country—and in the Netherlands it is about £984. Both David McLetchie and Alex Salmond were wrong about that. David McLetchie—I am sorry that I have not had more time for him—also gave us a trail of what we are going to hear tomorrow about the Transport (Scotland) Bill and a vendetta against motorists.

How long do I have, Presiding Officer?

I must conclude. I am glad that we have a Government—in this case we are talking about the Westminster Government—that takes the environment seriously, unlike the other parties, but has taken account of the success of the fuel duty escalator and abolished it in the last budget. I am also glad that we have a Government at Westminster that has put significant sums of money into public expenditure over the next four years and realises that that public expenditure has to be paid for by taxation. I am glad that we do not have a Government at Westminster or in the Scottish Parliament that is called either the SNP or the Tory party.

Some members will have realised that this is not dementia awareness week, but I lodged the motion several months ago and I am pleased that it has been selected as the first members' business debate after the recess. Until recently, I did not have much knowledge of dementia, partly because I have never known anyone with dementia. I accept that many of the people who speak after me today will have far more knowledge about it. I remind people that dementia is the fourth biggest killer in this country; it affects 60,000 Scots and that number is rising. About 55 per cent of that number have Alzheimer's disease. Dementia is a devastating illness, which progressively destroys brain cells. It is extremely distressing for the person with dementia and for their carers. It affects memory, language, motor skills and behaviour and requires a vast amount of care. We should remember that 60 per cent of people with dementia are cared for in their homes. I want to pay tribute to Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia for all the work that it has done over the years in highlighting the issues and problems arising from dementia. I also want to congratulate Alzheimer Scotland on the important initiative that it launched in dementia awareness week, which is referred to in the motion. I also acknowledge what has been achieved recently. I looked at Alzheimer Scotland's briefing to MSPs before the Scottish parliamentary election and noted the remark that "laws relating to the management of money matters for those with dementia"— and other incapable adults— "date back to 1849 and laws relating to personal welfare date back to 1585."  I am sure that we are all delighted that one of the first acts to be passed by the Scottish Parliament was the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, which addressed those problems. I pay tribute to the many superb initiatives throughout Scotland for the care of dementia sufferers. Margaret Smith, Dorothy-Grace Elder and I visited Craw Wood in the Borders at the beginning of the recess and I believe that Margaret Smith and Mary Scanlon visited another project in Inverness this week, which they commended in the Health and Community Care Committee this morning. The Midloch project in Glasgow was also commended in the Health and Community Care Committee this morning, which, by coincidence, Alzheimer Scotland attended. Today, while we highlight the continuing problems that arise, we must remember all the excellent new initiatives. A Scottish needs assessment project report on dementia in 1997 pointed out: "The authors wish to emphasise that people with dementia and their carers are currently a significantly disadvantaged group in terms of both the number and quality of services. This shortfall is particularly serious in view of the continuing increase in the number of people with dementia." In the view of Alzheimer Scotland, that is still the situation today. This morning, I asked the organisation what the main barriers to progress were on services for people with dementia. Three things were highlighted: lack of information and data about how services are provided, lack of understanding of the complexity of the needs of people with dementia and, of course, funding problems. The first problem was highlighted in 1997 by the Accounts Commission for Scotland in "The commissioning maze: Commissioning community care services", which identified the fact that people with dementia are one of seven main care groups, but that data on services to meet their needs are extremely poor. That problem must be addressed, because our starting point must be what exists at present. Even more important, however, is where we want to go, which is where the Alzheimer Scotland template is so important. In the template, which was launched in dementia awareness week, the organisation has admirably and definitively outlined the range and volume of services that should be available in every area of Scotland. The template highlights diagnostic and assessment services, early-stage therapeutic services including drugs, early-stage support services including information, counselling and advocacy, and community care services including intensive home support and long-term care. I cannot go through the template in detail, but I will pick out  two or three of the main points. First, Alzheimer Scotland emphasises the importance of early-stage support, because research indicates that early intervention can reduce morbidity and depression among people with dementia, reduce carer stress, reduce the need for crisis intervention and delay, or even prevent institutionalisation. Secondly, the group emphasises the importance of integrated and specialised home care services, provided by the same, familiar team of care staff. Thirdly, the group feels that, when long-term care becomes necessary, people with dementia function better in small dementia units where they can be cared for by staff with dementia care training. That is exactly the kind of care that we saw at Craw Wood in July. Through all this, Alzheimer Scotland emphasises the importance of multidisciplinary working, with a lowering of the boundaries between professionals in health and social care services. That leads us to the issue of funding and the Sutherland report in particular. Some members may wish to turn the whole debate into a debate about Sutherland. The report is clearly relevant, and many arguments in favour of Sutherland come from looking at the services for people with Alzheimer's. It is difficult to concentrate only on free nursing care when people with Alzheimer's gain more from personal care than from nursing care. The emphasis on multidisciplinary working also makes the formulation of free nursing care rather difficult, because people are not merely doing their traditional professional work. It is very unfair that people with Alzheimer's should pay for their illness when people with cancer and heart disease do not. However, it must also be pointed out that if money is put into eliminating charges for personal care, that same money, self-evidently, cannot be put into other services that dementia sufferers require, for example respite care. We know that when resource transfers took place—they are still taking place—the beds used for respite were often forgotten. That resource was lost when long-stay national health service beds closed. We need new resources for new drugs. Several drugs, such as Aricept, are not available throughout Scotland. Sometimes there is a waiting list, and sometimes there is postcode prescribing. More resources are also required for the key early-stage services and for the specialised home support that I referred to earlier. There are genuine dilemmas for the Executive and the Parliament when they address the Sutherland report over the next few weeks. Whatever the outcome, and whatever is charged for ultimately—we should remember that Sutherland himself advocated charging for housing and living costs, which is sometimes  forgotten—we ought to have more consistency in charging for community services and reasonable levels of charging, with a maximum level for each service that is charged for. It would also be reasonable for more income and capital to be disregarded when considering charges for both community services and long-term care. I have probably gone on too long, given the number of people who want to speak.

In health debates, it is always easy to criticise and hard to make progress. We have seen that once again from the Opposition parties this morning. The killer question came from Margaret Smith, who asked what the SNP would do. Answer came there none. It was exactly the same from the Conservative front bench, notwithstanding a witty speech from Mary Scanlon. I am proud of many achievements of the Executive and the Labour Government at Westminster, none more so than the national health service. One of the most important things that Labour and the partnership Administration have done is reassert the founding principles of the national health service. In no other area have the partnership parties been more radical. One of the most radical ideas of the partnership Executive and the Westminster Labour Government has been to say that the NHS cannot be improved simply by spending on health. The connection between health and social conditions is at the heart of the modernisation of health policy in Scotland. I am therefore delighted that the £34 million is going to be spent on health-related projects. I have yet to hear one Opposition party welcome that fact.

Notwithstanding all the debate and argument about the £34 million, let us remember that it was only an addendum to the big health programme. Can we hear more about the main programme and less about the addendum? We have not heard a welcome from one Opposition member this morning for the £30 million for X-ray equipment, scanners and sterilisation equipment, which was the key announcement in the minister's speech. Why has the Opposition not welcomed that massive advance that we have had this morning? That leads into the issue of funding, which no doubt Andrew Wilson will raise.

Andrew Wilson has tried to make the most of this. I certainly did not use the word major. In fact, the following morning, when I was on "Good Morning Scotland" with Andrew Wilson, I said that it was a small mistake. We should concentrate on the big picture today, which is exactly what the SNP refuses to do. Money is part of the modernisation agenda; I repeat that never before in the history of the health service have we had such a big increase in health expenditure over a five-year period. However, let us not only deal with money this morning; we should also deal with what the money is being used for. Three points that we want to emphasise—there are many others—are: improvements in the patient's journey through the health service, which Richard Simpson and others have dealt with; strengthening the patient's voice; and the new element that I would like to talk about, although Susan Deacon referred to it, which is the new quality agenda.

That typifies the SNP's approach. We are concerned with the substance of policy. The public are far more interested in that than whether presentational mistakes are sometimes made. It is the fact that the £34 million is now being spent on health-related projects that matters. We have introduced massive new initiatives—of which Opposition parties seem to be unaware—on clinical governance, the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland and the new emphasis on patient focus. One of the most important announcements was that the patients project, which is to be launched in the autumn, will be given even greater importance. That has been widely welcomed by the health council movement and all who are concerned with the patient voice in the health service. Those two agendas cross over. Clinical governance is about trusts being responsible for standards of clinical care, which did not happen before 1997. In the guidance on that, we include an emphasis on patient information and involvement as a key component. There is also  public involvement in the auditing process on the Clinical Standards Board and all standards of clinical care are being systematically audited. There is also an emphasis on patient focus in the generic standards of the Clinical Standards Board. Some people do not want to hear about this wider agenda of the health service, but it is very important. I will pick up on what Dorothy-Grace Elder said. If we have a mission over the summer, perhaps we should all ensure that the public understand all these major new initiatives so that they are given reassurance. We will always be able to find things that are going wrong with individual patients or more generally; the difference is that with this Executive those problems are being addressed. Let us concentrate more on the solutions and less on the problems, which we will always be able to find.

Phil Gallie will know from the stage 1 debate that I would like several measures to be implemented in order to strengthen the rights of victims in relation to bail; but amendment 13 is not one of those measures. Will Phil Gallie tell members whether it is now a Conservative tactic to propose a series of measures that are clearly and flagrantly in breach of the ECHR as part of that party's anti-European agenda?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to ensure that the highest standards of clinical care are available in all parts  of the NHS throughout Scotland. (S1O-2088)

I welcome the recent developments in clinical governance, which should lead to the early identification of any problems that arise with standards of clinical care. I also welcome the continuing work of the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland, which I recently visited to find out the way in which it is systematically auditing standards of care throughout Scotland. Is it possible for those important new initiatives to be widely publicised so that public confidence is enhanced? People should understand that there is a distinctive Scottish agenda on these important matters.

I welcome the Executive's commitment to act on the matter. Clearly, it is only one piece—although a very important one—in a jigsaw of measures that are required to secure justice and support for rape victims. I hope that that will be carried forward by the other measures in "Towards a Just Conclusion" and through other more radical provisions, such as the use of special prosecutors in rape cases. I wanted to talk about the European convention on human rights, because that has interested me throughout the debate. However, I have time to refer to only one judgment; I have read it in full because it is very interesting. It is not simply the interpretation of the principles in articles 3 and 6 to which Pauline McNeill referred that makes it clear that the proposals are not against the European convention. The case of Croissant v Germany in 1992 makes it absolutely clear that not only can a state require a defendant to act through a lawyer, but, according to the judgment, the court can even appoint the lawyer. There has been no doubt about that throughout the debate, and I should be interested to know what legal advice the Scottish Executive has received on the matter during the past year.

Like Mary Scanlon, I will speak as a member of the Health and Community Care Committee. I recommend that everybody read pages 65 to 87 of volume 1 of the Finance Committee report. If members do not have time to do that, they can read the summary on pages 83 and 84. Clearly, we are mainly concerned today with the budget process. However, as I am speaking about health, it is appropriate that I deal with the general points about health expenditure that were made by Andrew Wilson. In my intervention, I said that when he referred to bigger health expenditure increases, he was talking about isolated years during the past two decades, which he found with some difficulty. He could not answer my point that he would not be able to find a five-year period in which there was an average increase in the health budget of more than 5 per cent in real terms. Andrew Wilson also made the point that 7.3 per cent was an incorrect figure. As I used that figure during a television interview an hour ago, I should point out that that is the correct figure, once the end-year flexibility has been stripped out. That illustrates the point made by the Finance Committee on page 2 of its report, that "Investing in You" or its equivalent should make clear the carry-forward of underspend. There is some confusion in the document as to whether underspend is included in the total. However, that is what the debate is all about—how we can present the information in a more transparent way, so that MSPs and the public can understand more precisely what money is being spent on. That leads me to the issue of the budget process. As someone who is used to the discussion of budgets at Westminster, I must say that we are light years ahead of that place in considering in detail the way in which the Executive budget is spent.

I do not know what Jack McConnell was referring to, but I was talking about a 7.3 per cent real-terms increase from last year to this year.  The section on health on page 83 of the report states: "The framework for financial information inherited from Westminster and the Scottish Office is clearly not appropriate for a modern Scotland". The Finance Committee also makes that point when it says that the main requirement is clear information and robust figures. I am sure that the Executive will take those points on board as it develops an equivalent document for next year. Mary Scanlon has referred to the Health and Community Care Committee's concern about the need for strategic aims and clinical priorities to be better flagged up in the health section, so I will not repeat that. One of our main concerns—in general terms, this would also apply to local government—is the fact that so much of the health budget is spent locally: about £4 billion is spent by health boards. One of our main sources of dissatisfaction is that we did not have disaggregated data for local health spending.

Mr McConnell and I were making exactly the same point. The Health and Community Care Committee was one of the few committees to make specific recommendations on shifts of expenditure. They were relatively minor in the scheme of things, but that innovation might become more common in years ahead because of the greater power-sharing approach that is taken in the Scottish Parliament. I commend our recommendation that mental illness specific grant should be increased annually, rather than frozen as it has been for the past few years. Finally, I commend the recommendation of the Finance Committee that future budgets should deal with the impact on men and women. We have begun the debate on "engendering" budgets, which is an important part of mainstreaming, and I hope that that will be developed next year.

I apologise for missing the beginning of Andrew Wilson's speech. I was being interviewed about health; I apologise for knocking him off the television in order to do it. Is not the point that the difference is between a one-year increase, which happened now and then during the 18 years of Conservative Governments, and a sustained period of increase in the health budget? Is not it the case that this is the biggest sustained increase in health expenditure if looked at over a period of five years or so?

I start by congratulating the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on producing another superb report, despite the difficulties under which it laboured. The report is another example of the massive superiority of this Parliament over Westminster in stage 1 consideration of bills. A large number of people have already given evidence on the record, and the Executive has made changes as a result of that evidence and the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's report. Stage 1 in committee also allows people like me, who are not members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, to gain some knowledge of the issue before the stage 1 debate. The bill raises two general issues, which are similar to the issues that have come up in relation to the cross-examination of rape victims. The first is the European convention on human rights, which in many ways drives the bill. I want to make it clear that I absolutely welcome the convention and its incorporation into British law. It is the misuse of the convention that I have objected to in relation to cross-examination. The other issue is the relationship between politicians and the legal system. With the cross-examination issue, we started to see many lawyers beginning to try to frighten off politicians from their territory. We have to be absolutely clear that we have an important role to play in relation to criminal procedures—we must do more in that direction. However, there should be a strong distinction when it comes to individual cases. Of course, many of the changes in the bill aim to separate the conflict of interest that may arise if politicians are too directly involved in individual legal cases. I welcome the changes that are to be introduced  in relation to part-time sheriffs; the strict separation was not enforced in the original bill. There may still be issues surrounding the action for the removal of a part-time sheriff being initiated by ministers and the right of appeal in such cases. There are related but different issues of councillors who are justices of the peace. I do not have a view on that in relation to the European convention on human rights, but I tend to agree with the unease of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee about the blurring of the boundary between the judicial and the political. Bail, however, is a completely different matter. Some members thought that the debate about statutory guidelines ended yesterday, but I note that we have a formidable coalition of Professor Gane, the Rape Crisis Network, Victim Support Scotland and now Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, arguing in favour of statutory bail guidelines. I must say that I agree and would join that coalition. As Professor Gane said to the committee, guidelines are a legislative matter that should not be conceded to the judiciary. If the Executive does not agree with that point, it must show how it will ensure consistency in the granting of bail. I welcome Jim Wallace's announcement on the right of victims to be informed when an accused has been given bail, although I wonder why that has not been put in legislation. Clearly, there are many related issues, such as the conditions that are attached to bail being clearly explained to the victim and to the accused. I welcome the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's suggestion that such conditions could be read out in court. There are also many enforcement issues to consider, although they are not appropriate to the bill. My final point relates to victims giving information in relation to their safety and well-being prior to any bail consideration. Jim Wallace suggested that there would be some action in that respect. Perhaps Angus MacKay can clarify that in his closing statement. That was the main point that was made in Victim Support Scotland's evidence. I note that in talking about that evidence, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee referred to a "victim impact statement". However, I do not think that that was what Victim Support Scotland had in mind. Victim impact statements have American connotations and the victim statement would not give views on bail or sentences, but would simply give information about worries that the victim may have about the accused. I notice that there has already been a judgment in the European Court against the UK Government—Osman v United Kingdom—because the UK authorities failed to ask a victim about their worries concerning the accused. I welcome the bill and the work of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee in making it a better  bill. Many of us will keep our eyes on the bail issue in particular to ensure that the rights of victims are strengthened.

The Deputy Minister for Justice will know of concerns expressed at the Justice and Home Affairs Committee by Victim Support Scotland relating to the connection between the work carried out on "Towards a Just Conclusion", the work of the victim steering group and the work of the Lord Advocate's feasibility study. Can the minister explain how those different strands of work on policy for victims are being joined up?

Will the member give way?

As ever, I have a reasonable point. As an economist, Andrew Wilson knows perfectly well that there have always been two official rates of inflation, depending on whether mortgage rates are taken into account. Gordon Brown's announcement was in line with well-established practice; certain inflation rates are used for certain upratings. There was no departure from decades of tradition.

To ask the First Minister what assessment the Scottish Executive has made of the European convention on human rights in relation to the cross-examination of rape victims by the alleged perpetrator. (S1F-422)

I welcome the commitment to act but deplore the way in which the European convention on human rights has been used as a smokescreen by people who support the continuation of this totally unacceptable practice. Is it not the case that the European Court of Human Rights has already ruled that a state can require a defendant to act through a lawyer? Could not failure to end this practice lead to a challenge under article 3 of the ECHR, on the rights of victims? That is exactly what happened to the United Kingdom Government before the law was changed at Westminster.

Will the member give way?

I had considerable concerns about section 12A before the Executive introduced its new amendment today. Can Nicola Sturgeon tell us why she did not oppose the unamended section 12A when it was debated in committee? Does she not agree that today's Executive amendment makes a significant difference to the original formulation? To say that it should be presumed that those circumstances apply only exceptionally is in fact a radical policy development.

The Equal Opportunities Committee did a great deal of work on the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill and heard a lot of evidence on it. In our report to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, we expressed concern about the fact that the bill contained nothing specific about encouraging equal opportunities, in particular the observance of the equal opportunities requirements. I therefore welcome the Executive amendment to section 5 that has been put forward today. It entirely meets the wishes that we expressed throughout our work on the bill, particularly what we said at the committee meeting two weeks ago. Some of us wanted to put the icing on the cake with the amendment to section 6. I accept that, as the Deputy Minister for Children and Education said, there are problems in placing legal duties on individual employees. Given that the substance of our demands has been met, I am minded not to press the amendment to a vote, as long as assurances are given that the local authorities will ensure that all schools are signed up to encourage equal opportunities and to the observance of the requirements.

When the Deputy First Minister next meets the Prime Minister, will he ask him what legal advice the UK Government has received on the implications of the European convention on human rights for the cross-examination of rape victims by the alleged perpetrator? Will he then have second thoughts on allowing that totally unacceptable practice to continue, or can he here and now correct the incorrect and wrong-headed interpretation of the European convention on human rights that is attributed to the Scottish Executive on page 1 of The Scotsman today?

Like Mike Watson, I agree with everything Roseanna Cunningham has said. However, as a Westminster MP, surely she knows that the Home Secretary has wide-ranging discretion in matters of immigration and that therefore the issue of a judicial review is a red herring?

Debates such as this often become rather polarised. We have come a very long way, but there is still a long way to go. To find out how far we have come, I looked back at all the debates on health and community care in the House of Commons the year before the 1997 general election. It was not very hard, because there was only one. It was very ably summed up by Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and the Labour health spokesperson, Malcolm Chisholm. [Laughter.]  On reading the debate, I was struck by several things, including the fact that the Scottish Parliament has had many debates on care, whereas we had one a year in Westminster. Furthermore, the Scottish Parliament has a minister for community care, whereas Lord James was the minister for most things under the sun. There has been significant progress on many of  the issues that we raised in that debate, although I cannot list them all. Regulation was the main topic of the debate, and here we are, about to set up the Scottish commission for the regulation of care. There was also some interesting information. Since it is rather bad taste to quote myself, I shall quote Willie McKelvey, who was chair of the Scottish Affairs Select Committee at that time. Quoting evidence received by the committee about my part of Scotland—Edinburgh—he said: "'Edinburgh city social work department has stopped assessing people for care services'— all people, not just the elderly— 'and has a waiting list of 1,372 people . . . admissions to residential homes have been frozen.'"—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 26 February 1997; Vol 291, c 290.] We should have a sense of perspective in the debate. The Conservatives should remember the situation that we inherited. They quote figures about blocked beds; the reality is that such figures were not collected in those days. The Executive is collecting those figures, which invalidates the Conservative motion.

There is, quite clearly, action on bedblocking, on the carers strategy and on direct payments. I do not wish to repeat all Iain Gray's points, except to say that while I welcome the extension in direct payments, I hope that they will be extended to the carers of all people with learning difficulties. The Parliament's other difference is not just the many debates that we are having, but that we have a Health and Community Care Committee that is carrying out a detailed study on community care. The cross-party group on older people that Sandra White and I convene has done quite a lot of work on that issue. That, together, we are considering ways forward on this issue is a good example of how the Parliament is working and what it was set up for. It is clear that resources are one aspect of the matter, but it is not just about the totality of the budget; it is also whether they are being used effectively. That, in a sense, should be the key point of the debate. There are charging issues, but the joint futures group is considering that closely. I hope that it will consider some of the evidence the Health and Community Care Committee has received. The Scottish Consumer Council, for example, recommends national guidelines and Age Concern  Scotland recommends national maximum charges. The most important thing is to consider new ways of working. The committee is focusing on best practice, such as in the pilot project at Perth and Kinross Council, funded by the Scottish Executive. Pooled budgets, augmented home care and the possibilities of the new local health care co-operatives point the way forward.

It is part of the Scottish Parliament's new way of working, involving a wide range of people.

I wanted the main part of my speech to be on mental health, but I have been told to wind up, so I shall have to be brief. I was honoured to be invited to be the honorary president of the Edinburgh mental health users forum, which has taught me a great deal about mental health. To the credit of mental health services and the Executive, the framework has user involvement at its heart. We were told by SAMH that user and carer involvement in service planning is tokenistic. That point has been made by the Accounts Commission in "A shared approach: Developing adult mental health services", by the clinical resources and audit group on mental illness and by a recent progress report on the framework for mental health. More needs to be done genuinely to involve users. An important part of that is advocacy. Again, the users forum, in it submission to the Health and Community Care Committee, points out that collective and individual advocacy is essential for mental health users to participate actively in making decisions about their lives. Some of the concrete demands of users are for crisis services. They have acknowledged—and I know from my experience—the importance of community mental health projects such as the admirable stress centre in my constituency. Sometimes, community care means spending more money. If we had proper crisis services and community mental health projects, we would save money, as many of the people who end up in beds unnecessarily would be more appropriately looked after in the community.

Will Mr Gibson give way?

The First Minister will know of the unprecedented problems in my constituency and the rest of Edinburgh last week and the considerable consequential cost. In view of that, will the Executive take a sympathetic view of the council's imminent application for assistance under the Bellwin scheme?

Will Fiona Hyslop give way?

Is it not true that the SNP's proposals were nothing like John Prescott's? John Prescott's proposals were still on balance sheet, whereas the SNP is trying to get around that. Is it not also true that every increase in housing expenditure that John Prescott gets out of Gordon Brown, we get through the Barnett formula?

I was not at my most sprightly at 10 past 7 this morning, but I woke with a start when I heard Andrew Wilson's astonishing revelation, on "Good Morning Scotland", that Scottish people pay taxes to help fund our record levels of public investment. Of all the controversies that surround the Holyrood project, I did not think that the fact that the workers and companies who are involved in the project pay taxes was one. His point about  the accounting of the project was more interesting, although as Jack McConnell pointed out, under present circumstances that comes close to being an argument for PFI. The move towards resource accounting will help to deal with the problem that Andrew Wilson touched upon. Andrew Wilson's speech was interesting in many ways. It followed a sort of twin-track argument. He paid obeisance to the traditional SNP policy of independence, but it was clear that he was also very attracted by the huge success of the Labour Government in London in running the economy. Much of his speech was based on the massive surpluses that he said the Labour Government had accrued in Westminster. I was reminded of the debate, three weeks ago today, during which his colleague, the deputy leader of the SNP, said that there should be some fiscal tightening in the budget, because that was the only way in which to deal with the problem of interest rates and the high exchange rate. There is some support for that view—the British Chambers of Commerce and many in the business community argue that the Chancellor of the Exchequer increased public expenditure by far too much in the budget—but it strikes me as slightly odd that the SNP should take that position, implicitly, three weeks ago today and yet call for more and more public expenditure today. Today, we also heard more of Andrew Wilson's well-known obsession with percentages, but it would help if he quoted the correct percentages on the health budget. Over a period of four years, we have a 5.4 per cent annual real-terms growth in the health budget, which is unprecedented in the history of the national health service.

Again, that percentage is incorrect. In fact, there is a 7.3 per cent real-terms growth in the health budget in Scotland this year and a slightly higher—7.8 per cent, I think—real-terms growth in England. Over the four-year period, there is a less than 1 per cent difference in the real-terms growth of the health budget. The Scottish people are more interested in the £2.4 billion cash increase over four years; that is the same increase per head in the health budget as in England. Everybody in Scotland, apart from the SNP, has welcomed that. The SNP's views on health are almost as bizarre as those of the Conservative party and David Davidson, who said that, somehow, there was more bureaucracy now than there was under the Conservatives. Again, I  do not think that anyone else in Scotland believes that. Andrew Wilson's fundamental point was that public expenditure in Scotland did not take account of needs or of ability to pay, both of which, of course, are untrue. The whole point of our having a much larger health budget is to address the greater levels of ill health in Scotland. The pivot of the argument is, and will remain, ability to pay, but the simple fact is that there is a fiscal deficit, unless we assume a high oil price and a high oil production level. All the figures that suggest surpluses in Scotland assume those two things.

I am afraid my time is up. It is very foolish to make such assumptions when the long-term, incontrovertible, trend in oil is towards falling production levels.

Does the minister accept that two positions were put at the Health and Community Care Committee? The first is my  position. The second position, that the second opinion should not be a medical opinion but an independent non-medical opinion, has never been moved. The Health and Community Care Committee said that if that position was not accepted—and it was never moved, because the second opinion is now a medical opinion—the committee would accept my position instead of the minister's position.

Will the minister give way?

Will Mr Jackson give way?

Having read the Justice and Home Affairs Committee report that was presented to Parliament for the stage 1 debate, I am rather concerned. That report stated quite clearly that the committee was not persuaded of the need to make the change that has been made. Can Gordon Jackson clarify what he just said?

Will Gordon Jackson give way again?

This is a serious point.

Gordon Jackson appears to be saying that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's report recommended a change to section 47. I have read the committee's report. It admits that the argument is complex, but its conclusion is that, on balance, the committee supports section 47 as it was originally formulated. That is an important piece of evidence for this debate.

It is all very well for the Executive to say that the ECHR is not relevant, but when the Law Society of Scotland quotes two grounds for concern under the ECHR, it is our duty to sit up and pay attention. I will cite only one of those grounds for concern, as time is running out, but the second relates to the independence of the second medical opinion—the Law Society of Scotland is not assured by what the minister said. However, the more fundamental point in relation to human rights is this: "To allow doctors to override the proper role of the court as proposed in the Executive amendment would be contrary to the European Convention on Human Rights. It has recently been conceded that it is a clear breach of the Convention for a minister to alter a sentence imposed by a court. Likewise, it would be a breach to empower doctors to override powers conferred by the court, or to override powers granted by the patient other than upon application to the court." Let us consider that not only in terms of the European convention on human rights.

We are asking that proxies, who may be on low incomes—many of them are, because they look after adults with incapacity—should have to go to court. Remember not only the distress, but the expense of having to go to court, which was pointed out by the British Medical Association in its submission. The vast majority of people who have followed the issue in Scotland—all the groups that I mentioned, as well as campaigners on euthanasia—are opposed to the Executive's new section. We should go back to a position where it is the medical person who has to go to court. My final words on the matter are from the BMA, which said at the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, although we might not have expected it to: "we are happy with the subsection, which gives doctors the opportunity to apply to the Court of Session to overrule the decision of the proxy."—[ Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee , 17 November 1999; c 378.]

Amendment 139 is similar to Phil Gallie's amendment, and even more similar to the Executive's original position when the bill was published. Today, I am trying to drag the Executive back to that original, correct position, which was that a welfare attorney or guardian ought to be able to refuse medical treatment and that it would be up to the doctor to challenge that in court if necessary. Iain Gray implied that such cases would not end up in court, but they are still as likely to end up in court. Section 47 as it stands means that a proxy's view can be overridden by a second medical opinion and, therefore, that the proxy would have to go to court, which would be far more difficult for the proxy to achieve. The rationale behind the Executive's change was concern about euthanasia. That was illogical from the Executive's point of view, and entirely irrelevant from the point of view of those who were concerned about euthanasia. The change was illogical for the Executive, because it has said—and I accept its assurances—that we need have no grounds for concern about euthanasia. It is entirely illogical to say that there are no grounds for concern, but then to change section 47 on the grounds of those unfounded concerns. The change was irrelevant from the point of view of those who are concerned about euthanasia, because it is not the change that they wanted. They want safeguards in the bill; I understand and respect that view. They did not want the change that the Executive made to section 47. That was  made absolutely clear by the Scottish Council on Human Bioethics, which has perhaps been the leading campaigner on the euthanasia issue. I remind members that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, in its pre-legislative report, did not recommend the change to section 47. My amendment is supported—members have all had letters to this effect—by the Alliance for the Promotion of the Incapable Adults Bill, which has worked with the Executive on this process over the past few years. It is supported by Enable, by the Scottish Association for Mental Health, by Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia, by Parent Pressure, and by every carers group that I have spoken to in Scotland about the issue. It is also supported by the Scottish Law Society; I hope to have time to quote its views about the matter in relation to the European convention on human rights. On what grounds can a listening Parliament override those views?  I ask members to put themselves in that position. They should imagine appointing their wife, husband or partner as their welfare attorney, because they know that they are in the early stages of Alzheimer's. In that situation, the person who has been appointed—their nearest and dearest—will no longer have the right to say no on their behalf to medical treatment. That is the situation for us, but think of the situation for someone who, unlike members of the Scottish Parliament, has severe learning difficulties. The Health and Community Care Committee was very moved and influenced by the evidence of parents of adults with severe learning difficulties. I want to quote once again what one mother said at the committee. It is only a brief paragraph: "It seems strange to me that I have been entrusted with looking after Kimberly on a daily basis for 28 years—bathing, lifting, feeding and medicating her and deciding when a doctor should be called—yet I would have no say when it comes to medication or surgery. The power will be handed over to a doctor who might never have met her. In 28 years, I have seen the often devastating effect of drugs on my daughter. I am the person closest to her in the world; the one who recognises her every change of expression and every sound of pain or pleasure. Doctors do not live with the side effects of powerful drugs—carers and their patients do."—[ Official Report, Health and Community Care Committee , 26 January 2000; c 540.] Alzheimer Scotland made precisely the same point about the side effects of powerful drugs. As the carers, they want to be able to say no. Contrary to what Iain Gray said, this is a matter of the rights and the interests of adults with incapacity. Remember that guardians are appointed by the court and that welfare attorneys would be appointed by people like ourselves before they became incapable. We are not talking  about just any carer in Scotland; we are talking about people who have been appointed either by an adult when capable or by the court. Remember also that the powers of welfare attorneys or guardians can be withdrawn by the court if there are any problems. I hope that I have time to refer to the European convention on human rights, which, I believe, is an important aspect of the bill.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Everybody is understandably concerned about an aspect of democracy—elections. Today's debate reminds us that the new democracy we have created in Scotland goes far wider than that. Mary Scanlon referred to the central concepts for this Parliament of accountability and participation by the public, laid down by the consultative steering group. Today, we are debating the extension of those principles to all the local governing bodies in Scotland. The petitions came to the Health and Community Care Committee through the Public Petitions Committee, which again is a new feature of the Parliament and allows the public to have a new input into policy making. I have not taken part in such a debate at Westminster. My colleagues on the Health and Community Care Committee and I were concerned not to pre-empt local decisions about the acute services review. As many members have said, there are hard choices to be made and most of us, I am sure, believe that services must be redesigned, sometimes in controversial ways. The Health and Community Care Committee therefore focused on the processes that are undertaken by health boards and trusts in making decisions. The key concepts, mentioned in the motion, are accountability and consultation. Accountability goes in two directions. I am glad that ministers are seeking to ensure that health boards and trusts are more accountable upwards, to central Government and its priorities. Today we have concentrated more on their downward accountability to local populations. Richard Simpson was right to say that accountability begins centrally with a flow of information. That has often not been the case; both Margaret Smith and Kay Ullrich referred to the "secret service" that has been common. Accountability means visible policy. It means  local bodies justifying what they are doing and the possibility of local people challenging decisions. Beyond that, some members have suggested we need to introduce sanctions so that the people who make decisions can be got rid of. For that reason, some people want members of health boards to be elected. I do not think the Health and Community Care Committee has a particular view on that, although it has said that it should be actively considered. Some of the central recommendations of the Health and Community Care Committee reports on Stobhill and Stracathro concern consultation. A clear recommendation of both reports was that staff consultation, as outlined in the human resources strategy, should be implemented. As Iain Gray said, we are at the beginning of a process, but it is important that the new culture of the health service be adopted by local health bodies. I was pleased that Iain Gray said that the accountability review would take that on board. We now have the Scottish partnership forum at a national level and, as he reminded us, local forums are being set up. Margaret Smith made the central point that there is a lack of clear guidance on effective consultation, especially in relation to new services. I am glad that Iain Gray said that the Executive is developing new guidance on consultation. Many people in Scotland are very cynical about consultation and feel that it is often just a formality and that a health board or trust goes through the motions of holding public meetings but does not take on board anything that is said. The concept of permeability is perhaps more useful than that of consultation. Permeability contains the idea that bodies have to be open to what local people say to them. It is important that, as Richard Simpson said, consultations give options rather than decisions, so that local people feel that they have a say and are not being consulted only formally. It is important that health boards and trusts should be permeable and undertake genuine consultation and that local people should feel that they can be involved in decision making in local health care co-operatives, which are new bodies that have been set up under the new health structures. The Executive's quality programmes should also incorporate the views of patients. That principle was flagged up in "Designed to care" at the beginning of the health reforms in 1997. It is very important that it be put into practice so that patients and the public feel that they have a say in the health decisions that affect them personally and in the broader health decisions at a local level. The Health and Community Care Committee also raised the issue of appointments to health  councils. In the past, health councils have been the voice of patients at a local level. If patients become involved more generally at every level of the health service, the role of health councils may have to change. The Health and Community Care Committee suggests that appointments to health councils should be examined. At the moment, members of health councils are the appointees of health boards. There may need to be a radical restructuring of health councils as part of the process of opening up the health service. The third principle of the new NHS democracy—the first two are accountability and consultation, or permeability—is redress. People must feel that they can get redress when something goes wrong and that they can get satisfaction from bodies with which they are dissatisfied. The Health and Community Care Committee has considered that matter. The NHS complaints procedure is being reviewed. It is important that more independence be introduced into that procedure. The Health and Community Care Committee looks forward to being involved in further discussions about that matter. Today's debate has illustrated that the Scottish Parliament and its committees offer a new channel of redress. In the past, the people served by Stracathro or Stobhill would have felt that nothing more could be done after they had campaigned. I am cheered because this debate has shown that the Parliament is a new arena in which people's concerns can be listened to. It was important that the Health and Community Care Committee took up the massive concern about Stracathro and Stobhill and considered the general issues that arose from the petitions. There will be many other acute services reviews at local level over the next few months. It is important that conclusions are drawn from the reports that have been debated this morning and that clear guidance is given to the NHS management executive, so that the Health and Community Care Committee does not have to receive many more petitions complaining about the lack of consultation and the failure of local accountability in a particular area. I hope that the Health and Community Care Committee has made a useful contribution to this area of debate and shown that in the new Scottish Parliament there is a system of power sharing that allows committees to influence the development of policy and to ensure that improvements are made as a matter of urgency by the Executive.

I can understand that two Westminster MPs must seem a very large number to the Scottish Conservatives, but is not it the case that there are 56 Scottish Labour MPs at Westminster and that approximately 54 of them can tell the difference between the significant achievements of the Executive and the transient froth of many newspaper headlines? Will the First Minister take this opportunity to reassure Labour's traditional support and everybody else that the social justice agenda is at the heart of the Executive's programme and that further significant progress will be made in the next few months and years?

As Fergus Ewing has invited intervention, I must make one, if only to repeat my previous point. One must look at both sides of the equation—the valuation and the rate poundage. If Mr Ewing asked the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities or anybody else whether there is a level playing field in business rates between Scotland and England, they would say that there was one. The two factors must be examined and Mr Ewing is looking at only one. Six times four is the same as eight times three.

Will Fergus Ewing give way?

I should first apologise for my grey suit. I welcome this morning's co-operative approach to micro-economic policy and Opposition parties' acknowledgement of many excellent Executive initiatives such as the application of new technologies, export diversification, e-commerce, modern apprenticeships and the PACE report. I also welcome the acknowledgement of Scotland's many manufacturing successes in spite of the undoubted difficulties caused by the high exchange rate. Several members have pointed out such figures as our 12.3 per cent share of UK manufacturing exports; our 7.8 per cent increase in manufacturing exports, according to the latest statistics; the 1.4 per cent increase in manufacturing output; the increase in manufacturing output for 12 months in a row; and the increase in manufacturing employment for seven months in a row. Fergus Ewing had the only serious carp about the Scottish Parliament's areas of responsibility. He made his standard point about the business rate and once again was completely wrong. If we examine the product of valuation plus rate poundage, we will find that there is a level playing field throughout the UK. Of course, the same does not hold if we examine either valuation or rate poundage in isolation, but I do not think that anyone but Fergus Ewing would do that.

I want to make some progress, because I have quite a lot to say. Annabel Goldie had a minor carp about targets—or the absence of them, as she saw it. The Executive has set many important targets, such as 100,000 new business start-ups in 10 years. What could be more important than that? Page 25 of "Created in Scotland" lists the  manufacturing steering group's recommendations for other important targets on research and development, training and internet sales, and I hope that the Executive will take those on board as it develops the framework. Although the SNP and others put forward a very positive view about Labour in Scotland, I am afraid that we also heard the SNP's standard negative view about Labour at a UK level. There was silence about many of UK Labour's successful initiatives, which are also outlined in the document. For example, research and development tax credits, the university challenge, the science enterprise challenge, Faraday partnerships and the defence diversification agency are mentioned on page 39. There was also complete silence about the great advantages for Scotland of macro-economic stability at a UK level.

That is an interesting point; I was just about to pick up on John Swinney's recipe for curing some of the problems. For the first time, perhaps, he acknowledged that it is not possible to reduce interest rates without creating knock-on effects on the whole economy. He seemed to be advising Gordon Brown to take fiscal measures in the budget to cool down the economy. I found that interesting, so I intervened to ask whether that meant increasing taxes, lowering public expenditure or both. He swerved the question. Now, his colleague Fergus Ewing is asking for a reduction in taxation. They cannot have that at a macro-economic level. John Swinney wants to take fiscal measures and Fergus Ewing and many of his colleagues want lower taxes and higher public expenditure. It makes no economic sense.

No. I think I am running out of time. Am I?

I have plenty of time. All right. I give way to John Swinney then.

I am certainly experienced enough at Westminster not to second-guess what Gordon Brown will say in two weeks' time. I have said—and I do not mind saying it again—that I hope that he does not make further reductions in income tax, but that is my personal view. However, that is not what John Swinney was implying; he was talking about raising income tax. What we did not get from John Swinney today was the more standard SNP line about increasing interest rates to deal with overheating in the economy in the south-east of England. We did get that from Linda Fabiani, who related it, in particular, to housing. That was a simplistic analysis. House prices here, in the city that I represent, are going up more steeply than anywhere else in the United Kingdom apart from London. It is not a simple Scotland-England interest rates issue; there are variations within Scotland and within the UK. Similarly, on the euro, the Germans want interest rates to do down, while many other countries in Europe want them to go up. The high exchange rate causes a problem. Capital is flowing into the United Kingdom—partly because of the weakness of the euro and partly because of the economic competence of the Labour Government. The monetary policy committee was considering direct intervention to bring down the exchange rate. Indeed, it talked about little other than the exchange rate when it attended the Treasury Select Committee last Tuesday. I hope that that idea will be reconsidered, because there is clearly a problem which, in the spirit of co-operation, we all acknowledge. We should not, however, try to find a simplistic solution or give a simplistic analysis of it.

Will Mr Swinney give way?

I have been listening carefully and with great interest to John Swinney's speech. However, if he is saying that, in two weeks' time, the Chancellor should take the heat out of the economy through fiscal measures, does the SNP advise him to raise taxes, cut public expenditure or both?

In my more extreme moments, I say that modernisation is a meaningless word and that just as Herbert Morrison said that socialism was what Labour Governments do, now modernisation is what Labour Governments do. However, the word can be meaningful, if we recognise that there are not only outdated structures, practices and attitudes, but alternative routes to modernisation. The first Labour politician I ever came across who used the word modernisation was Ken Livingstone in the 1980s. Now, my friend John McAllion, who I hope will speak soon, claims to be the most radical moderniser in the Labour party in Scotland, although I might challenge him for that title. On a more serious note, however, the most important modernisers in my lifetime were the feminists who, from the 1970s onwards, did so much to begin to transform attitudes and structures in society, although clearly there is a long way to go. All of us will agree that devolution was one of the great modernising acts of the Labour Government since 1997. We are privileged to be at the cutting edge of modernisation. The way in which the Parliament is beginning to work is an example, certainly to Westminster and no doubt to many other Parliaments throughout the world. We come under a lot of criticism—there was an item on "Newsnight" last night—but I believe that the committees are beginning to work and to deal with legislation in a new and more effective way. The debate on the census last week was a small precursor to events to follow.

I have frequent contact with my two constituents whom I was pleased to see getting coverage on "Newsnight" last night. I think that we would all agree that one of the modernising acts of Labour at Westminster was to get rid of the House of Lords. The debate at Westminster is about what kind of second chamber to have, to which my reply is that here we have only one chamber. However, the only way to justify that is to handle legislation differently, which we are beginning to do. Power sharing is the next stage of democracy. One of the great achievements of this Parliament is the enhanced role for committees and outside people—Jack McConnell referred to the Civic Forum. The other simple but vital fact is that this Parliament has a much higher percentage of women members than Westminster and most other Parliaments in the world. On the Labour side, 50 per cent of members are women. That fact, combined with moves to do something about the number of women and representatives of ethnic minorities on quangos, which Jack McConnell has also initiated, is an important part of modernising government. The motion refers to integration. We should acknowledge that joined-up government is starting to happen within the Scottish Executive, although there is still a long way to go. One of the features that has bedevilled government in this country for decades is departmentalitis, which must be challenged. At local level, too, we need far more joined-up government, with different bodies—local authorities, health boards and other agencies—working together. The Government has started that process through its community planning agenda, but there is still a long way to go. The democratisation of quangos is another change that must happen at local level. We can claim to be ahead of Whitehall on many of those initiatives. We should also be proud that we are prepared to be different from Whitehall. I was slightly amused that the Scottish National party amendment refers to the need for targets for modernisation. I am sure that John Swinney will know—although some of his colleagues might not—that targets for modernisation are one of the obsessions of new Labour in London and a feature that Labour in Scotland has decided is rather a mechanistic approach to the modernisation agenda. I thought that that was slightly ironic.

It is important to establish what we mean by modernisation. I would like to move on to a main feature of the motion—the modernising of public services. It would be helpful to describe what we mean by that. We have a chance, in Scotland, to do that modernising slightly differently. That is what devolution is all about.

I suspect that on that issue, John McAllion would claim to be the leading moderniser, because he would definitely support proportional representation for local authorities. I have come to support proportional representation for this Parliament and I now support it for Westminster; I am also minded to support it for local government, although I have not quite firmed up my position on that to the same extent. However, the point illustrates that modernisation means different things to different people. On public services, we should feel free to strike out on a slightly different route, because we have the power to do so. For local government, best value is at the centre of the debate. I bear some responsibility for that, having started things off three years ago. Now that we have a Scottish Parliament, we have an opportunity to proceed with best value with less of the obsession with competition that is the hallmark of best value in Whitehall. Now that devolution has been embraced, the challenge to all parties is also to embrace democratisation and diversity. If we do that, we will begin to have the new politics for the new Scotland that we have all dreamed about.

In terms of its subject matter, this is not the most important debate that we have had since 6 May, but in terms of the processes and founding principles of the Parliament, it is the most significant moment yet. Before 6 May, we talked about a new politics, in which parties would relate differently to each other. We talked about an unprecedented new role for the committees in the Parliament and about a direct line, through the committees and in other ways, from people outside the Parliament into policy making. In a small way, we have seen that working for us in the census discussions that we have had. It may not yet be all power to the committees, but it is some power. This is a significant moment. It is also the debate in which we heard a minister saying: "I am better informed now." I hope that we will hear that again; indeed, from back benchers as well. It has been a debate in which the minister, who last week reported quite correctly that users did not see a religion question as a priority, said that users did not give full weight to equality proofing, thus taking on board the concerns of the Equal Opportunities Committee and acknowledging one of the founding principles of the Parliament, which is of course equal opportunities. The reality is that people's view of the world shapes the data that they seek. Often, they do not recognise the relevance of information until they have it. Providing that information is the role of bodies such as the Commission for Racial Equality. Much of its work has been in persuading institutions at all levels in society that they must collect and use such information as an essential tool in the work of uncovering and eliminating possible discrimination and of understanding the needs of particular groups, the impact of institutions' practices on those groups and the policies that are required to overcome inequalities and patterns of social exclusion. We should be  grateful to the CRE, one of the most important bodies that came to give evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee. It reflected the views of black and ethnic people in wider society. I welcome the minister's announcements on the inclusion in the census of a question on religion, on the broadening of ethnic categories in the census and on the pursuit of the language issue through a household survey. I was not, initially, totally persuaded about that, but I have listened to the minister and I have had further discussions with lobby groups today. There seems to be a view that the household survey is an appropriate vehicle for the language issue. That is because, first, there are complications in the language question—various speakers have referred to those complications. Secondly, the reliability of the household survey on the matter of language will be greater than on certain other issues such as religion, in which there is a reactivity factor that results from the sensitivity of the question.

I was going to conclude by asking for assurances from Jackie Baillie that the Scots language will be assessed via the household survey. In view of some of the points that have been made about definitions, that is probably the appropriate way to carry that forward. I also seek assurances from Jackie Baillie on the size of the samples in the household survey, and a commitment to act on the findings.

It is hard to believe that, only 12 months ago, the Scottish budget was dealt with by a statement. If we were lucky, we got one debate thereafter, so this has been an important step forward. We have begun the process of opening up what has, historically, been the most secretive and under-examined part of Scottish government. We should congratulate everybody—and especially the Finance Committee—on all the work that has been done. I look forward to much more progress next year, because the other committees could not be involved this year. The big change next year will be that every member of the Parliament—through the committees—should get involved in examining the budget, because it is at the heart of everything that happens in the Parliament.

I agree with Richard Simpson. The key word is transparency. The problem with the budget process is that it has never been very transparent, although it is sometimes not easy to make it so, because it is  very technical. However, that must be our intention. Much of the debate this year has been conducted in terms of headlines, which is perhaps inevitable, so I might as well use some headlines of my own, as I, too, have been reading Arthur Midwinter's essay this week. I noticed two figures, which have not yet been mentioned in the debate today. They show that in the three-year period that started with this Parliament last spring, the real growth in public expenditure in Scotland is 2 per cent a year. In contrast, during the final three years of the previous Government, real-terms public expenditure fell by 1.6 per cent a year. I am sure that Andrew Wilson will welcome the massive difference that a Labour Government has made.

That is not right, because there is 2 per cent real growth over and above inflation, which is beyond the level of pay awards. The Scottish National party has also been using its headlines, although to be fair to Andrew Wilson, perhaps he did not use so many in his speech today. We have become used to its headlines during the budget debate. The one that I have got used to, as a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, is the figure of 0.8 per cent real-terms increase in the health budget for next year. That is an artificial figure because of the massive in-year increase in this year's health budget. The real figure for growth in the health budget over three years is 11 per cent, which is the largest increase that we have known over a three-year period. Andrew Wilson's main point has been about what he calls the Barnett squeeze. I welcome the discussion about that, because we must go behind the headlines. One of the key issues that we must consider is the effect of the Barnett formula. Let us have transparency about that as well. As Jack McConnell said, the key thing is that per person, increases in expenditure will be the same in Scotland as in England. Andrew Wilson was not quite right to say that our priorities must be based on the rest of the UK's priorities because, as health or education expenditure increases in England, we will receive the same money in our budget. However, we can spend that in whichever way we want, on our own priorities. Once again, I welcome the process that we have engaged in this year and look forward to going behind the headlines next year to examine Barnett  and to pick up on what Jack McConnell said about best value. To add a new dimension to that, we need to consider not only cost and quality, but expenditure over time. I have seen the correspondence between Mike Watson and Jack McConnell on public-private partnership projects—we must consider the effect of those projects over time. There has been much controversy about that issue in the newspapers this week—it is one that the Parliament should deal with next year.

January was a very important month in the history of the NHS. Michael Portillo said that a health service that was free at the point of use and funded from general taxation was a "historical accident", and Tony Blair reaffirmed the fundamental principles of the NHS as laid down by Aneurin Bevan, when he rejected insurance models and established the best demonstration that we have ever had of socialism in action. That is what so many Tories do not like, and why William Hague and Liam Fox are so obsessed with private health insurance rather than a fair NHS.

As I know that Scottish Tories are often embarrassed by their English colleagues, I hope that David Davidson will take this opportunity to distance himself from Michael Portillo, William Hague and Liam Fox.

David Davidson could not be more wrong. Private health insurance is expensive; is focused on people who are good medical risks; rarely extends to the over-75s; is deeply divisive and creates a two-tier service; and would not ease any burden on the NHS.

I have to move on; I have only two and a half minutes left. Margo MacDonald, in her Edinburgh Evening News column, recently supported an alternative social insurance model. That would be a more expensive and bureaucratic system, in which costs would perpetually escalate. By contrast, in an important interview, Tony Blair said that the public finances had been sorted out and the economy had been put on a stable path, so that the Government could afford to put the money in.

Of course I do, and on this occasion I agree with Tony Blair, who said that more money was going in. Kay Ullrich asked what money was going in. The answer is: the same per head as in England. It is a matter of basic maths—because we have a higher base, we receive a lower percentage. If Kay Ullrich has £10 and I have £12, and we each get a £1 increase, Kay gets a higher percentage increase than me, but I still have more money.

I am sorry—I have only one minute left. Whether we look at the increase in terms of percentages or money, in the current three-year period there will be 11 per cent—or £546 million—real growth in the health service. Kay Ullrich outlined several real problems, which I acknowledge; I believe that the Executive acknowledges them, too. She talked about intensive care beds; a review of such beds is being carried out. She talked about unacceptable waiting times; a commitment on waiting times is central to Executive health policy. She also talked  about the recent flu outbreak and other January difficulties; a commissioning group that represents a wide range of interests has been formed to reflect on existing winter planning arrangements and how they can be improved. There is no room for complacency and I do not believe that anyone is being complacent, but we must have a sense of proportion. A Scottish Association of Health Councils report, this week, said that waiting times in Scottish accident and emergency departments had been halved since last January. I am not complacent—we need to go further—but let us remember that much activity is going on. For example, in Edinburgh, three wards were opened in January especially because of the flu emergency. Perhaps that is how we must move forward. If, instead, we just have massive increases in bed numbers throughout the year, we must realise the cost implications for the development of primary care and the broad public health agenda that we all support.

The debate about student funding is a variant of the wider debate about universal versus targeted benefits, and is helped by the concept of opportunity cost, which is unfortunately outside the conceptual universe of the SNP. In other words, it may be desirable to implement Cubie plus at £105 million or even Cubie plus plus at £200 million a year, but not if that means raiding other budgets. Since 1997, I have taken the view that, ideally, university tuition should be available as a universal benefit, but not if the opportunity cost of that is fewer students in higher education and slowing down the process of widening access for students, particularly those from lower-income backgrounds. I am therefore delighted that the package before us today enables tuition fees to be abolished and access to be widened. Because the opportunity cost of less access is not there, I fully support that aspect of the package. My primary concern in this debate about student funding has always been about the abolition of grants. Let us remember that grants have always been a targeted or means-tested benefit. I am an honest enough Labour politician to admit that the Labour Government at Westminster has made one or two mistakes in its first 1,000 days. I think that the abolition of grants was one such mistake.

Right, well—

Well, I was going to say something about one that I was involved in, but I will stick to student funding. Labour has the primary objective of widening access to higher education, in particular for those from low-income backgrounds who would not have gone to university in the past. This is the point that people who praise the old funding arrangements should remember. Those arrangements did not deliver that wider access for students from low-income backgrounds. I am, therefore, delighted that today's package restores a measure of grant to such students. That is the best thing about the package. I was pleased that Henry McLeish said yesterday that he would investigate the possibility of Scottish students who are studying in England also benefiting from the bursaries. I think that we should all accept—including, I hope, the Opposition parties—that there is a definite problem in European law about tuition fees, with  reference to Scottish students in England. I am by no means convinced that there would be such a problem with bursaries. I am also delighted by Henry McLeish's announcement today about a forthcoming child care package. I like Cubie's proposal of a £1,500 child care grant for lone parents and I hope that such a proposal will be included in the child care package. We have to keep an eye on the situation with grants, and I hope that my colleagues in England will do so too. David Blunkett showed yesterday that he is prepared to revise his views on the matter, because there is now a wider access package for England. We need to monitor how the new student support systems operate, and the test should be to ask whether they enable wider access, in particular for students from low-income families. If we do not get the desired results in terms of our policies for social inclusion and wider opportunities, we will have to revisit the issue of bursaries and grants, possibly with a view to increasing them and widening their scope. Today's package is a sensible first step, and I welcome it totally.

Zero Tolerance has taught us about the importance of prevention, provision and protection in relation to rape and all other forms of violence against women. Clearly, there must be education from an early age to change male attitudes, and there must be provision of services—I am particularly concerned about the funding crisis facing the Rape Crisis Centre in Edinburgh. Today we are concentrating on protection. I welcome the soroptimists' report, but I do not support the view that there should be a separate charge of date rape, as the seriousness of that offence must not be diminished. If it is difficult to get a conviction, we should ask why. Why do so many women not come forward? Why is it that, although the number of reported rapes has gone up, the number of convictions has gone down? We should concentrate on the report, "Towards a Just Conclusion", which suggested many ways in which the treatment of rape victims in court could be improved. I will leave it to Johann Lamont, who has convened a group of members of the Equal Opportunities Committee, to talk in detail about the report. Why has nothing been done about the report in the past year? The rape crisis centres welcomed the report in principle, but thought that it did not go far enough. For example, they wanted more support for victims in court and the use of screens in court. The report should be debated and developed soon. I will conclude by picking up on something that Jim Wallace said during questions last week. Johann Lamont and I—and others, I am sure—were shocked that he used the red herring of the European Court of Human Rights in relation to the cross-examination of rape victims by the accused. That question was debated exhaustively in the House of Commons last year in connection with legislation in England. I invite ministers and other members to read the report of the House of Lords debate of 1 February 1999, in which all the expert lawyers in the House of Lords agreed that that is not an issue. Article 6.3 of the European convention on human rights talks about the right of someone to defend himself in person or through a legal  assistant—it does not have to be the person himself who conducts the defence. We should also remember articles 3 and 8, which talk about the right to protection from cruel and inhuman treatment and about unwarranted intrusion into private lives. That is the issue that is involved in the cross-examination of rape victims by the accused.

I had actually turned my light off because my question had been answered. However, I welcome what Henry McLeish said about investigating the matter of bursaries for Scottish students who go to English universities.

I welcome the introduction of domestic rather than matrimonial interdicts but ask the Minister for Justice to address in his white paper the financial barriers to obtaining such interdicts. I also ask him to explain what is wrong with the new procedures on the rights and responsibilities for unmarried fathers that he and I were involved in introducing only five years ago in the Children (Scotland) Act 1995.

I join other members in thanking the thousands of NHS staff who have worked well beyond the call of duty over the past few weeks. With reference to Kay Ullrich's question, I must say that while we will always want—and indeed need—more money for the national health service, the simple fact is that in the three-year period beginning with the establishment of the Parliament, there will be more growth in the NHS budget than at any time in recent history.

As one former housing minister following another former housing minister, I congratulate the present housing minister on raising the profile of Scottish housing as a key policy priority, and also on the many initiatives that she has started with her deputy, Jackie Baillie.  We are concentrating on the controversial areas of stock transfers and right to buy, but we should acknowledge the many housing policies that command widespread support across this chamber and across Scotland. First are the initiatives concerning anti-social behaviour by tenants. Everyone welcomes the new developments that have taken place on that issue. Secondly, with regard to the warm deal—notwithstanding some of the issues that were raised last night which I have not studied—we all acknowledge that the Executive is placing a new priority on dealing with the scourge of dampness, which was referred to in the opening speech. Thirdly, there is widespread support for the new money that was put into the rough sleepers initiative, which we had a debate about in November. I think that we all agree that those initiatives address the key policies and priorities in Scottish housing, which are to increase the quality and the quantity of affordable rented housing and to support people, as was recently flagged up in the evaluation of the rough sleepers initiative. The two controversial issues should be dealt with in relation to those priorities. The key question is, do those controversial initiatives make the achievement of our objectives more likely? We should consider stock transfers and right to buy in that context. I am not instinctively in favour of large-scale stock transfers, although I have for a long time supported smaller stock transfers. However, we must examine all the stock transfers, including the Glasgow ones, in terms of whether they will help to improve the quality of housing and eliminate cold, damp housing. The financial facts suggest that that is the case. There is no time to go into those in detail, but we must consider the borrowing consent and the fact that the amount of money that Glasgow was able to spend, on average, over the past two or three years was £30 million. Under the new arrangements, it will be £130 million a year, which is balanced out just by the public expenditure on the breakage costs of the debt and servicing the debt. There will be a lot more investment for the same amount of public money. We must face that fact. Members have made points about Treasury rules, but we have no control over those in this chamber. We must remember that there is a right to buy, but there is also a right to rent. There are rights for individuals, but there are also rights for communities. The housing green paper made that point. It stated: "The aim would be to strike a better balance between the aspirations of those tenants who would like to buy and the need to protect the interests of the community as a whole." At the very least, we should consider the issue of  local flexibility, so that local communities can make decisions about what is the correct balance.

There is a lot of controversy about what the consequences of this will be. Many members have seen the paper from the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations. It makes similar points to those made by Fiona Hyslop and questions the Executive's estimate of the present net value. There is a massive gap between their estimate and that of the Executive. This Parliament should not jump to conclusions on those issues and should take evidence to consider the conflicting arguments. The Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee is doing that at the moment in relation to stock transfer. I hope that that committee, and other members, will do so in relation to right to buy as well. I will repeat the point that I made in the equalities debate on 2 December, which is that one of the issues that last year's housing green paper failed to address was race equality and housing. It was widely said to be colour-blind. I hope that the Executive will address that issue. There is more harassment, more overcrowding and more homelessness among the black and ethnic minority community. I hope that the Executive will restore ring-fenced funding for those groups through Scottish Homes, will instruct Scottish Homes to set up the first black and ethnic minority-led housing association in Scotland and will put a representative from Positive Action in Housing on the new housing advisory forum.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the minister ensure that the education bill includes a presumption that all children with special needs will be taught within mainstream education?

As I have grappled with Scottish expenditure tables for most of the decade, I welcome this first ever debate on level 2 expenditure totals. I look forward to a more comprehensive process next year, in which all the committees will be involved, to the implementation of the minister's undertakings on real-terms spending, and to more disaggregation of figures where that is appropriate. I would like to add one note of caution: decisions on the two biggest lines in the budget—local authority revenue and hospital and community  health services—are, fundamentally, made at local level. That should be borne in mind when we talk about further disaggregation. Mr Wilson used a lot of figures in his speech today. I will address some of them. He talked about public expenditure as a percentage of gross domestic product, but he did not mention the extent of GDP—because we have a stronger economy and a much larger GDP than we did during the Tory years to which he referred. He talked about the final years of the Conservative Government, but he did not mention the unsustainable levels of borrowing during that period, which have to be dealt with. Mr Davidson spoke on the same theme and referred to the high point of Tory public expenditure in 1994-95. That was a freak year, if members consider the whole period of Conservative Governments. That level of expenditure was unsustainable without the economic problems being dealt with. The main point that Mr Wilson made—and repeated in his amendment—was about percentage increases in England as distinct from Scotland. I tried to deal with that issue at question time last week, which was perhaps unwise given that most members had their minds on another matter. If we start with a higher base, we will have lower percentage increases each year.

Mr Wilson was especially unwise to talk about health spending, given that health spending in Scotland is 20 per cent per head higher than it is in England. The point that Mr Wilson did not consider about the budget is that, over the three-year period of the comprehensive spending review, Scottish Parliament expenditure goes up by £856 million in real terms. Can Mr Wilson tell me of any three-year period in Scottish politics when that has happened? We should keep that fact in our minds. Mr Wilson was unwise enough to emphasise health. The real-terms increase in spending on health is £546 million over three years. Again, I defy Mr Wilson to find a three-year period in which there has been such an increase. It was especially inappropriate for Mr Davidson to talk about starvation of health funds in that context. In the papers today, Mr Wilson talks about the increase from this year to next. As I pointed out when I dropped in briefly to the Finance Committee yesterday, the reason for that is that there was a big in-year increase in health expenditure this year—an extra £140 million in  October. That reduces the percentage increase from this year to next. Over three years, the increase in spending on health is £546 million in real terms, or 11 per cent. That is unprecedented.

I have five seconds left, so I cannot give way. As usual, the SNP says—in the second part of its amendment—that fiscal autonomy would allow the Scottish Parliament to allocate the resources required for Scottish public services. I know that there is controversy about the details, but this week's "Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland 1997-1998" report makes it clear that the overall range for the Scottish fiscal deficit, including oil, falls somewhere between—this is where the argument arises—£5.25 billion and £2 billion. We also know the long-term trend in oil over the next 10 to 20 years will be falling production levels. I know that Mr Wilson is one of the few SNP people to have acknowledged a structural fiscal deficit, so perhaps that point can be addressed in the summing-up at the end of the debate.

I begin by congratulating the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on a superbly impressive report. In my years at Westminster, I have never seen such thorough and effective work on a bill before the first Parliament debate. We should all be proud of the Parliament's new procedures and the effective work being done by all its committees. I also congratulate the  Executive on introducing the bill. Most parts of the bill are universally welcome. I want to focus on its medical aspects. The bill addresses the current lack of clarity, which the Minister for Justice mentioned this morning. In some cases, the lack of clarity has resulted in no treatment being given. I am delighted by the amendment on research. I welcome the fact that artificial nutrition and hydration are to be taken out of the definition of medical treatment, resulting in a broad definition. That ought to deal with the serious concerns that have been raised by a range of organisations. I look forward to receiving their detailed responses to the amendment. We should no longer need to discuss euthanasia in connection with the bill, although many interesting questions about euthanasia were raised in evidence. We should deal with them on another occasion. During the evidence taking by the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and the Health and Community Care Committee, I was struck by the confusion about whether it is necessary to go to court to withdraw hydration and nutrition. As I said this morning, I must disagree with the Executive's significant change to the balance between medical opinion and that of a proxy. As there is now no issue surrounding hydration and nutrition, it is unnecessary to change section 47 as the Executive proposes. The change goes much further than was suggested even by medical opinion—neither the BMA nor my colleague, Richard Simpson, suggested it. We all received a briefing from Alzheimer Scotland, which made it clear that "any challenge should have to be made by the doctor". In other words, the decision should rest with the welfare attorney or guardian. Alzheimer Scotland goes on to discuss "inappropriately prescribed or over-prescribed neuroleptic drugs" and says that "when carers ask for medication to be reviewed they are often refused and their views disregarded." That situation will be made worse by what was proposed this morning. More serious opposition will come from campaigners for people with learning difficulties. Those who are currently tutors dative will lose the rights that they have. One person has approached me about the matter and I know that she will be very angry about the Executive's announcement. She was told 28 years ago by doctors that she should put her daughter into Gogarburn hospital. She has looked after her daughter all that time,  resisting certain epileptic drugs doctors have tried to give her because she knew what effect they would have on her daughter's stomach. What doctor knows better what is good for her daughter? We all know that medicine is not an exact science—it changes from year to year and even month to month. At stage 2, I will lodge an amendment to deal with that matter. Furthermore, the fact that electroconvulsive therapy can be given with a second medical opinion, against the wishes of a proxy, is another matter that is totally unacceptable.

Will the Minister for Finance provide the SNP with a maths teacher—Mr Canavan springs to mind—to explain to its members that if one starts with a higher base and gets the same expenditure boost as from a lower base, the higher base necessarily creates a lower percentage increase?

I welcome the change to section 44 and the deletion of the reference to nutrition and hydration by artificial means as a medical treatment. However, as that deals with the concerns that people had about the powers of welfare attorneys or guardians in section 47, why has the minister gone against the wishes of the alliance for promotion of the incapable adults bill and of Alzheimer Scotland in giving primary authority on treatment decisions to medical opinion rather than to the welfare attorney or guardian?

I welcome the minister's statement and merely seek clarification on targets. Is the initial 75 per cent reduction in landfill a hard-and-fast European target that must be delivered UK-wide? Where does Scotland stand in relation to that figure, which is for 1995 to 2006? Finally, how many recycling targets are there and are they  simply a matter for this Parliament rather than Europe?

Two minutes? Right—

I was disappointed that the Conservative party failed to understand the importance of positive action in trying to create a  level playing field where none exists. I was staggered to see the SNP failing to understand the many areas where the Parliament can take decisive action on inequality. I say to Fiona Hyslop that the debate is about race and inequality. The Executive motion says that "in developing policy and in service design and delivery concern for equality is at the heart of the matter." Many services could be mentioned. Best value, which is about service delivery, should have equality at its heart. Perhaps the key words in the motion are "in developing policy", as they show that, from the very start, the intention is to build in equal opportunities. That is called mainstreaming; talking about it is not the same as doing it, but an important start has been made. In many cases, it means transforming the main stream—in developing family-friendly employment, for example. That change in society will have revolutionary implications when it is properly implemented. Members of the Equal Opportunities Committee have already heard representations on the policies and bills that are before this Parliament. We were told by the Equal Opportunities Commission, for example, that there should be an explicit duty in the improvement in Scottish education bill to increase equality of opportunity, and that annual school development plans should contain equality measures. I am sure that the Executive will take those suggestions on board. There has also been some criticism of the housing green paper's being colour blind—although I accept that that paper was produced before this Parliament was established. I am sure that the Executive will listen to the concerns of organisations such as Positive Action in Housing and give them a place on the Scottish housing advisory panel. I hope also that the Executive will use its influence with Scottish Homes to persuade it to set up the first black and ethnic minority-led housing association in Scotland. I agree with what Kate MacLean said about public appointments. The Equal Opportunities Committee will be paying special attention to the issue of data, to ensure that all data are disaggregated in terms of gender, race and disability.

The background to all debates about pensioner poverty, or any kind of poverty, must be the stark fact that between 1979 and 1997 the proportion of people in Scotland who were living on less than 50 per cent of the mean GB income—which is the official definition of poverty—rose from 10 per cent to 26 per cent. That problem could never be addressed overnight. All members should welcome the fact that, last week, the Executive made an undertaking to reduce that figure over the next few years. That was a significant development. I agree with Alex Neil that pensioner groups want a restoration of the link between pensions  and earnings. What Alex Neil did not say is that pensioner groups and individual pensioners, whom we all meet every day in our constituencies, also welcome some of the changes that the Government has made. Such changes include the £100 fuel allowance; the fact that 300,000 Scottish pensioners will receive a free television licence next year; the extra £300 million for community care; the free eye tests; and, for the younger range of older people—and here, like Kay Ullrich, I must declare an interest—the new deal for the over-50s.

There are many pensioners—300,000 was the figure that I cited—who will benefit in Scotland. There is also the minimum income guarantee, which means that, since 1997, the lowest pension that someone can receive will by next April have risen by £15 for a single pensioner and by £20 for a couple. That said, there is a problem in means-testing pensioners. In the welfare reform debate, a balance must be struck between universal and targeted benefits. The problem is greater for pensioners than for families. The working families tax credit will work well, as it involves targeting and a taper. The fundamental problem in applying the same model to pensioners is that hundreds of thousands of pensioners throughout the United Kingdom do not claim income support. A further problem—one that we all encounter regularly in our constituencies—is that many pensioners live just above the income support level. I do not think that it is right to continue with pension increases of 75p, or thereabouts, for pensioners in that group. That is a challenge for the Government, as it recognises. The pension increase last year was combined with the £100 fuel allowance and the pension increase this year is combined with the free television licences. Many of the Executive's initiatives are welcome and within the power of this Parliament. The warm deal is one such initiative. Like many members, I visited a pensioners' home this week. The £37 million for the warm deal, over the next three years, will be welcomed. However, one of the people in the home brought to my attention the fact that, unless a pensioner is claiming income support, they do not receive that money, which excludes a lot of people. We must investigate the implementation of a taper for that provision. The minister mentioned many of the other initiatives that the Executive is implementing, particularly in relation to community care. There is the money that I have mentioned and the welcome  regulation. We debated the carers strategy last week, which is an important development. I also welcome what the minister said today about long-term care, although I hope that the Sutherland report will be implemented in full, as it proposes the right balance between universal and targeted benefits. Time is out, so I cannot go on to talk about transport and crime. However, the fact that I even mention those subjects illustrates the many areas over which this Parliament has control, which will benefit pensioners. I urge the Minister for Transport and the Environment—who was sitting near to me a minute ago—to investigate a national concessionary travel scheme for pensioners.

On a point of order. I suspect that when a member makes an intervention, their name is wiped off your screen. I think that members should be aware of that. It has happened to me.

There is nothing complacent about the Executive's motion, and I am sure that the Scottish National party amendment would have been accepted had it not implied that none of the funding is sustainable or long-term. What strikes me is how far we have moved since the election of the Labour Government in 1997. I am interested in child care; in 1993, I asked a question about it of John Major, the Conservative Prime Minister, at Prime Minister's question time. I asked whether the Government would assist financially the lone parents who required child care. He did not answer the question—which was not uncommon—so I wrote to him. I looked at his reply recently, and astoundingly he said that research indicated that low-income lone parents did not spend money on child care. For him, that was the end of the matter. I do not think, however, that it needed research to indicate that. We should remember that as recently as 1993—only six years ago—no financial support for child care was available for lone parents or for any other parents. Since 1997, there has been a massive advance in the importance of child care in political debate. The present Westminster Government is the first in United Kingdom history to state openly that child care is part of economic policy—it has thereby signified an end to the men-only economic policies of the past. Child care is also a fundamental aspect of equal opportunities policy. Perhaps most important, it is a fundamental part of policy on children. That is most clearly demonstrated in the fact that the new initiatives ensure care for the under-threes; I am sure that we will hear more details about that in the near future. All child care—for the under-threes, nursery places, after-school places and wrap-around care—is in the interests of the children as well as of the parents, and much research backs that up. The fundamental points of the strategy that have been emphasised are affordability, accessibility, quality and choice. There has been discussion  about affordability, and we must reiterate the importance of the child care tax credit. That is a new departure, although there were some belated starts towards it by the previous Government. It will ensure that a significant amount of money will go not only to people who formerly received family credit, but to others, as a result of the incomes scare. That is important for the sustainability of many new child care developments. Accessibility has been a problem in the past—the child care places were simply not there. No one is complacent and there are still problems, particularly on extended places for children under five. There have been important developments in wrap-around care, and we all know about the guaranteed places for four-year olds. There will also be a big expansion in after-school child care. Accessibility is being addressed. A paper on regulation has been taken on board, which is important for quality. Choice is also important—not only in regard to the choice of a child care place. An issue that is beginning to enter the debate is whether parents—women in particular—want to return to work after having a child. Last week's pre-budget report said that in future there will be provision for them for the first year. That will be done via an extension of the working families tax credit. Another principle is family-friendly employment. We need to develop a new combination of work and child care. I am not complacent, any more than the Executive is, and I have some concerns. No one is pretending that all the problems have been solved in the past two and a half years. Students cannot get the working families tax credit, and the access funds for further and higher education do not meet the full costs of child care. A constituent of mine, a lone parent in further education, has a big bill for child care that she cannot meet. I am also concerned that the wages and conditions of child care workers should be addressed. A study is being carried out by the Accounts Commission, to compare the conditions of local authority child care workers with those in the private sector. There are issues to be addressed that relate to working families tax credit and child care tax credit, although both schemes are praiseworthy. A withdrawal of housing benefit accompanies working families tax credit, although not child care tax credit. We have to keep an eye on charges, as they might rise as a result of working families tax credit. That will leave students and others who do not get working families tax credit in some difficulty. Edinburgh Sitters has found that, although it provides a valuable service, it cannot attract the working families tax credit. I have written to the  minister about that, and I am sure that I will receive a satisfactory reply soon.

Will the member give way?

Given that after-school clubs will be supported mainly by the child care tax credit element of the working families tax credit, how will the Conservatives' policy of abolishing that help to sustain them?

I welcome the tone of Nicola Sturgeon's speech and I thank her for visiting my constituency this morning. Does she realise that, as part of the national child care strategy, City of Edinburgh Council has guaranteed a wrap-around nursery place for all children by 2001? I am sure that that is only one example of that happening.  Does she recognise that start-up funding is one thing, but that the child care tax credit should sustain after-school places?

I welcome the involvement of the health department, which addresses one of the weaknesses of the rough sleepers initiative. Can the minister give us any more detail about how she will ensure the involvement of health services  at local level and what form that involvement may take?

I congratulate our superb Minister for Transport and the Environment on a superb statement, which is better than anything that I have imagined in the two years since I announced the strategic roads review. I commend the vision, which has balanced safety with environmental and other factors and which also sees the need for further multi-modal studies in the main transport corridors. I also commend the choices that she has made. Unfortunately, that word is not in Mr MacAskill's vocabulary.

Choice is the essence of what we have before us. That road is being progressed.  I commend the proposal to go ahead with work on the A1, which is essential for safety reasons. I also welcome the announcements on the A77, the bypass at Fochabers and the Mallaig road. Two years ago, I was pleased to travel along that road on a fish lorry, so that I could understand the problems at first hand.

I have only three minutes, and half of them are up. All three of the Ewings who represent the Highlands should be pleased. Unfortunately, Mr MacAskill is never pleased unless everything is delivered immediately. What we have had today from the SNP is not serious politics. I am not particularly surprised by that—as I said in my intervention, the SNP is unwilling to make choices, either on the general budget of this Parliament or on the roads budget. The Tories are not much better. They want most of the roads, but will not tell us how they would pay for them. The problem started because of the wish list that we inherited from them. They went round every part of Scotland saying, "The road is in the programme." The road was in the programme, but the money was not. That was one reason why we had to have a strategic roads review. The second reason was our new approach to transport policy, which is based on integration and which has a new emphasis on public transport. Public transport is important for everybody, but especially for the third of the Scottish population that does not have a car. The new emphasis has been demonstrated in many ways, not least by the £26 million announced last week for further public transport developments. It is in that area that the new multi-modal studies will be important. We already have a sophisticated methodology—it has been applied to this review—but it will now become even more sophisticated and will examine the comparative advantages of road and public transport developments. That is a tremendous step forward for transport policy in the United Kingdom and, indeed, throughout the world. As we know, public transport investment boosts the economy. That will be taken into account in the further studies. As my three minutes are up, I will end by saying well done to the Minister for Transport and the Environment.

Is it not the case that in the last three years of the previous Conservative Government, expenditure on roads fell by 37 per cent? Is it not also the case that—contrary to what Mr Tosh said—expenditure and maintenance will double between 1997 and 2002?

Is the SNP prepared to make any choices whatever about the Parliament's budget or its own roads budget? Does Mr MacAskill support every road in the review? If so, where on earth will he find the £900 million to pay for them?

I welcome the minister's announcement last week of the £2 million that  Scottish Homes is to spend on women's refuges. As the minister responsible for that area of policy, will she ensure that Scottish Homes, health boards and local authorities work together on the strategy on violence against women and make that strategy a priority?

Once again, one of the best and most important debates in the Parliament is taking place at the end of the day. The shocking figures about breast cancer have already been mentioned. However, the statistic that has made a deep impression on me is that more than twice as many women between 30 and 54 die from breast cancer as from any other single cause. When the Westminster all-party group on breast cancer was formed in 1994, we heard from many experts about the lottery of care; about the way in which fewer women developed breast cancer in this  country than in some other countries, but more of those women died from it; and about the fact that only a quarter of research money came from public funds. Since then, some progress has been made. We have a good opportunity today to make sure that the issue becomes a priority for the Scottish Parliament. I look forward to hearing from the Minister for Health and Community Care about on-going initiatives. It is obviously important that all women, wherever they live, get the best available care and that one-stop clinics should be developed, so that diagnoses are made as quickly as possible. I also hope that we can support the Breakthrough Breast Cancer campaign and aim towards every pound from charities for breast cancer research being matched by a pound from public funds.

Surely the fact is that there is a higher base now. The reality is that spending in Scotland is at a higher profile during that three-year period than it has been for decades.

rose—

rose—

Mr Wilson mentioned health. In real terms, he took the best of 18 Tory years when the figure was £4.2 billion. That figure will be over £5 billion at the end of the comprehensive spending review period. His point about percentage of GDP is invalid—because the economy is doing so well, it is the total figures on public expenditure that matter, not the percentages.

As a member of the EIS, I declare an interest and express some difficulties with the  COSLA offer. I am pleased that the Executive has distanced itself from it. I am concerned about the raising of the limit on the number in composite classes. I am also worried about the reduction from 16,000 promoted posts to 4,000 professional leaders. That leaves me wondering how secondary schools are going to work, and how many women are going to be in promoted posts.

I am glad that Nicola Sturgeon found my beginning positive. I will now turn to the SNP. The SNP motion reduces this matter to lack of resources. The SNP position would have some credibility if it had flagged up education as the one area in this Parliament that was to get extra resources, with the consequence that other areas would suffer. However, the motion today lacks credibility as the SNP calls for extra resources in every debate. It occurs to me that SNP members in this Parliament take a Trotskyist position over and over again. What we hear from them is transitional demands, asking for money across every range of policy that they know cannot be delivered. They must address that if their proposals are to be taken more seriously.

That takes me on to the Executive amendment. The Executive amendment refers to substantial extra resources for education. Without pre-empting decisions that Gordon Brown will make, I am confident that considerable extra resources will be allocated to this Parliament over the next few years, for health and education in particular, although it is up to this Parliament to decide what it spends its resources on. It is important—and it is acknowledged by the Executive amendment—that we take teachers with us in all those positive initiatives, which are partly to do with money but partly to do with extra places for nursery education and extra help in the primary school. However, I do not believe that the SJNC is the main issue for teachers, so I accept the proposal for an independent committee. I will make one final plea in relation to that committee. I agree with the STUC in its criticism of its composition. The independent committee would be more widely acceptable to this Parliament and  to the teaching profession if it had at least one trade unionist and, especially, one ordinary classroom teacher on it. The minister must recognise that the experience of ordinary classroom teachers is very different from that of head teachers. With that proviso, I am prepared to accept the Executive amendment.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is considering measures to improve concessionary travel schemes for pensioners. (S1O-346)

Does the minister agree that although a wise decision about next year's pension increase is reserved to Westminster, there are many areas, including public transport, in which this Parliament can advance the interests of pensioners? I welcome the fact that the minister has talked about integration and I urge the Executive to move as quickly as possible towards a national concessionary travel scheme for pensioners.

I support the Executive motion with its emphasis on community, and I regret the way in which the Tory amendment has resorted to a one-club policy of concentrating on the criminal justice system. As Johann Lamont said, we are dealing with a complex matter, and addressing the criminal justice system is certainly one of many policies that must be carried out. I do not think that the Executive is failing. Angus MacKay emphasised the strong measures that are being taken against drug dealers, and I am sure that every member of this Parliament fully supports the Executive's efforts. The reality, however, is that, no matter how tough we are, we will not solve the drugs problem with just one policy. I am sure that the Executive recognises that. Education is important in addressing the problem of drugs. In talking about drugs, we should widen the definition to include, for example, alcohol. I was struck by a speech that the deputy chief constable of Lothian and Borders police made last week, in which he pointed out that alcohol is a factor in 60 to 70 per cent of homicides, 75 per cent of stabbings and 50 per  cent of all crime. That problem is a great challenge for us. In addressing the education problem, we must look at evidence of what works. More generally, all crime policy must be based on evidence. Since 1997, the Labour Government has moved towards basing crime policy on evidence, and it should be congratulated on that achievement. The sort of practical measures to which Angus MacKay referred go some way to solving the problem. I welcome the £3 million that is being allocated to provide such practical measures as closed-circuit television. Again, people must look at the evidence, which suggests that, while CCTV may not be a panacea, it is effective. Other practical measures include better locks on houses and better street lighting. The jargon calls all that target hardening, and the evidence shows that those measures have a quantifiable effect on reducing crime. At the heart of the Executive motion is the prominence that is given to community safety partnerships. I welcome the one in Edinburgh and the local one in my constituency in the north of Edinburgh. It is important to involve local people in the solutions to problems. As Johann Lamont rightly said, it is local communities—and particularly the poorest people in those communities—that bear the brunt of crime. That is why we who represent those people are right to be tough on crime. We must not forget, however, the underlying relationship, emphasised by Angus MacKay, between crime and poverty. The whole development of social policy is crucially important in crime prevention. A simple measure such as providing more nursery education has been shown to have an effect on reducing crime. As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I would like to throw in two other dimensions. The first is the issue of crime and race. Next week, we shall be questioning Jim Wallace about the Macpherson report. We must all be committed to taking action to prevent the appalling crimes of racial harassment and racial violence that scar our society. I think that the Executive's response to the Macpherson report has been important, although some of us think that it should go further in some regards. The other issue about which the Equal Opportunities Committee is concerned is the question of crime and gender. To put it simply, men are far more involved in crime than women are. There is also a problem of male violence against women, and I welcome the work that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has done on that. I am sure that members will support developments that will enable all women to benefit  from interdict orders so that they will have protection from harassment by violent partners. The Equal Opportunities Committee wants to examine the whole development of the strategy to combat violence against women. Quite rightly, people in this Parliament have emphasised the importance of services and the importance of better funding for Women's Aid and for rape crisis centres. I and many others will demand that that issue be addressed in this year's spending round. We realise that we must deal with the causes of the problem. We must also emphasise the importance of preventing crime. The work of Zero Tolerance, for example, is fundamentally important. Next Thursday, the organisation will be holding a meeting here in Parliament about Respect, a new campaign developed to challenge the common attitudes that many men have towards women. I hope that many members will attend the presentation and will support the campaign. As I said during the debate on domestic violence that Maureen Macmillan introduced, I hope that Zero Tolerance will be fully involved in the development of the Scottish Executive's strategy to tackle violence against women, because there have been some problems with that in the past. I hope we all recognise the central importance of preventing crime. That is why this morning's debate is so important. Of course we have to address problems in the criminal justice system, but we must also look at the underlying causes of crime and deal with them.

I listened to Murray Tosh with disbelief. He criticised the fuel escalator. Who started it? He decried motorway tolling. Who introduced it? He bemoaned the crisis in roads funding. Who caused it? As Sarah Boyack said, there was a massive cut in the Scottish Office roads budget before 1997 and the Executive has tried to deal with the uncosted wish list that we inherited and to develop a clear set of priorities for road funding.

Leaving aside the Skye bridge, when the Tories were in power there was only a UK Government and tolls were introduced by it in England. I remember that there were wiser voices in the Conservative party. John MacGregor, as Secretary of State for Transport, said in 1994 that increases in fuel duty and motorway tolls would help people to make more informed choices about the cost of using their cars. I listened with a different kind of disbelief to Mr MacAskill. Setting aside the fact that the SNP has applied to join the European Federation of Green Parties, which supports a much steeper fuel escalator and many other charges on motorists, I was struck today, as on so many days, by the SNP's wish list of undeliverable spending promises. Before the public spending round later this year, the SNP really must learn not just to promise more money for transport, more money for education, more money for health, more money for everything, without any indication of how it is going to be provided. The Executive has made an excellent start with £90 million for public transport and initiatives such as quality partnerships for buses. The Parliament should take the opportunity offered by complete control of bus policy in Scotland, which is a very important lever. The Executive has also understood that no matter how much public money we are able to find, it will never be enough. That is why the issue of road user charging has arisen. I know that Mr McLetchie is going to say that we do not need it, that there are other pots of gold. He will tell us that if the City of Edinburgh Council sells Lothian Region Transport it will not need to introduce congestion charging. Lothian Region Transport provides money every year from its surpluses for public transport in Edinburgh and if it is sold off that will be very bad economics—once again the Tory ideology of selling off the family silver—and, in the long run, it will cost the people of Edinburgh more. I was pleased that the SNP at least acknowledged a role for congestion charging. The Executive has put forward that proposal, but I  emphasise that it will be up to local authorities to decide whether they want to do it. Already Glasgow City Council has indicated that it will not, but it may consider workplace charging. I felt, however, that Mr MacAskill caricatured the Executive's and David Begg's positions on motorway charging. As Sarah Boyack said, extensive research on diversion would be needed. David Begg has also said that he would support motorway charging if the money that it raised was used to develop public transport in the same traffic corridor. The Executive has a good story to tell on public transport. We should remember that a third of households in Scotland do not have a car. Promoting public transport is in the interests of the poorest and most excluded sections of society. It is good for pensioners—I hope that we will develop concessionary travel schemes—and for women, who are the main users of public transport. It is also good for reducing congestion in cities, which is in everyone's economic interest. The Executive should go on the offensive and sell the policy on public transport.

I was moved by Maureen Macmillan's speech, and I hope that from today the Parliament will make it a priority of its first year to develop a comprehensive strategy against violence against women. I was brought into this issue by the zero tolerance campaign, which started in this city, and which taught us about the three Ps, which have also been mentioned by others.  Prevention, through education, is important. The male attitudes that lead to domestic violence, rape, child sexual abuse and other male abuses of power must be challenged. I hope that the Scottish Executive will involve zero tolerance from now on.  Protection is also essential. That is why we need several legislative changes, such as allowing all women, rather than only married women, to get an interdict with power of arrest, and such as providing specific protective measures for rape victims in court.  Provision is the third P, and the one that has been highlighted most today. I hope that funding will be sorted out in this year's spending round for Women's Aid and for rape crisis centres, either by a specific central grant, or through ring-fenced local authority budgets.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it proposes to take in relation to funding the Scottish Civic Forum. (S1O-200)

Given that we have made radical commitments to involve outside people and bodies in the work of this Parliament, and given that the civic forum is a crucial umbrella organisation for that purpose, I welcome the fact that the minister is holding meetings with the forum's representatives. Can he confirm that no legislative action is required prior to funding the forum, and will he ensure that support is given to the forum as soon as possible?

If anybody outside-or indeed inside-the Parliament does not have time to read "Towards a Healthier Scotland", I suggest they look at the jigsaw on the front. That symbol embodies the new holistic approach to health, which sees that life circumstances issues such as housing, income, employment and the environment are just as relevant to health as traditional lifestyle issues such as diet and smoking, which are, of course, often related to the life circumstances issues.  If people have time to read only one word of the document, I suggest that they highlight the word inequalities, because that is the main theme of the document and it must be our main objective in health policy; we must address the scandalous inequalities of health in Scottish society, which are related to income.  I hope that when we do health impact assessments on all policy we will address in particular the effects of all policies on health inequalities. I also hope that, as this Parliament goes on, we will work out targets for reducing health inequalities, because there could be no  more fitting monument to the first session of this Parliament than the achievement of a significant reduction in health inequalities in Scotland.  I welcome Kay Ullrich's speech and the consensual approach that she adopted, but I very much disagree with Phil Gallie and Mary Scanlon. Health inequalities widened considerably under the previous Government; we can have debates-as Phil Gallie wanted-about the level of health expenditure, but that widening is the simple reality. The standard mortality ratio for someone in the poorest community in 1981 was 120 per cent of that of someone in the most affluent communities; by 1991 that had grown to 162 per cent.  Mortality is not the only indicator. Only last week, I read a report about mental health in Glasgow that showed clearly that there were far more mental health issues in deprived areas, showing that mental health, too, is related to poverty and life circumstances.

I have only two minutes left. I am sorry I cannot give way, but I look forward to discussing the issue in the Health and Community Care Committee and elsewhere.  I welcome the minister's emphasis on minus one to five-the years of life, including the period in the womb, when all the evidence shows that issues such as birth weight are so significant. It is really good that the Executive is emphasising that. That too is related, as the Acheson report in England reminded us, to levels of income. In terms of welfare reform, we have to consider the income of pregnant women as well as women in the early years of their children's lives.  Food is a good example of how income issues relate to the lifestyle issue of diet. I would like to expand on that, but time does not allow me to do so. I will just say that in my constituency there is an excellent food project called Barry Grub, which tries to provide healthy food at wholesale rates in the Pilton area. We should consider food co-operatives and initiatives so that the problems poor families have buying healthy food are addressed.  The emphasis on mental health in the white paper is also very important. If I may advertise my constituency again, I will mention that there is an excellent community mental health project in my constituency, called The Stress Centre. The Executive should support initiatives such as that, which address the higher levels of mental health problems in certain areas.  There are many initiatives on mental health. I was glad to see circulars from the Executive on post-natal depression and on domestic violence,  as both are closely related to mental health. I hope that the Healthy Respect project on teenage pregnancy will also consider how men and women relate to each other-they should certainly not do so with violence and inequality.  Time is almost up, but I have one final important point about the white paper. The issue is not just about addressing life circumstances and lifestyle; it is also about involving people at the grass roots in decisions about their health care. I am pleased that the proposals for the task force make that point. The task force will involve people from local communities, and that bottom-up approach is fundamental. It is practised in many community health projects, such as the one in my constituency.  I hope that, if there is any money floating around after the review, some small sums could be targeted towards community health projects as part of the social inclusion partnerships. Those projects involve local people in addressing those issues, which are a challenge to us all.

I welcome both the minister's statement and her robust defence of the socialist principle of property tax and of the democratic principle of decisions about local government finance being made here. In line with that, I hope that the McIntosh commission's recommendations will be seen not as set in stone, but as a useful starting point for the debate on the renewal of local democracy.  We should all record our thanks to the commission. Having been the local government minister in its gestation, I probably should not say that the commission was well chosen and had a well-defined double-pronged remit, but I will anyway. The first part of its remit has been brilliantly discharged in the assertion of the principle of power sharing and in the  recommendations of a covenant and a joint conference. Although the commission establishes subsidiarity as the fundamental principle, that does not mean that we should not give strategic direction to local government. More controversially, I believe that money should be ring-fenced for vital projects such as the carers strategy and the strategy against violence against women.  I feel some disappointment with the second part of the commission's remit about responding to people. I welcome the report's recommendations on community councils, as there are many excellent ones in my constituency. I also welcome the minister's statement that we need to go much further in involving local communities in local decisions. We have to start with the fundamental principle of a more responsive local government with a strengthened role for local councillors as representatives and champions of local people. All local groups-such as tenants groups, community groups and community councils-must be involved in that.  It is in the light of that fundamental principle that I hope that the debate about executives and PR systems will take place, because some of those systems make for less responsive local government. I hope that we will have a full and frank debate about that. If we are going to have an executive system there has to be, as the commission admits, a different kind of whipping system so that back-bench councillors can put forward the views of their communities. I am glad that the commission has recommended that and hope that the Executive will take it on board.  With more proportional systems we must preserve the link between a councillor and an area; a closed list PR system, for example, would result in far more power going to parties, with councillors becoming far less responsive to local communities.

I do not think that that is one of the commission's fundamental recommendations. However, I support it because I agree that it is important that people should focus on local government in local government elections. In the recent local government elections, people focused on the Scottish Parliament.  We should approach all the recommendations  with an open mind. The McIntosh commission has given us an excellent foundation. I hope that the Local Government Committee and this chamber will be able to have a full, frank and open debate about its recommendations so that we renew democracy at a local level, just as we intend to renew it at this national level.

The minister will know that Shelter and many others have welcomed new housing partnerships, but have expressed concerns about  the loss of homeless people's statutory rights under the new arrangements. When the Executive brings forward housing legislation, will it consider legislating in that area, or does it consider that contractual rights are adequate?

I welcome the fact that, for the first time, we will have a road programme that is based on an integrated transport policy rather than an uncosted and unaffordable wish list such as we had under the previous Government. Will the minister undertake to consider safety and environmental factors when making decisions about road developments?

Is not "Pathfinders to the Parliament" more honest in admitting that what is being proposed would count as public expenditure? The document talks about borrowing that is supported by an income stream, as is the case for the transport charges that are mentioned, which is quite unlike what happens for either the health or education services.

Clearly, this will be a dominant controversy in this Parliament, but I hope that it can also-perhaps somewhat improbably-be a defining issue of the new politics and one where we make the quantum leap of realising that both sides of the case have some merit.  There is concern about PFI. Tommy Sheridan did not reveal a state secret when he said that the Scottish Trades Union Congress was officially opposed to it. I know that many of my constituents are as well. The SNP, however-and Mr Gibson in particular, when he suggested that the Labour party was doing this for some ideological reason-overstated the case when it criticised the Labour party. The reality is that the Labour party is doing this for the practical reason of speeding up investment in public services. I know that the SNP has put forward an alternative, but that would fall foul of the public borrowing rules. That is a dilemma which the Labour party has had to address.  I think-and again some members may find this improbable-that there are grounds for consensus around the Labour amendment because of its use of the words "best value". This Parliament provides an excellent opportunity to scrutinise every proposed PFI or PPP deal.  There is massive controversy about whether those deals are better value than traditional funding in the long term. In each case the Government says that it has let a deal go ahead because it offers better value, but many economists and experts say that there is doubt about the public sector comparator. The existence of this Parliament makes scrutiny in great detail of those deals possible for the first time. On that basis, I am prepared to accept the Labour amendment.

There is clearly an issue about how affordable PFI is. Although it brings forward investment, there is a limit to the number of projects that can be undertaken because of the commitment to pay for them over 30 years. We cannot get into that area today, but many of the committees of this Parliament should examine it in great detail over the next few months.

I have only four minutes. I would like to take more interventions, but I must speed up and miss out things that I had intended to say.  Labour has always said that best value is about not only cost, but quality. Apart from the issue of whether PFI is cheaper in the long run-which I have doubts about-there is the issue of staffing. Concern has been expressed about the effect of PFI on unified staff, particularly in the health service.  I welcome Jack McConnell's announcement today on the conditions of NHS staff and, I presume, education staff in PPP projects. However, there is still concern about the loss of a unified NHS staff. The Select Committee on Health at Westminster examined the issue of NHS staffing and-while not opposing PFI in the health service in England-called for a moratorium on new NHS private finance initiatives until the effect on staff had been monitored. That had the support of the Labour majority on the committee. There is widespread concern about the work force issues and we must monitor them closely to assess the effect on staff morale and the details of staff conditions.  I am pleased that the pension arrangements have been modified at the new Royal Infirmary. That has been of great concern to many of my constituents who work in the health service. We must keep a close eye all along on the effect of PPP deals on the work force and conditions of service.  At the end of the day, along with staffing, the key issue is best value. How does paying over 30 years using this method compare with the traditional method of funding? This Parliament should address that key issue.  On condition that that debate and scrutiny take place, I am prepared to support the Labour amendment, although it is well known that I have serious reservations about PFI.

Do not clauses 32 and 33 of the Food Standards Bill make it perfectly clear that we can opt out at any point in the future, if we so wish? Mr Morgan's points are therefore not at all well founded.

Will the minister clarify the role of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee in relation to the draft bill? Will the committee be able to hear witnesses and give a view at the draft stage, as I expected, or will its role begin only once the bill is fully published?

I welcome all those bills, which are refreshingly radical and will command widespread public support. The only one that I am slightly unclear about is the finance bill. Will the First Minister give more detail on the scope of that legislation?

Two charges have been made against these orders, especially that on Short money, which is clearly the most controversial element. First, Mr Russell said that they ignore conventions. Secondly, Mr Russell and Mr McLetchie claimed that they are an affront to democracy. Mr Russell said that they undermine the democratic process and Mr McLetchie said that they suppress opposition. Those are serious charges. It is regrettable that such intemperate language has been used: the whole purpose of this Parliament was massively to increase democracy in Scotland. It is simply farcical to say that the party that took the legislation that established this Parliament through the House of Commons, the party that established the voting system to ensure fair voting, and the party that insisted on the great expansion of democracy through the committee system is now undermining democracy. Such a statement beggars belief-it is the opposite of what everybody in Scotland knows from their own eyes and from their own experience.

I think I can see what Mr Gallie is saying. It is the old debate that we had two weeks ago about a partnership between two parties in this Parliament. I shall repeat what I said then. The new voting system that we set up was always unlikely to give absolute power to one party, so a partnership was always likely.  I would also like to deal with convention. As is well known, I am in reactive mode when it comes to Westminster. I never want to stand here and defend what Westminster does, but the SNP has invited us to do so because it has made the charge that we have ignored convention in the allocation of Short money. It seems to me that that is not so.

After 1 July, this matter can be considered in different ways. A section 30 order is being laid, which will allow the Scottish Parliament to deal with assistance to Opposition parties, but we have to get the system up and running now. I am sure that the Opposition parties want this matter to be resolved immediately.  The Westminster system is based on an allocation of money that is based on the number of seats and the number of votes-parties receive so much money for seats and so much money for votes. In this Parliament, the additional members-the list members-reflect the number of votes each party got. Using the Westminster system, the SNP would get £75,000 for their seats and £68,000 for their votes, making a total of £143,000. The Government has proposed £175,000.  By a sleight of hand, the SNP is suggesting that, under the Westminster system, list members are the same as constituency members. In reality, the number of list members in this Parliament reflects the number of votes received-that is the whole point of the additional member system. Therefore, on the basis of the convention, the Opposition parties are getting substantially more than they would under the Westminster system.

That is not the issue we are debating. We are debating how money should be given to the Opposition parties at this moment. The system will change after 1 July and we will be able to discuss that then. We are discussing a particular order to get the system up and running. It is very important that we challenge the idea that this is an affront to democracy. I do not particularly want to defend the convention, but the opening charge made by Mike Russell was that convention was being ignored. That is simply not true. Regarding the position of the Liberal Democrats, I am sure that everyone knows that section 97(3) of the Scotland Act 1998 allows a coalition partner to receive Short money.  We should approve the orders, although we will  obviously have further discussions about this issue as that will become possible after 1 July. I agree with the article in yesterday's  The    Scotsman  that made the point that by elevating this issue we are doing the Parliament an enormous disservice, rather than getting ahead with the business it was set up to perform.

Three criticisms have been made of  the selection of ministers. They concern the number of ministers, their quality and matters relating to the coalition.  Mr McLetchie objected to the number of ministers. He would admit that the way in which for 100 years the Scottish Office has been run by five ministers has hardly been a model of good government. I have a limited personal experience of that; I assure members that covering the number of portfolios that Scottish Office ministers used to cover in the bad old days is not a recipe for good government. I commend the First Minister for addressing that problem and ensuring that government in Scotland can be conducted much more efficiently than it has been in the past.  The problem of quality on the Government benches has been the embarrassment of riches among the new members. I have found this Parliament a more competitive environment than Westminster when it comes to appointments, but that is a good sign. It indicates the very high quality of Labour members, who are the only ones for whom I will speak.  Another noted achievement, which should be celebrated today and on many other days, is that 50 per cent of our members are women. As far as I know, we are the only substantial group in any parliament in the world of which that is so. We should continually receive praise from the people of Scotland for that achievement, which I hope all the other parties will emulate.  That achievement has resulted in the appointment to the Cabinet of three remarkable women. As two of them are my neighbouring MSPs, members will forgive me for mentioning them. Sarah Boyack was born to be Minister for Transport and the Environment. Combining those two portfolios for the first time represents an imaginative realignment in the Scottish Office.  Susan Deacon has a key appointment as Minister for Health and Community Care. Since the Government was elected in 1997, it has taken a broad view of health policy, which will lead to an attack on health inequality in particular. Susan is clearly the ideal person to drive health policy forward.  Lest I forget, the third woman is Wendy Alexander, who worked with me on the matters that she covers in the Scottish Office. I can vouch for her great expertise in those areas.  I perhaps gave those three women the political kiss of death when I said in the Edinburgh Evening News that one of them would be the next First Minister, but no doubt we will see in time.  The third criticism of the selection of ministers relates to the coalition. What we are trying to achieve in this Parliament is a different way of  doing things-those of us who have come from Westminster will be aware of that. We should ask ourselves at all times whether we are doing things differently.  The fact that parties will have different relationships to one another is a key plank of the new politics. Given that we had a voting system that was unlikely to deliver an overall majority, I fail to see how anyone can complain about the fact that two parties are working together in a new way.  That does not mean that the Labour party will not work differently with other parties as well. I hope that Labour will have a new working relationship with the Tories and with the SNP, although, because of past enmities, that will be difficult to achieve. There will always be a fundamental divide between Labour and the SNP on the constitutional question, but I hope that, in substantive policy areas such as health and housing, we can work in a way that is unlike the Westminster style.  Parties working differently together is not the only point of the new politics. I have two other points to make.

I am sorry; I was not aware of the time factor.  Committees will be fundamental to the Parliament, as will be the involvement of the wider public. Not having time to go into those points in more detail, I will just say that the way in which we are approaching tuition fees seems to be a good example of the new politics working. We will involve people from outside and we will have a comprehensive debate in the chamber. That is a more sophisticated view of politics than the simplistic approach of individual party manifestos.