Thank you, Presiding Officer—my device is charging as I speak. I remind members that we live in a time when the international drug market is changing profoundly. I think that all members are aware that a huge variety of substances is now available. A growing number of them are not classified in the drugs legislation, so responding to them is problematic. It is understandable that most of us are increasingly concerned about the growing availability of substances that are sold as legal highs. We are discouraging the use of that term, because—unfortunately—it leads people to assume that they must be safe, when they are not. That is why the motion uses the term “new psychoactive substances”; we could also call them new drugs. The new drugs are designed to produce similar effects to illegal drugs, such as ecstasy, but they fall outside the control of the United Kingdom Government’s Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. They are often labelled and sold as plant food or bath salts, or marked as not fit for human consumption. Those are all tactics used by sellers to avoid the law. The substances are easily accessible. They can be bought online and on our high streets in so-called head shops. A survey by DrugScope found that the substances are also sold at petrol stations and in takeaways and newsagents. As new drugs, their health effects are completely unknown. We know that they can be harmful and that there are reports of people being admitted to hospital and sometimes—tragically—dying after taking them. To put it simply, whether or not a substance is controlled, it is impossible to know its content. Dangers are associated with every drug. We have seen the events last weekend in Glasgow and Ayrshire. The police investigation continues and it would probably be inappropriate for us to discuss those events. I am sure that everybody agrees that our thoughts are with the families who have been affected. I will put the new drugs into context as we consider the implications for policy and practice. The most commonly used drug in Scotland is still cannabis. There is a legacy of problem opiate use that stretches back decades, with which we are all—sadly—familiar. Responding to the new drugs, like any other drug, will be an integral part of the overall drugs strategy in “The Road to Recovery”. The strategy is underpinned by a holistic and person-centred approach to treating drug use, regardless of the substances involved. Until now, most of the emphasis has been on opiate use, but we must remember that the strategy covers a great deal more than that. Members who attended the drugs debate in November will be pleased to hear that my summary of the Government’s achievements will be swift. The rate of drug use among the general adult population has fallen since 2006 and drug use among young people is at its lowest level since 2002. Some of the battles are beginning to be won. We have dramatically reduced waiting times for drug treatment and maintained record investment in front-line drug services and support. We have moved into the third phase of delivering the strategy, which involves driving forward improvements in quality across drug services in Scotland. However, we cannot be complacent. We need to be mindful that different drugs bring different and new challenges. Evidence from the United Nations and the European Union highlights the increased availability of the new drugs internationally. In 2012, the EU’s early warning system identified 73 new drugs—a number that has risen steadily over recent years. The new drugs present a constantly evolving challenge, not just because of the apparent ease with which they can be produced and subsequently tweaked, but because of their ease of supply and sale online. Technological advances in global communications have created an unregulated and open online marketplace for drugs. According to the EU, the number of online shops is growing, with 693 identified across Europe in 2012—the number will be much higher now—and I am aware that some members have experienced the problem in their constituencies. Across the world, Governments are grappling with the new challenge. Global problems need global solutions, and new psychoactive substances are increasingly on the agenda of international institutions such as the UN. Although the control of drugs is a reserved issue, the challenges from the new substances are a concern to the Government. Last year, I hosted a national event at which I invited experts from enforcement, health, education, research and the third sector to share information and experiences of how the new substances are affecting Scotland. I was reassured to hear of the considerable knowledge that is available on new psychoactive substances and the valuable work that is already being undertaken across the country. It is clear that no sector can tackle the problem alone and that a collective and co-ordinated response is required. Last year’s event was the first step towards further action. Informed by those discussions, we have taken action in four areas: tackling supply, preventing demand, enabling our workforce to respond, and understanding the scale of the issue. I will deal first with tackling supply. Aside from the UK Government’s temporary banning order and the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, there is no bespoke legislation available in Scotland to address the supply of new psychoactive substances. Police Scotland has been working with trading standards to explore the powers that are available under civil and criminal law, such as reckless conduct and trading standards powers to seize and test substances and take action against their sale. We have been working with Police Scotland to review enforcement activity and will continue to explore the range of devolved powers that may be available to tackle the sale of new psychoactive substances, which would include planning and licensing powers. I welcome the Home Office’s announcement in December of a review of the legislative powers that are available to address the supply of the drugs. I have been asked to contribute to the review and will host a workshop for experts in enforcement from the police, trading standards and local government to inform Scotland’s response. I turn to preventing demand. It is essential that we prevent drug use in the first place or stop its escalation through the timely provision of advice on drugs and their risks to all those who need it. That includes addressing the dangers of polydrug use, which increases the risks even more. Substance misuse education in schools is delivered through the health and wellbeing strand of the curriculum for excellence. Our know the score helpline and website offer free confidential advice on drugs, including new psychoactive substances. The website was refreshed in December to make it more user friendly and accessible by mobile phone. We will produce new leaflets and posters on new psychoactive substances for know the score to support services and to raise awareness of the dangers of the drugs. Starting tomorrow, we will also run Facebook adverts to raise awareness of the dangers of the drugs and to get people to visit the know the score website to get information. Together with partners, we are providing teachers with resources to respond to the new drugs. Police Scotland receives funding from the Scottish Government to deliver choices for life, a substance misuse education programme for schoolchildren. In 2013, educational resources on the new drugs were developed for high-school children. This year, Crew is developing national educational resources for teachers and youth workers on new psychoactive substances and other stimulant drugs. A range of education work is already taking place. Responding to any new drug and offering support that is person centred is the approach that underpins our whole drugs strategy. We are, therefore, investing in the development of the workforce to prepare them for the challenges ahead. To develop the capacity of drug and youth workers, since 2010 we have funded Crew to provide training and information on new drug trends to Scotland’s 30 alcohol and drug partnerships, as well as drugs services and other services. The Scottish Drugs Forum has been commissioned to develop the capacity and quality of interventions around new psychoactive substances and stimulants in, for example, housing and employment services for young people. Last September, I was pleased to open the joint Scottish Drugs Forum and Crew conference on new drug trends in Scotland. I hope that members took time to read the information that the SDF and Crew provided for today’s debate. The constant challenge of new substances affects the figures that we report. As a direct result of discussions at the event that I hosted last year, we have refreshed our data collection tools to help improve the information on new psychoactive substances, which will help us to further understand their prevalence and impact. The way in which we collect data on new drugs has also been considered in the consultation for the new integrated information system for drug and alcohol treatment and outcomes, which is led by the national health service’s Information Services Division. In August, the annual drug deaths statistics, which are published by the National Records of Scotland, reported for the first time on drug deaths where new psychoactive substances were found in the body. The figures showed that, in 2012, new psychoactive substances were present in 47 drug deaths. In 32 of those cases, pathologists judged that such substances were directly implicated, and in five cases they were the only substances that were implicated. In the coming months, the next annual report from Scotland’s drug-related deaths database will provide analysis of the circumstances around deaths involving new psychoactive substances to identify risk factors and inform policy and practice. We have made changes to the 2013 Scottish schools adolescent lifestyle and substance use survey, or SALSUS, which gathers information from schoolchildren on alcohol, drugs and tobacco, as well as to the next sweep of the Scottish crime and justice survey. National data is supplemented by organisations in the third sector, which collect data on drug trends that are observed by services and at music festivals. To strengthen all that work further, I will commission research on the prevalence and use of new psychoactive substances in Scotland.

I will advise the member separately on precisely when the fieldwork will be done. I think that the survey is done biannually, so probably the fieldwork is on-going for a period. I will get back to the member on that. It is clear that new drugs are a challenge not just for Scotland but for the United Kingdom and internationally. The Scottish Government continues to work with the UK Government and other Administrations to gather and share information and to ensure that Scottish interests are represented in reserved matters. The Scottish Government regularly cascades requests for information from the Home Office’s drugs early warning system to ADPs and drug services in Scotland. In June 2013, the Home Office temporarily banned NBOMe and Benzofury type substances. Members would find it hair-raising to google those substances and have a look at how they are sold. The Home Office thanked health and enforcement partners in Scotland for their contributions to the drugs early warning system, as their expertise helped those drugs to be banned. We must look outwards and monitor the approaches that are taken elsewhere to new psychoactive substances. Three types of responses have emerged internationally. Some countries use consumer safety or medicines legislation, some have extended and adapted existing drug control laws and others have created bespoke legislation to tackle new psychoactive substances. No country has yet found a solution. New Zealand got some attention for its product licensing approach, but it is far too early to know whether that will be successful. I close by restating the need for us all to work together to address the challenges that are presented by changing drug trends. The health implications of new psychoactive substances can be just as serious as those of controlled drugs, so we must challenge the myth that legal equals safe. I wanted to have this debate to ensure that new drugs are placed firmly on the parliamentary agenda. I hope that we will have an informed and productive conversation on the challenges of new psychoactive substances and on how Scotland can best respond. I look forward to hearing members’ views. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges that drug markets are changing internationally with the increased global availability of new psychoactive substances (NPS); recognises the challenges that NPS pose to Scotland in the areas of enforcement, public health, prevention and research, challenges that are common to other parts of the UK and internationally, and endorses a collective and co-ordinated approach to responding to NPS in Scotland by all organisations and individuals that have a role to play addressing the supply of these substances through enforcement activity, reducing the demand in their use through prevention, ensuring that services are able to respond and looking at what can be learned from approaches from across the UK and elsewhere.

I thank members for their valuable contributions this afternoon, which have highlighted the complexity of the issue. Among us we have covered every potential upside and downside of various suggestions. It is useful, though, that we recognise that not all suggestions are without pitfalls. It is clear that the challenges that Scotland faces from the new drugs are common to other parts of the UK and internationally. If we are to tackle the issue, no one sector can do it alone and no one country can do it alone. Throughout Scotland, through different initiatives and organisations, a lot of work is taking place to respond to the supply and use of these new drugs. Again, as a country we cannot do that alone. Following the national event that I hosted last April, I made the new drugs a priority for Scotland’s alcohol and drug partnerships. I asked ADPs to report on any local needs assessments of the impact of new psychoactive substances on local populations, and their responses. It is encouraging that ADPs are delivering local training events to raise awareness among the public and workforce, and gathering data to help inform the development and delivery of local strategies to address the use of the new drugs. It is also reassuring that local drug trend monitoring groups, comprising representatives from the statutory and third sectors, have been established throughout Scotland, from the Borders and Grampian to greater Glasgow and Clyde. Those networks are vital in sharing information on new drug trends and co-ordinating local responses, including disseminating health alerts and facilitating training. I hope that that good work can continue. I was delighted to see that two projects—mid-Galloway youth productions’ film “Legal Highs—Don’t Do It!”, and the new drug trend awareness programme in the Scottish Borders—were shortlisted for safer communities awards in 2013. Both projects raise awareness of the dangers of new psychoactive substances, with the Borders project winning the prevention and problem solving category. I know that all members would wish to join me in congratulating them on that. As I mentioned in my opening remarks, in November, the Parliament discussed the Government’s response to the independent expert review on opioid replacement therapies, including the development of an alcohol and drug quality improvement framework, the principles of which are equally important for those affected by the new drugs. Claire Baker mentioned visiting an organisation in Kirkcaldy. Yesterday morning, I, too, was in Kirkcaldy, not to visit the same organisation but to visit FIRST—Fife Intensive Rehabilitation & Substance Misuse Team—which provides drug support services in Fife. FIRST told me that people were beginning to present with issues related to the use of the new drugs. It made a strong comment that the use of the drugs is in no way confined to teenagers. One of the difficulties about this debate is that we fall back into the easy assumption that we are talking about an age group, that is, teenagers. We need to remind ourselves that that is not necessarily the case. It is therefore vital that we help the workforce to respond and that we ensure that measures are in place to know when progress in someone’s recovery journey is being made. I thank Mary Scanlon for reminding us of the huge challenge that this issue is for the NHS. Indeed, clinicians on last year’s working group discussed the issues that confront them when somebody turns up at A and E and they have absolutely no idea what has been taken and no likelihood of knowing it before they have to help deal with the issue there and then. Mary Scanlon has rightly reminded members that if somebody in their 50s or 60s is admitted to A and E, it would probably never occur to anybody at that stage that it might be related to the new drugs. I reassure Elaine Murray—as I should have at the start—that I am happy to accept the Labour amendment. I had forgotten that she has a very pertinent professional expertise to bring to the debate. She may have lost one or two of us during her remarks, but nevertheless it is helpful to be reminded that members in the chamber have a lot of expertise. A number of members, including Alex Johnstone, Graeme Dey and Alison McInnes, mentioned the head shops in Arbroath and Montrose and Sandra White flagged up the shops in her constituency, emphasising the in-your-face reality on the high street. More than one member will have grimaced at the idea of loyalty cards and BOGOF offers in that particular market. Many members mentioned education. As well as the enforcement summit that we will hold, I have outlined the various initiatives that we are promoting to bolster the ability of know the score to help support services and raise public awareness of the dangers of such drugs across Scotland. Of course, the recourse to Facebook is to get information on to a very widely used forum. As with everything pertaining to online activity, there is an upside as well as a downside, as Kezia Dugdale reminded us. That also applies to testing, which will be part of our considerations, including investigating the Welsh initiative. However, testing is a challenge when the product itself is constantly changing, so there is never a simple, straightforward answer. In response to Kezia Dugdale’s earlier question, I can say that the survey fieldwork for SALSUS started in August. It will be finished at the end of this month and it will be reported on in autumn, so she will be able to look out for that. Graeme Pearson made an interesting suggestion about the potential involvement of revenue and customs officers, which I will take on board, as well as Alison McInnes’ suggestion about guidance for trading standards officers. Willie Coffey, Kezia Dugdale and Mark McDonald emphasised the internet traffic—we all know how difficult the internet is to control. I reassure members that everything, including use of the licensing powers, will be explored. Claire Baker raised the issue of available data. I assure her that we have made significant improvements to our data collection tools. I have also commissioned research to understand more fully the prevalence and use of those new drugs in Scotland. That research will inform future policy and practice on the issue. I will also be asking our nationally commissioned drugs organisations—the Scottish Drugs Forum, the Scottish Recovery Consortium and Scottish Families Affected by Alcohol and Drugs—to further support and contribute to our response on new psychoactive substances in 2014-15. The issue of those new drugs will also be raised as a challenge to our independent expert stakeholder groups, including the Drugs Strategy Delivery Commission, the national delivery group and the national forum on drug-related deaths. We all have a responsibility to work together to respond to the huge challenges that new drug trends bring to Scotland; it will only be by working together that we can address the supply and use of new psychoactive substances in our country. This afternoon’s debate was an example of how the Parliament can constructively bring to bear its collective understanding and knowledge on an issue on which—as we all recognise—there are no easy answers. A number of members made constructive suggestions, and I reassure each and every one of them that those suggestions will be examined incredibly carefully. I hope to be able to get back to individual members on any specific issues that arise from the points that they have raised. I hope that other members in the chamber will feel, as I do, that today’s debate has been an extraordinarily useful two hours. I hope that when we next return to the chamber to discuss the issue, although that may not be very soon, we will all feel that this debate has been a stage along the way in our progress. Presiding Officer, I wonder whether you really need the extra 15 seconds, and whether or not you wish me to sit down.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer—I hope that the Presiding Officers have enjoyed the debate too. [Applause.]

Scottish Government officials regularly meet UK Government officials to discuss international parental child abduction. They last met on 23 October 2013 and expect to meet again in April 2014.

I cannot discuss the specifics of any case. We have suggested to the UK Government that it might be helpful to issue a practice direction in England and Wales on potential Scottish jurisdiction in cross-UK border cases. That has not been issued yet. Any decision to do so is a matter entirely for the authorities in England and Wales, but I will draw Nigel Don’s specific point to the attention of the UK Government. Cases in which parents are involved in disputes about their children are often difficult and frequently are high profile, for obvious reasons. There is provision in legislation that extends across the UK on matters such as mutual recognition, enforcement of judgments and jurisdiction of the courts in parental responsibility proceedings. After independence, we would need to discuss with the UK Government what further provision might be needed on cross-border cases that involve children, taking into account our European Union and international obligations. In all such cases the welfare of the child would have to be paramount.

The Scottish Government has regular meetings with the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service. My next such meeting with the SFRS chair happens to be tomorrow.

When I meet the chair of the SFRS, our conversation typically encompasses all current issues before the SFRS for consideration. Sarah Boyack may be aware that the next board meeting, which is on 30 January, is the meeting at which a final decision will be made on control rooms. The only fixed position at the moment is that a decision has been made to maintain and continue with the Johnstone control room. The remainder of the control rooms scenario means that Edinburgh is being considered along with Aberdeen, Inverness and Dundee control rooms. The board will make the final decision, but it will be made taking into account all important considerations, which will no doubt include those that have been raised by Sarah Boyack.

There is little that I can add to what I have said. I reassure members that all those things will be taken into consideration by the board when it makes its final determination. The decision will be arrived at carefully, thoughtfully and with due care and regard to the principle of the safety of the public.

This debate has been short but no less important for that, and I am grateful to Annabel Goldie for highlighting the excellent work being done by the throughcare support officers at HMP Greenock and, of course, to Jackson Carlaw for stepping in at the last minute to lead this members’ business debate. Given that Mr Carlaw spoke in the previous debate, he has certainly earned his money today. Nevertheless, I hope that he transmits my best wishes for Annabel Goldie’s speedy recovery. As Mary Fee has reminded the chamber, we debated this very issue last year, when members welcomed the then £70,000 investment announced by the Scottish Prison Service to pilot this new approach. Eight months on, I am pleased to announce that the investment has increased to £90,000 and that the new approach is making a real difference to the reintegration needs of the 34 offenders who have successfully completed the programme so far. Of course, it is essential that we evaluate new approaches and gain an understanding of the lessons learned. An interim evaluation of the Greenock pilot has been carried out by the University of Edinburgh, but the report was received only on 8 January and time will be needed to consider and reflect on it. I can say, though, that its overall tenor is positive and that it will be used to inform the pilot’s progress and to influence next steps. The person-centred approach to rehabilitation and reintegration reflects the Scottish Prison Service’s new vision of “Helping to build a safer Scotland—Unlocking Potential—Transforming Lives”, which was launched in November 2013 by the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, Colin McConnell. That new vision recognises that the existence of a supportive and trusting relationship between officer and individual can support an individual to stay away from crime and ensure continuity of support between custody and community. Both Jackson Carlaw and Annabel Goldie recognise that. There is no one-size-fits-all approach to reducing reoffending, and the Government is committed to testing approaches that meet the needs of short-term offenders through our reducing reoffending programme. That can be seen in our programme of work with partners to support offenders on liberation from prison. In April last year, we launched the £10 million reducing reoffending change fund. Like the throughcare support programme at Greenock, the change fund recognises that offenders who are leaving custody very often need support, so the fund has established two national and four specialist mentoring projects across Scotland. HMP Greenock is also taking part in the wider community reintegration project, which involves a partnership between the Scottish Government, the Scottish Prison Service and the Scottish Court Service. As well as HMP Greenock, the project works with certain short-term prisoners in Cornton Vale, Edinburgh and Perth prisons. It is examining an improved throughcare case management system and trialling enhanced support for the prisoners in both custody and the community. Both approaches are making a difference. I remind members that I am, of course, the drugs minister. I want to say a little about that specific aspect. We know that more than two thirds of prisoners admit to drug use before they arrived in prison. To address that, the Scottish Prison Service’s drugs misuse strategy sets out a joint approach that involves improved security measures to prevent illicit drugs from getting into prisons in the first place sitting alongside a person-centred, therapeutic approach to reducing harm and risk, and providing fast and effective treatment and support. Local alcohol and drug partnerships, as strategic leads, are responsible for commissioning appropriate recovery-focused services to ensure continuity of care for individuals between prison and the community. That is another component of the desire to follow a prisoner outside the prison walls and into the community. A positive example of that approach is the national naloxone programme. In recognition of the increased risk of an illicit drug overdose in the first three months following liberation from custody, we are working with the SPS to deliver the provision of take-home naloxone at the point of release in all Scottish prisons. Improved linkages between prisons and community agencies will require significant cultural change across public services and society as a whole, and that has to happen now. Jackson Carlaw recognised that, but he went on to extol the virtues of what is happening south of the border. Perhaps I should gently point out to him that, as recently as 9 January, when she was stepping down, Her Majesty’s inspector of probation, Liz Calderbank, said about the situation in England and Wales that “the same problems remain” and that “The current offender management model is not working, and neither will the new rehabilitation programme”. Therefore, the approach south of the border is not without its critics. It was for a general reason and to help to embed the change across the wider public sector that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice established a ministerial group on offender reintegration. I and six other ministers sit on that group. Stuart McMillan’s raising the issue of housing need in that client group and Anne McTaggart’s discussing her experience with offender education reminded us of how just wide-ranging the responses have to be. The group will drive through changes that will enhance the way in which our communities respond to the needs of offenders to boost their chances of succeeding in reintegrating and rehabilitating themselves, and it acknowledges that that requires to be done across a number of portfolios. I am sure that members will agree that that vital work cannot be the sole responsibility of criminal justice services. I think that Jackson Carlaw raised the issue of employers, as well. The Government will continue to ask everybody in the public and voluntary sectors and wider society to look carefully at what they could do to respond to the wide-ranging needs of offenders. We need to ensure that the right support is available when an individual decides to go straight, repay their debts to society, and make a new and better life for themselves. Hanzala Malik used an important phrase when he said that we have to treat prisoners “as human beings”. That is important, because some rhetoric suggests that that is often forgotten. Let me close by again commending the continued work of HMP Greenock in testing the new approach and thanking Annabel Goldie for again bringing the matter to the attention of Parliament. Meeting closed at 17:35.

I welcome all the speeches that have been made and I congratulate Paul Martin on bringing this debate to the Parliament. We discuss the issue today against the background of recent and continuing reports of dog attacks, including the particular cases that Paul Martin mentioned. It is useful to remind the Parliament that both civil and criminal law can apply in respect of a dog’s behaviour, and that the basis and the standard of proof for each is different. I turn first to the civil law. The Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010 gave local authorities new powers to help to promote responsible dog ownership. Where a dog is considered to be out of control, a local authority can issue a dog control notice on its owner. Christine Grahame was right to remind us that the 2010 act is preventative, as a dog attack does not need to have happened before a dog control notice can be issued. It is important to remind ourselves of that. A number of conditions can be imposed through a dog control notice if it is decided that that is required. As well as a mandatory requirement to have a dog microchipped, other conditions may include having the dog muzzled while in public and the owner having to undergo training in the control of their dog.

The member is absolutely right about that, but I remind her that the 2010 act aims to empower local authorities to be able to do a lot of this work. I will come back to that later. The aim of the 2010 act is for steps to be taken by dog owners before an out-of-control dog becomes a dangerous dog and someone is attacked. In civil law, cases require to be proved on a balance-of-probability basis. Between February 2011 and February 2013—the first two years of operation of the 2010 act—local authorities carried out approximately 3,200 investigations into potentially out-of-control dogs, as a result of which 240 notices were issued. However, as some members noted, there are large variations in how local authorities are using the legislation. In Edinburgh, for example, 164 investigations were carried out between February 2012 and February 2013, but in the same period Glasgow City Council conducted only five investigations. As an exemplar, I note that Aberdeen City Council conducted 317 investigations. It is difficult to understand why the variations have occurred and I think that a little bit of work needs to be done in respect of that, because these are important powers for local authorities and we are clear that they should be using them to help to control dogs in their communities. I remind members that there is no need to wait for an actual attack, as the provisions can be brought into play before that happens. Alongside the new 2010 act, we have long-standing criminal laws to deal with dangerous dogs under the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991, which provides for prison sentences. Under existing criminal law, however, a dog owner can be held criminally liable for their dog only if they had a reasonable apprehension that their dog would behave in a dangerously out of control way. That issue has come to the fore as a result of the Dundee case. The Government is determined to ensure that our approach to dog control keeps our communities safe, and I assure members that we will look at whether our criminal laws should be changed to keep them more in line with how the civil dog control notice regime works. Such a change would have the effect that no prior knowledge by the owner about the likelihood of a dog’s aggressive behaviour would be needed before a conviction could be obtained. There would be controversy about that, so it would have to be considered carefully. The criminal standard of proof required is that the case be beyond reasonable doubt, which is a different standard of proof. Consolidation, as suggested by Christine Grahame, would therefore be even more complicated than such exercises usually are, given that we are dealing with both criminal and civil law. I have a caution on the listing of breeds. I understand why people raised that, but the only time that I have been bitten by a dog—when I was bitten on the face as a small child—a dachshund did it. I am pretty sure that a dachshund would never be listed, so we have to be careful when we talk about breed listing. Just after Christmas, the Scottish Government launched a consultation to seek views on what new measures may be needed to deal with both the public safety and dog welfare problems associated with irresponsible ownership. Our consultation seeks views on a number of measures that may help to promote responsible dog ownership, although that does not exclude the suggestion, discussion and consideration of other issues. We have raised the mandatory microchipping of all dogs. Personally, I have to say that it is hard to argue against the mandatory microchipping of dogs in the circumstances. We know that some dogs are still unfortunately mistreated and that where their welfare has been compromised, that can sometimes lead to dogs lashing out, which Patricia Ferguson was right to point out. Compulsory microchipping could reinforce the responsibility an owner should have for their dog’s wellbeing. We want to talk to people about the practicality and effectiveness of the widespread microchipping of all dogs. In addition, we are raising the issue of dog licensing. The reintroduction of dog licensing would have to be done differently to how it was before, because it was ineffective before. It could be done in conjunction with mandatory microchipping—the two are not mutually exclusive—and those two things together probably would promote responsible dog ownership.

I need to press on, if the member will allow me. There has to be some question of criteria for ownership. If we are going to reintroduce dog licensing we would need to understand that potential owners are suitable. We have raised the issue of compulsory muzzling and I hear the views in the chamber. I think that that could be the most controversial aspect of the consultation. The consultation runs until the end of March and I urge people with an interest to offer their views. In March we will hold a summit, bringing together key interests such as local authorities, the police, victims groups, a wide variety of organisations and others to discuss what more can be done to promote responsible dog ownership. As a number of people have said, we have to remind ourselves that the vast majority of dog owners and dogs in Scotland are well-behaved, socialised and cause no danger to anybody. Our consultation, the summit and our review of the criminal law is focused on seeking views and evidence on what more practical things we can do to increase the safety of all of our community. It is right that the Government is doing that, and what we do can, of course, include measures in addition to the three referenced in the consultation. I congratulate Paul Martin again on bringing forward the issue. 13:18 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

I am pleased to respond to the debate, which falls under the heading of post-legislative scrutiny by the Justice Committee. The work that the committee carried out was, as we might expect, wide ranging. Among the main issues were property factors and land maintenance companies. I will say something about those, because most members will have dealt with cases involving one or the other of those subjects—if not both—at some point in their careers. There has, of course, been relatively recent legislation in the area: the Property Factors (Scotland) Act 2011, which was introduced by Patricia Ferguson. Therefore, I am not surprised to see her in the chamber. The Government has carried out work to implement the 2011 act, which provided for a compulsory register of factors and land maintenance companies, a statutory code of conduct and the Homeowner Housing Panel. Home owners can apply to the panel if they believe that their factor or land maintenance company has failed to comply with the code of conduct or has otherwise failed to carry out its duties. Since it started operating on 1 October 2012, the panel has received more than 300 applications. About two thirds have related to property factors, and one third to land maintenance. As members might expect, a number of those applications have subsequently been withdrawn or rejected for a variety of reasons. Applicants must, first of all, go through the complaints procedures that the factor or land maintenance company itself operates; the panel exists to deal with disputes on matters that have not been resolved, for example on standards of service. The panel has now heard about 20 cases and decisions are published on its website. The 2011 act did not deal with all the issues on property factors and land maintenance companies. In particular, it did not make any changes on switching or dismissing and replacing factors or land maintenance companies, which is one of the key points that the committee considered. The 2003 act contains provisions on the dismissal and replacement of factors. In new housing developments, the housing developer often appoints a factor through a manager burden. Manager burdens are time limited, with the normal period being three years. Once the initial period has expired, owners can appoint a different factor. That is done either by simple majority or through provision that is laid down in the title deeds. Once the manager burden has expired, a two-thirds majority can always dismiss and replace a factor regardless of what the title deeds say. In right-to-buy cases, a two-thirds majority can dismiss and replace the factor straight away. Our view is that those legislative provisions on factors are generally satisfactory. The provisions on manager burdens allow a period of stability when a development is new; thereafter, home owners have the opportunity to switch factors. The committee raised some specific points on right-to-buy cases. As issues in that area seem to be declining, given the fall in right-to-buy sales and the Government’s planned abolition of the right to buy, we are not planning any legislative changes on switching of property factors. However, we agree that the legislation is not always easy to understand, so we will issue guidance on a number of issues, including information on the duration of manager burdens that builds on the explanatory notes to the 2003 act, and information for factors on making a home owner’s details available to other home owners, which might make it easier for home owners to obtain the necessary majority to switch factors. That relates to the point that Christine Grahame made about disclosure of owner information—she mentioned the difficulties with data protection. There is the added complexity that data protection is a reserved rather than a devolved matter, which means that addressing the issue in legislation would result in further difficulty for Parliament. We will also provide public-facing information on dismissal and replacement of factors, and a guide on establishing residents associations. In some cases, guidance may be included in the publication “Common Repair, Common Sense”, which the Government took over from Consumer Focus Scotland last year. It is a well-written publication, which we will expand to provide further information to flat owners. As I have said, there is existing legislation on dismissal and replacement of factors. The position is, however, much less clear when it comes to the dismissal and replacement of land-owning land maintenance companies. We have given serious thought to legislation in that area and have consulted on the issue. We are not saying that we will never legislate; if voluntary routes cannot deliver progress, we will legislate, but at the moment we are preparing a code of conduct on dismissal and replacement of land-owning land maintenance companies, which will cover matters such as the majority that is required, information that companies should provide to home owners, the transfer of the ownership of the land, and future arrangements for maintaining the land. As our response to the committee indicated, we decided against legislation at this stage because land maintenance companies have been subject to recent legislation—the 2011 act. It was also uncertain whether legislation would be any more effective than a code of practice and any such legislation would, of necessity, be complex. It was a marginal decision—we could have legislated—so we will review the effectiveness of the code, keep the matter under close scrutiny and will come back to the Parliament, if necessary. In our response to the committee, we indicated that, in the longer term, we will carry out a review of the arrangements that are in place for land maintenance on housing estates. Thoughts from members on what we could consider in that review would be very welcome. The committee also raised concerns about access to the Lands Tribunal for Scotland. I know that my colleague Sandra White has particular concerns in that area. The issue that the committee raised was expenses liability. We are considering various potential options and, as we promised in our response to the report, I will write to the committee on the matter again. Potential options include—as the Lands Tribunal suggested in supplementary written evidence—a cap on expenses or changing the provision in the 2003 act on expenses to refer to “reasonableness” rather than to “success”. The Lands Tribunal also suggested that it could be authorised to make more decisions on the basis of written material and site visits in order to reduce expenses. I understand the concerns that have been expressed about individuals facing potentially large bills for expenses, but we need to ensure that we are treating all parties fairly. We will write to the committee with our further thoughts. The committee considered section 53 of the 2003 act, which gives enforcement rights to neighbours in respect of certain real burdens in title deeds that were created before 2004. The section was not in the original draft bill that the Scottish Law Commission proposed, but was added as the bill made its way through Parliament. The committee recommended that the commission review section 53. The Government has accepted that and, as the committee’s convener indicated, the Law Commission has agreed to a reference in that area. Work on that is most likely to commence early in its ninth programme, in 2015. The Government is grateful for the committee’s report. We have responded to it and have provided an action plan. We will keep the committee and Parliament closely informed and will carry out monitoring, where that is necessary. I will make a small final point. I am acutely conscious that, once again, we are involved in a debate in which David McLetchie’s sense of humour is sorely missed. He could always be relied on to provoke laughter from even the most unpromising material and his absence is felt nowhere more than in debates such as this.

This has been a helpful and constructive debate. Graeme Pearson was right to remind us fairly early on that this legislation was the third part of the early parliamentary reform of land and property ownership in Scotland. However, of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003, the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000 and the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003, the latter is perhaps seen as the least sexy of the three. The debate has demonstrated the inevitable complexities of the 2003 act and how it can have a significant effect on peoples’ lives. It has also demonstrated the value of post-legislative scrutiny, particularly in areas that are technical but have real impact. Like Patricia Ferguson, I, too, wish that I had a magic wand to deal with all the issues raised on the timescale in which we might wish to do so. Many members, including Graeme Pearson and Roderick Campbell, have understandably commented on landowning land maintenance companies, which I will shorten to LMCs, if the Presiding Officer is happy with that. The Government fully recognises the concerns in that area and the difficulties that arise in relation to dismissing and replacing LMCs. That is why we said in our response to the Justice Committee that “doing nothing is not an option”. That is also why we are committed to preparing a transparent code of practice on the switching of landowning LMCs and why we will legislate if a voluntary code does not work.

I understand where the member is coming from. I was about to go on to talk about the timescale for the code as was raised by John Lamont. A draft is being prepared and we aim to circulate that in spring, with a view to finalising it before the end of the year. That is the timescale to which we are working. John Lamont and Roderick Campbell also raised questions related to the enforceability of burdens in favour of LMCs. That is not a matter for the Government; rather, it is matter for the courts or the Lands Tribunal for Scotland. I know that Consumer Focus Scotland was planning a test case, but it no longer has a remit to do so. Although the Government can see the benefit of a test case, it is not for the Government to raise such a case. I will move on to the role of local authorities in land maintenance that some members mentioned. The committee noted in its report that local authorities might still have a role in relation to the maintenance of common areas. The Government agrees that authorities have a role in areas such as planning and the adoption of roads; indeed, in some cases, authorities may wish to carry out maintenance at their own hand. The Government welcomes that option but does not consider that we could require authorities to carry out land maintenance. However, we will work closely with local authorities and others on our forthcoming review of land maintenance arrangements. The committee convener, Christine Grahame, and John Lamont mentioned the problem of people not being told about land maintenance arrangements when they bought their property. I have mentioned that general issue to the Law Society of Scotland to emphasise that conveyancing solicitors should tell their clients about obligations in that area. I note that the Law Society was the only external organisation to provide a briefing for the debate and I think that it has taken that issue on board. For new-build properties, the consumer code for home builders, in force since April 2010, lays down that developers should provide information to home buyers on management services to which the buyer would be committed. We follow up any breaches of that code, so members are welcome to draw any potential breaches to my attention. Although not raised specifically by any member, the Scottish Government’s consultation on the home report asks, at question 23, whether an additional question on land maintenance fees should be added to the property questionnaire. I will now turn to factors. As well as issues in relation to land maintenance companies, the debate also showed that there continue to be some concerns about factors. I accept that switching is low. That is partly because switching a factor will always be more difficult, given that a collective decision is required to switch factors—that is not the case for energy companies—and partly because consumers do not have enough information on how to switch. We will produce a comprehensive guide on that and we will do more to encourage residents’ associations, an issue raised by some members. Patricia Ferguson asked specifically about factor arrangements in uncompleted developments. We are committed to addressing that issue through guidance on managing burdens and also possible model title conditions for factors. Sandra White and other members raised concerns about consumer access to the Lands Tribunal. I reiterate that I will consider the issues further in the context of potential primary legislation—I remind members about the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill—and tribunal rules. I will write to the committee on expenses caps and other potential options. Sandra White raised a couple of other small points and I will deal separately with those directly with her. Alison McInnes referred to potential OFT interest. The OFT considers that it has already examined the Scottish market. However, it plans to examine the English market, which may be what she is picking up on. Rod Campbell questioned the SLC’s timescale for considering section 53. The SLC is currently on its eighth programme, which runs until the end of 2014. Jenny Marra wanted to know the likely timescale of the Government’s response to what it will recommend, but the SLC will probably take a couple of years to provide its report, which in turn means that it is likely that implementation will be post-2016, which is to say, of course, in the next session of Parliament. We will, of course, draw the SLC’s attention to the debate. The Government has welcomed the committee’s report. We have responded and will carry out follow-up actions. Such work shows the value of the committee system. We will keep the committee informed about progress.

Today marks the launch of “Scotland’s National Action Plan for Human Rights: 2013-2017”—Scotland’s first national action plan for human rights—and I am delighted to be here to debate it on international human rights day. In talking about human rights, I could not let the debate pass without paying my own tribute to Nelson Mandela. With the passing of the first democratically elected President of South Africa, the world has lost a towering statesman and the outstanding political leader of his generation. His integrity, humanity and compassion were an inspiration to countless millions around the globe, and his influence transcended ideology, race and creed. He was an outstanding champion of universal human rights everywhere. The creation of a modern inclusive Scotland that protects, respects and realises the universal human rights of all our citizens is a core ambition of this Government, which is why the Scottish Human Rights Commission’s efforts over the past 18 months to develop a national action plan for human rights have enjoyed our support and our active engagement. Human rights are more than mere legal instruments; they are the fundamental freedoms and rights to which everyone is entitled. They are built on the universal values of dignity, equality, freedom, autonomy and respect that were first set down in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 65 years ago, and which are now grounded in international law. It is fair to say that those fundamental principles resonate closely with Scotland’s own deeply held values of fairness, social justice and communitarian spirit. Of course, the protection of human rights in Scotland and beyond depends on a clear legal framework. The European convention on human rights acts as a guide to the common European ideal in that regard. It has been with us for some time. Members may be aware that September marked the 60th anniversary of its coming into force across Europe—a Europe that was coming out of a horrendous war and which needed to establish and look forward to a far better future. There is also a broader framework of international human rights law, which consists of various covenants and treaties to which Scotland is obliged to give positive effect. Domestically, human rights are embedded within the Scotland Act 1998, while the Human Rights Act 1998 places further obligations upon all public bodies to respect human rights in the exercise of their functions. A strong legal framework is already in place. We start from the premise that human rights are a force for good and provide the foundation of a modern democratic society. Ultimately, it is for nations to ensure that they secure human rights for their citizens through their institutions and public services. The devolved settlement ensures that the Scottish Government and Parliament are constitutionally bound to uphold human rights. That system is progressively in line with the European main stream. Of course, an independent Scotland could do more: human rights would be secured within a codified constitution and we could ensure that Scotland became a beacon of progressive opinion, in keeping with the importance that we have long attached to human dignity, equality and fairness, and the pursuit of social justice.

We would be looking at exactly the kinds of rights that most countries in Europe and the wider world regard as human rights. I do not want to disappoint Jenny Marra by suggesting that we are going to come up with a completely different set of human rights. We will work with, and build on, what we already have. The First Minister has spoken of the potential to go even further than the ECHR does and to consider how we might embed economic, social and cultural rights within a constitution for Scotland. Those matters could be considered by a constitutional convention that would be set up after independence to prepare the permanent written constitution. Such a move would accord with the Scottish Government’s existing approach—our abolition of tuition fees and legislation on homelessness are just two examples in which we have demonstrated our commitment—but it would also accord with the broader social democratic consensus in Scotland and our collective commitment to the common weal. Those are interesting subjects for wider debate—a debate that would probably continue on into the development of any constitution. Members will all be familiar with Eleanor Roosevelt’s oft-quoted remarks that human rights begin “In small places, close to home—so close and so small that they cannot be seen on any maps of the world … Unless these rights have meaning there, they have little meaning anywhere.” It is key that we ensure that those fundamental legal principles translate into real life experiences, which accords with the Government’s approach. Across the Scottish Government’s various responsibilities, we are working to realise the rights of the people of Scotland. I will give a few examples. We have introduced legislation to ensure that our criminal justice system has human rights at its heart. We are working to embed human rights in the integration of healthcare and social care. Our commitment to equality and non-discrimination is supported by the provision of over £20 million to realise the rights of communities. We are committed to progressing implementation of the “United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child”, which includes the introduction of dedicated children’s rights legislation for the first time. We are also taking action to mitigate the worst impacts of the United Kingdom Government’s welfare reforms. There has been a step change in Scotland’s Government’s approach to international engagement. The placing of human rights at the heart of our international framework, the championing of climate justice at home and abroad, our international development programme to support the aspirations of the developing world and a greater focus on engagement with the UN human rights system all demonstrate our commitment to acting as a modern responsible nation, and to supporting the realisation of human rights across the world and in the developing world. Part of that role involves promoting Scotland’s values internationally. The First Minister delivered a significant speech in China recently highlighting the launch of the national action plan and outlining the importance of participation in the UN human rights system—a speech that Amnesty International described as “an important first step”. In 2014, there will be a further opportunity to showcase our values, with the advent of the Commonwealth games and the eyes of the world being on Scotland. I am certain that the world will be left in no doubt about the values of Scotland and the Commonwealth games, or about our collective commitment to humanity, equality and destiny. It will come as no surprise that I believe that with independence we would gain the levers to give further effect to our international human rights obligations domestically, and that we would play a more active role as a responsible nation on the world stage. Scotland’s first national action plan for human rights recognises that Scotland is at a particular stage in her journey and that there is more to be done, whether it be through building a rights-based culture, tackling the continued injustices in Scottish society or playing our part as a responsible actor globally. The aspiration to create a country where everyone lives with human dignity is one that we can all support. Although we may have interesting debates about particular aspects of it, what we are all trying to achieve is a unified end.

I am sure that Stewart Stevenson would expect me to endorse that, as I have met Mary Robinson and know the huge impact that she had internationally—not just on climate justice but on a wide range of issues. It shows that small countries are not constrained, nor always restrained, in what they are able to do, even in this huge global endeavour of pushing forwards human rights. Scotland’s politics and history suggest that we could have that same commitment and push forward internationally in ways in which we are constrained at the moment because of the constitutional set-up. I know that members have differing views about that, but I would like to unleash our views on human rights on the world because I believe that we have as much to offer as Ireland did under President Mary Robinson. The Scottish Government is fully committed to continued engagement with the first national action plan for human rights. I commend the Scottish Human Rights Commission for the work that it has put in—work that has been done not just in partnership with the Government but across a wide range of partnerships. A huge number of groups and organisations have been involved in developing the action plan and in giving us a blueprint for our work in the future. Whatever happens in 2014, the action plan will become an important part of Scotland’s future and will help us to build a Scotland and a wider world where everyone can live with human dignity. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of Scotland’s first National Action Plan for Human Rights; recognises it as a historic milestone in Scotland’s progress toward a vision, shared across the whole of Scottish society, of ensuring that everyone in the country can live with fundamental human dignity through the realisation of the universal and inalienable human rights proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and recognised in international law; commends the Scottish Human Rights Commission and all those from across the public, private and voluntary sectors, and from Scottish civil society at large who have contributed to the inclusive and cooperative process of developing this first National Action Plan for Human Rights, and looks forward to future opportunities over the lifetime of the plan to hear reports of the actions taken, and the progress achieved, in better realising the human rights of all in Scotland through realising the vision and achieving the outcomes mapped out in the plan.

It is amazing how wide a variety of views can be encompassed even in a short debate such as this. Practically all the speeches have been constructive in addressing the issue, even if they do not all come from exactly the same starting point. I will shortly meet the Council of Europe’s commissioner for human rights, Nils Muižnieks—I hope that that is the correct pronunciation—who is visiting the Parliament today. Indeed, he might be in the public gallery somewhere. I recall meeting him in Strasbourg last year, and I was struck by his deep commitment to human rights and by his positive impression of Scotland’s approach in this area. Earlier today, I spoke about the Scottish Government’s strong commitment to human rights. I am sorry that Jenny Marra found that objectionable in some way. I spoke about what we are doing to make rights a reality for all and about our future aspirations in this field. I will conclude today’s debate by linking that further to Scotland’s first national action plan for human rights. I join other members who have spoken today in commending the Scottish Human Rights Commission for its achievements. The SHRC is Scotland’s A-rated national human rights institution. It is statutorily independent of Government and Parliament. The commission has a key role in promoting and protecting the human rights of everyone in Scotland. I do not know whether everyone here is aware of how widely well regarded the SHRC is across the whole of Europe. It is considered to be an extraordinarily important institution, and it is held in great regard across Europe. We need to commend the commission for its work in getting to that position.

I will come to the Labour amendment later in my speech. The Government has enjoyed a productive, constructive relationship with the commission on a wide range of issues. The commission’s approach has been very much in evidence in the development of the plan. The SHRC team is small but perfectly formed, and their intelligence and commitment are impressive. It is worth noting that a national action plan for human rights has been developed not simply because the Scottish Human Rights Commission, or indeed the Scottish Government, thought that it was a good idea. Twenty years ago at the world conference on human rights in Vienna, the international community adopted a declaration on human rights that reaffirmed many core principles. One of the recommendations was for each state to “consider the desirability of drawing up a national action plan identifying steps whereby that State would improve the promotion and protection of human rights.” Since then, a number of states have done so—Sweden, Finland and New Zealand are three fine examples. I am delighted that Scotland is following suit, and I very much hope that our approach will act as a model of best practice for others to follow. Scotland is joining a group of progressive nations across the world in seeking not to assume, but to assure, human rights. In building a coalition of partners who share its vision of a Scotland where everyone lives with fundamental human dignity, the Scottish Human Rights Commission has been successful in facilitating a genuine co-production effort. I emphasise that, although the plan is very much the SHRC’s creation—and it should take the credit for that—the commission has been open and inclusive in involving a range of partners from all quarters in shaping the plan. It is far from being a traditional action plan; it is much more a programme of action constructed around a shared vision, with a closely aligned set of outcomes. The sharing of that vision goes beyond government; it goes right across society. The plan has been explicitly linked to the Scottish Government’s national outcomes framework, which has attracted international attention and praise. It aspires to create an environment in which people better understand rights and organisations are able to apply them. That is linked to the Scottish Government’s ambition to ensure that our public services are high quality and responsive to need. Improving lives through tackling injustice and exclusion in our society accords strongly with the priority that the Scottish Government has placed on tackling the significant inequalities in Scotland—and there are indeed significant inequalities in Scotland. The more that Scotland gives effect to our international obligations, the more we can take pride in a strong, fair and inclusive national identity. I turn briefly to the Labour amendment. Work to tackle female genital mutilation, which is a form of violence against women, will be included in Scotland’s national strategy to tackle violence against women. That strategy is being developed in collaboration with public and voluntary sector partners and will be the first of its kind in Scotland. It will be published in the summer of 2014 following a consultation in the new year. I expect that all members in the chamber will wish to contribute to that consultation and take part in the discussions around it. However, I wish that the Labour Party had allowed the motion simply to proceed on the basis of its congratulating the Scottish Human Rights Commission and what it says about Scotland’s first national action plan. For those reasons, I cannot find any reason to support the amendment.

I normally find myself broadly in agreement with Malcolm Chisholm, but we could have had an entire catalogue of amendments on individual subjects today. I am simply saying that I think that the motion should be passed in its entirety, as it is presented to members. Jamie Hepburn made a very good point, which was perhaps a counterpoint to Alex Johnstone’s speech, in reminding us that many people still do not see human rights as applying to them at all. The debate can sound very high flown, and it is often wrapped up in legalese. An important outcome of the national action plan will be to relate those ideas to the real existences of ordinary people where they live. Malcolm Chisholm, who was interesting, as always—even if I do not always agree with him—flagged up some issues that he thought were missing from the ECHR. That was an interesting perspective that I had not considered before. I think that he talked about issues around the standard of living. Perhaps that highlights how perceptions change over the years, even in an area that we think of as somehow inalienable. Alison McInnes highlighted the human rights issues that surround mental health decisions and outcomes. That is also a significant area of current concern. She was right to flag up that human rights issues apply in that area as they do everywhere else. As befits the convener of the cross-party group on human rights, John Finnie outlined the huge number of specific areas to which human rights could apply. Certainly, individuals and communities understanding their rights and duty bearers understanding how to apply them, all set in the context of an international human rights framework, are critical to creating empowered communities. I am conscious that I am running out of time, so I will move quickly towards the end of my speech. My colleague Stewart Stevenson mentioned Mary Robinson. She has been quoted as saying: “Every human has rights. What does it mean? It means simply that rights belong to people, not Governments. That the Universal Declaration on Human Rights gave a birthright to every child born in the world”. That usefully encapsulates the challenge before us, not just for Christmas or for Governments but for everybody everywhere. I invite members to support the motion.

The classification of drugs is a reserved matter. However, I hosted a national event in April 2013 with representatives from the police, health services, local authorities and community and youth organisations to discuss the issue and agree on what can be done. We have already acted on a number of the proposals that emanated from that meeting. We will continue to work with partners across Scotland and the United Kingdom to learn more about the impact of the substances.

One of the difficulties is the enormous challenge that the substances present, because they are not illegal if they are not explicitly sold for human consumption, and they are marketed in that way. We take substance misuse in schools seriously. I commend to the member the know the score free helpline and website. Those resources ensure that credible information on new drugs is available and help to challenge the myth that legal equals safe, which is one of the difficulties. That is why we do not use the term “legal highs” when possible; we prefer to describe them as new psychoactive substances. We continue to work with the UK Government, but we are also monitoring changes in legislation worldwide to see whether other approaches are feasible. Nothing has been in place long enough yet to give us certainty about whether proposals will work. We remain on top of the issue. The member referred to the number of deaths in which such substances have been implicated. An outcome of the April meeting was that we would make such figures clearly separate in the death statistics.

That question is difficult to answer, because the figures are not recorded in the same way. We are in the business of gathering as much information as possible about the extent to which such substances are used. Their use is by no means widespread, but there is no doubt that they might seem more attractive in some areas and age groups, because people are equating being legal with being safe. I reiterate that, where possible, we should not use the term “legal highs” because the fear is that that gives out a very wrong impression of those substances. We are in the process of trying to gather information—as I indicated, one of the outcomes from the April meeting relates to death statistics—and we are already putting in place some other outcomes as well. However, getting a statistical handle on the situation is not easy given that the substances are not criminal.

When an unknown substance is believed to contain a controlled drug it would be seized by the police for the purposes of securing evidence, identification, investigation and potential prosecution. It is, of course, the potential presence of a controlled substance that triggers the seizure, and the information and intelligence that are obtained are key in that respect.

I thank Kevin Stewart for amending his terminology. I advised him—this may also interest John Wilson—that about 10 per cent of the Scottish Police Authority’s current monthly case load relates to analysis of substances that are suspected of being new psychoactive substances. The rise in those submissions is due to improved forensic capability and to increased awareness about and availability of such products. Police Scotland is now better placed to identify and to respond to availability of those substances, particularly when they are found to be mixed with controlled drugs. To date, Police Scotland has been required to provide greater returns to the Scottish Government on traditional controlled drugs. However, with the emergence of the particular products that Kevin Stewart asks about, there is now a requirement to ascertain more specific data on seizures and the availability of such substances. Police Scotland is well aware of the need for it to keep on top of what is happening and for us to understand what is going on. In respect of drugs education and the information that is going out to people, I again refer Kevin Stewart to my answer to John Wilson, and to the work that is done by bodies such as Crew 2000 to try to keep people as well informed as possible.

It would be useful to remind the chamber of the background to this afternoon’s debate. In August last year, it was reported in national statistics that, in 2011, drug-related deaths reached the highest level recorded. Some 584 people in Scotland lost their lives to drugs and, for the first time ever, methadone was implicated in more deaths than heroin. Those deaths affected, and continue to affect, friends, families and communities. That background is why I asked the chief medical officer, Sir Harry Burns, to commission an independent expert group on opioid replacement therapies. The expert group published its report “Delivering Recovery—Opioid Replacement Therapies in Scotland” in August. My thanks go to Sir Harry Burns, Dr Brian Kidd, who was the chair of the group, and Doctors Charles Lind and Kennedy Roberts, who undertook the research, for their drive and determination in producing the report. I also extend my thanks to everyone who contributed to the process, including members of this Parliament. The report provides recommendations on the delivery of opioid replacement therapies in Scotland and on the wider delivery landscape, and looks at themes such as social exclusion and health inequalities; recovery; governance and accountability; information, research and evaluation; and the improvement approach that is needed to drive change. Today, the Minister for Public Health and I will provide a cross-Government response to the report. Since the report was published, the Government has held two events to provide those who work in alcohol and drug partnerships and primary and secondary care with an opportunity to reflect on it. As members are aware, some of the report’s recommendations refer to the national health service. I will touch on some of those recommendations, but Mr Matheson will provide more detail later about how we are responding to them. First, I want to ensure that everyone is aware of the headline finding in the report. Last year’s drug-related death figures resulted in media coverage that questioned the use of methadone. However, the expert group concluded that opioid replacement therapies have “a strong evidence base ... and should be retained in Scottish services” and “should be delivered as part of a coherent person centred recovery plan”. The report is clear that methadone, like other treatments such as residential rehabilitation, community detoxification or psychiatric support, has a place only in the context of recovery. In practice, recovery is best realised through the development of “recovery oriented systems of care”, which is a term that is used frequently in the report. It means systems that enable people to progress at their own pace with a planned and integrated care pathway from their first entry into services to their return to non-specialist services. With that in mind, the Government has been developing an alcohol and drug quality improvement framework, which will ensure quality in the provision of care, treatment and recovery services as well as in the data that will evidence the outcomes that people are achieving. The framework is aligned with the themes that are outlined in the report. Following collaboration with service users, people in recovery and delivery partners, we are about to consult Scotland’s 30 ADPs on the development of quality principles, embedded in a human rights approach, for drug and alcohol services. We have achieved huge success in reducing waiting times—the latest statistics show that 96 per cent of people started treatment for their drug problem within three weeks or less; in 2007, people could wait for over a year for an appointment—but securing quick access to treatment is the least that we can do. The quality principles to which I referred will set out what someone who accesses a service can expect to achieve, and will be measurable at service, local and national levels. They include high-quality, evidence-based interventions; workers who are appropriately trained and supervised; full strengths-based assessments and person-centred recovery plans that are agreed and regularly reviewed; and, if it is helpful to the individual, the opportunity for their family to be involved. We know that some areas are taking that approach already, and examples of good practice are highlighted in the report. Delivering quality also depends on the availability of robust information that is capable of demonstrating recovery outcomes. Access to meaningful and reliable information is essential if ADPs and local services are to monitor their progress in delivering recovery. We are currently working with the Information Services Division of the NHS in Scotland and ADPs to scope out the development of an integrated drug and alcohol information system. The proposed system will integrate the existing waiting times database and the drug misuse database, and gather information on alcohol treatment and recovery indicators. We are also working with members of the expert group via the independent Drugs Strategy Delivery Commission to explore the feasibility of agreeing key priorities for research on substance use in Scotland. The Scottish Government created ADPs with NHS Scotland and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities four years ago. The report tells us that there are real concerns around the lack of progress on delivering recovery that has been found in many ADPs. We must not be complacent, and we must ensure that governance and accountability are robust within those structures. The Government is committed to working with current expert advisory structures on drugs to review their impact, performance and lines of accountability. We have already taken steps to improve the accountability of ADPs. Planning and reporting mechanisms have been developed and agreed, and in order to drive performance locally, I have set ministerial priorities for all ADPs to report on in their annual reports. Those include the delivery of the health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment standard to maintain fast access to treatment; increasing levels of compliance with the Scottish drug misuse database; sustaining the quality of data in the national drug and alcohol treatment waiting times database; and increasing the number of take-home naloxone kits supplied to those at risk of opiate overdose. Those pieces of information must be supplied on an annual basis. ADPs have taken those priorities seriously and have committed to taking forward the areas identified for improvement. For example, over the past six months the number of take-home naloxone supplies that have been distributed has increased. Our focus on improvement is crucial. I met ADP chairs last month and urged them to set an improvement goal that sets out specifically how they will respond to the independent report. For example, West Lothian ADP has stated that, by December 2016, 100 per cent of people who receive substitute prescribing will have had a review and will have a recovery plan in place, and Edinburgh ADP will, in 2014-15, increase by 30 per cent the proportion of people who are linked, rather than just referred, to recovery communities and/or mutual aid groups following a planned discharge from specialist treatment. Those examples demonstrate that a real change is taking place as a result of the Government’s alcohol and drug quality improvement programme and the expert group report, on which we have already begun to act. However, it is important to remember that people affected by drugs are extremely vulnerable and often experience other significant health conditions, including the effects of ageing. The evidence also tells us that stigma is a significant barrier to delivering recovery. The CMO recognised that in his foreword to the expert group’s report, in which he highlighted that “Overcoming the stigma and further increasing the numbers of people in recovery will be challenging—but achievable.” In line with Government priorities, the report emphasises the importance of workforce development, not only in upskilling but in addressing stigma and attitudes towards drug use and recovery, which are present even within the wider workforces that deal with people who use drugs. The attitudes of many professionals themselves must therefore be challenged. Scottish training on drugs and alcohol—STRADA—our nationally commissioned workforce development agency, is working with ADPs to support them to identify training needs around the development of recovery-oriented systems of care. In addition, the Scottish recovery consortium delivers recovery workshops for treatment providers, giving workers opportunities to connect with people’s own experiences of recovery as well as to learn about recovery tools and practices that are used elsewhere in Scotland. I am delighted that, by taking that work across the country, the recovery consortium will work with all addictions staff in NHS Ayrshire and Arran in the coming months. The report makes recommendations on the quality, consistency and availability of drug treatment services within Scotland’s health service. Inconsistency was reported to be driven by the opt-in nature of the general practitioner contracting process for substance use treatment. To increase consistency, the report calls for discussions within primary care and pharmacy about the delivery of drug treatment services and suggests the development of national standards for primary care and community pharmacy. The Government has increased the number of GPs in Scotland and we now have more GPs per head of population than the rest of the UK. We are leading the way with the world’s first patient safety programme for primary care and we invested more than £757 million to deliver primary care services last year, which is an increase of more than 17 per cent since 2004.

It is always going to be a challenge to deliver uniformity of services, particularly across a wide range of services, many of which are designed to be responsive to local needs and conditions and involve a variety of professional groups and professional interests. We need to work very hard to overcome that challenge. However, we must remember that patient care is provided by the whole clinical team and not just by GPs. They use their professional judgment to work with patients to agree the best and most appropriate care to support individuals’ general health, including their recovery from drug use. In delivering care, GPs should take account of all aspects that affect a patient’s care and, where necessary, actively link with specialist services to deliver the care that is required. The report does not make light of the role of pharmacists in delivering recovery. Since the publication of the expert group’s report, the Government published “Prescription for Excellence” in September. That document is our 10-year vision and action plan for pharmaceutical care in Scotland. It gives a firm commitment to work with pharmacists and other healthcare professionals to develop and implement new NHS standard specifications for drug and alcohol services. The expert group’s report will build on work that is already taking place in NHS boards and inform the development of that work. At the event with healthcare professionals that was held just this month, both the Minister for Public Health and I made individual commitments on how we can better engage with the NHS. I committed to bringing together relevant healthcare professionals each year to ensure that people with drug problems are supported in their recovery, and the Minister for Public Health committed to identifying an accountable officer from every NHS board to be responsible for the delivery of opioid replacement therapies in local areas. Mr Matheson will provide more information on that later. I also take this opportunity to reassure the Parliament that recovery is alive across Scotland. Last year, I announced the development of a recovery initiative fund, and since then almost £100,000 has been distributed to individuals and recovery communities. Examples of successful applicants include the unity recovery football club, which is a Glaswegian football group consisting of people in recovery and their families, and hectic life in Edinburgh, which is a social enterprise that aims to provide training and permanent work for individuals in recovery from addiction through furniture building, restoration and recycling. Meaningful work and activity are extremely important when we are talking about recovery. I have also had the privilege of attending five-year anniversary events for “The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland’s Drug Problem”, at which we discussed not only what still needs to be done but the achievements that have been made since the introduction of that strategy in 2008. I think that all members have been sent a copy of “The Story So Far: A collective summary of reflections on Scotland’s road to recovery since 2008”, which reflects on how things have changed in Scotland in the past five years. While we must not be complacent about the improvements that still need to be made, I would like to finish with a quote from “The Story So Far” that I think summarises where we are today: “Momentum is building and I hope that in 5 years time we will have reached a tipping point that washes all the unhelpful stigma and moral rhetoric away. I appreciate that sometimes we can be seen as naive optimists and know that living can be tough whoever you are, whatever demographic, social, economic situation you’re in ... But it is right to pursue recovery in this way, at this time, in an inclusive and hopeful way ... and it is working.” I move, That the Parliament notes the August 2013 publication of the report and findings of the independent expert group on opioid replacement therapies commissioned by the Chief Medical Officer and led by the independent Drugs Strategy Delivery Commission; endorses the expert group’s conclusion that opiate replacement therapies have a strong evidence base, should be retained in Scottish services and should be delivered as part of a coherent person-centred recovery plan; agrees with the six priority themes identified in the report and calls on members to endorse an improvement approach, as enshrined in the “three-step improvement framework for Scotland’s public services”, at national and local level to address health and social inequalities for people affected by drug problems in Scotland, address variability in service provision to ensure that high quality recovery-oriented systems of care are in place across Scotland that recognise the contribution of primary and secondary care, continue to improve the governance and accountability of the delivery system and further develop information, research and evaluation systems on substance misuse at a national level; recognises the role and contribution of the workforce in delivering a recovery-oriented system of care in Scotland, and supports the continued development of all those working to make recovery from problem drug use a reality.

Sheriff Principal Taylor published his comprehensive report on 11 September 2013. The report makes extensive recommendations on a range of proposals regarding expenses and civil litigation. The Scottish Government is considering the detail of the report and will publish its intentions in due course.

I appreciate the member’s interest in the issue. The wide range of detailed recommendations is being looked at carefully by the Government. When decisions are made about which will be pursued, appropriate further consultation will be undertaken.

I am delighted to open this stage 1 debate on the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill. I thank the Justice Committee for its scrutiny of the bill at stage 1 and for the preparation of its comprehensive stage 1 report. I also record my thanks to the various groups and individuals who provided evidence to the committee during stage 1, as well as to those who have engaged directly with the Government during the development of the bill and the parliamentary process to date. As members know, the introduction of a bill is usually preceded by a considerable amount of work, probably for a good couple of years prior to it, and the folk who are engaged in the discussion then have to carry that through during the bill process. The bill aims to create a simplified and flexible framework that will bring coherence to the current disparate tribunals landscape. It brings improvements to the structure, management and organisation of devolved tribunals while maintaining the specialism and ethos of each individual tribunal. The bill creates a simple two-tier structure; introduces common practices and procedures; and brings judicial leadership, under the Lord President. The bill includes proposals to bring tribunal appointments into the remit of the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland, which will ensure independence from Government and provide consistency in tribunal appointments. That will ensure that all tribunal users benefit from the same high standard of judicial decision making, regardless of the subject matter. The bill creates the office of president of the Scottish tribunals, to support the Lord President with his new duties, to champion tribunals in the wider civil justice system and to ensure the proper distinction and separation of tribunals from courts. There will also be a new upper tribunal for Scotland, which will benefit the tribunal user by, in most cases, removing appeals from courts. The bill creates a structure that will enable a far better service to be provided to users. As it deals with structure and organisation, much of the detail will necessarily be fleshed out in secondary legislation. The proposals in the bill have not been developed in isolation. In addition to the formal consultation exercise, we have engaged extensively with stakeholders and the judiciary. It is important to note that the bill does not sit in isolation and is an integral part of our making justice work programme, which is the most significant set of reforms to our justice system for more than a century. The programme brings together a wide range of reforms to the structure and processes of the courts, access to justice and tribunals and administrative justice. It has been developed and is being delivered with partners across the justice system. It is probably fair to say that the bill is at the least controversial end of that broader programme of work. I turn to the detail of the Justice Committee’s report. I warmly welcome the committee’s support for the general principles of the bill and the recommendation to the Parliament that those principles be agreed to. I will address a few of the issues that are raised in the report, and I will be interested in hearing members’ views during the debate. I note the committee’s view that consideration should be given to extending the pool of eligible candidates for assignment to the office of president of the Scottish tribunals. It is important to acknowledge that the leadership of the new tribunals structure will be invested in the Lord President, who will have responsibility for the efficient disposal of business and overall responsibility for the Scottish tribunals, as he does for the Scottish courts. The position of president of the Scottish tribunals is not an appointment; it is an assignment by the Lord President to assist him in delivering those new responsibilities. The president of the Scottish tribunals has certain functions delegated to them in the bill and will be responsible for the day-to-day running of the Scottish tribunals. That includes the upper tribunal, which will be made up of senators, sheriffs principal and sheriffs as well as chamber presidents from the first-tier tribunal. For those reasons, it is entirely appropriate that the president of the Scottish tribunals should be assigned from among the senators of the College of Justice. I welcome the Lord President’s announcement that he intends to assign Lady Smith to the office. Lady Smith will bring a wealth of knowledge to the position.

We want to ensure that the Lord President’s role is paramount. Members need to keep that in mind. I do not want to get into the business of defining matters all the way down the line, in the way that the member might be suggesting. If that is not what the member meant, he will no doubt come back to the issue. That rather leads me to the debate about whether the term “judge” should be specified in the bill. I note that some people have suggested that legal members on tribunals should be called tribunal judges, so as not to imply that they have a lesser status than court judiciary. However, all members of tribunals, whether they be legal or ordinary, are taking judicial decisions and should therefore have the same status. The bill achieves that aim by giving all members judicial status and capacity. The bill is designed to create a new structure for devolved tribunals. I am not aware of any devolved tribunal that currently uses the term “judge”. We must not forget that users are at the centre of what we are creating. I am aware that the term “judge” is not popular with the majority of tribunal stakeholders, who fear a drift towards courtification—which may or may not be a word, but people understand what it means—and a more adversarial approach to tribunal hearings. However, it is for individual tribunals to determine what they call themselves during hearings informally. That therefore does not need to be explicit in the bill. However, I look forward to hearing members’ views on the issue during the debate. There has been interest throughout the development of the bill, from consultation to the committee evidence sessions, that the particular nature and characteristics of the individual tribunals should be protected in the new structure. If anything, that has probably been the prevailing sentiment expressed to us all in one way or another. I fully agree with that view and I am confident that we have ensured that there is the right balance in the bill. The bill has to be flexible enough to allow the new structure to accommodate the different tribunals. By providing adequate safeguards, we ensure that each tribunal’s specialism and ethos is protected. The committee has recommended that an amendment is made to the bill at stage 2 to allow for permanent members of the tribunals. Although there is no need for permanent members now, I accept that it might be a requirement in the future. I therefore intend to make an amendment to allow for permanent tribunal members should the need arise. I hear the convener of the Justice Committee sighing—I suspect that I may already have dealt a blow to part of her speech.

I thought that that might be the case. Members need to keep it in mind that each tribunal was created by an act of Parliament. They are all required to operate differently depending on the matter that they are addressing. That will still be the case in the new structure. For instance, the Lands Tribunal for Scotland charges fees, so the bill contains provisions to allow that to continue. Concern has been expressed about provision being made in the bill for court judiciary—sheriffs—to be able to act as members of the first-tier tribunal. However, there is a requirement in the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 for the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland to have a sheriff convener to sit in its forensic cases. We therefore have to allow recognition of that position in the bill to ensure that sheriffs can act as members of the first-tier tribunal for that purpose. The bill allows Scottish ministers to make composition orders specifying which category of member hears what cases in matters that fall to the first-tier tribunal to determine. The judicial members—sheriffs—of the first-tier tribunal will appear on composition orders only for cases where the founding legislation requires them to sit. That will ensure that they cannot hear any other type of case in the first-tier tribunal. It is possible that, in the future, a new jurisdiction will be created that will require a judicial member to be part of the panel that hears the case. That would be enacted in the set-up legislation, and would be the result of a policy decision that was taken in the context of a particular policy area; it would not be my decision or come from the justice department. The bill as drafted allows for that flexibility, with safeguards in place to ensure that judicial members of the first-tier tribunal are authorised to hear cases only where there is a genuine requirement for them to do so. The committee suggested that there would be merit in setting out the characteristics of a tribunal in the bill. As I indicated to the committee in my evidence, I would be happy to consider that, and I am open to hearing members’ views this afternoon on how that might be constructed and what they might like it to include. There have been representations by stakeholders to request that the Lands Tribunal for Scotland and the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland should be treated differently in the bill, by placing the former as a separate pillar outwith the structure and giving the latter its own chamber enshrined in legislation. I fully appreciate the complexity and unique nature of both those tribunals; I will say more about them individually in a moment. The key word to describe what the bill proposes is “flexibility”. The structure is designed to allow it to develop and grow, and respond to the needs of the individual tribunals that are transferring into it. The structure protects and maintains the unique individual needs of tribunals as well as providing the benefits that I mentioned earlier. It is true that the Lands Tribunal for Scotland deals with complex matters of law, and that it operates extremely well. However, that is true of many other tribunals that will transfer into the new structure. Nothing that is proposed in the bill will affect how the tribunals operate in accordance with their founding legislation. I have taken account of the complexities of the Lands Tribunal by stating in the policy memorandum that its functions and members will transfer into the upper tribunal, with its appeals going to the inner house of the Court of Session, as they do now. It has been acknowledged that being in the upper tribunal would work for the Lands Tribunal; being in a separate pillar would not provide anything that is not achieved by the Lands Tribunal’s position in the new structure. The Mental Health Tribunal is the only tribunal that is currently listed to come into the new structure that makes decisions on people’s liberty. The tribunal focuses on the needs of the patient, putting them at the centre of everything, and ensures that their voice is heard by those who make decisions about their care and treatment. I fully agree with those who advocate strongly for the retention of the specialism and ethos of that tribunal. However, I do not believe that anything that we are proposing would be detrimental to those values. The bill provides many safeguards, but most importantly it does nothing to change the fact that the tribunal will continue to adhere to the Millan principles, which the Scottish Government believes are at the centre of everything that the tribunal does. I have made the commitment that the Mental Health Tribunal will be in a chamber of its own in the first instance. The bill is clear that only similar subjects can be located together in chambers, and there is currently no jurisdiction of a similar nature that could be located with the Mental Health Tribunal. There may never be such a jurisdiction, but the bill as drafted is flexible enough to allow for that to happen if one should come along. Any changes to chamber structure will be made only following consultation and by affirmative order by this Parliament. I will clarify, in case there is any misunderstanding, that the location of two or more jurisdictions in the same chamber in no way amalgamates them. Each jurisdiction will continue to have its own founding legislation, specialist members, procedural rules and specialist support staff; all that the jurisdictions will share is a chamber president. The committee commented on other issues that might be of interest to members in the chamber. I look forward to the debate and will seek to address in my closing remarks any matters that arise. The bill represents a long-overdue reform of the tribunal landscape in Scotland, which I sincerely believe will be to the advantage of all tribunals and their users. I welcome the wide support for the bill to date, and I look forward to a constructive debate today on the creation of a cohesive tribunal structure for devolved tribunals in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill.

It is assignment.

Although the majority on the front bench today are women.

I thank all the members in the chamber for a stimulating debate on an important reform. I particularly thank Justice Committee members for their constructive contributions. I will make a tiny point. When I talked about composition orders, some members might have thought that they heard me say “compensation orders”. I make it clear for the record that I was talking about composition, not compensation, orders. We have missed something in the debate. One or two members have referred to it; it is the presence of David McLetchie. However, I feel that his spirit is with us. I can envisage him sitting with a cigar and watching our proceedings now, saying heartfelt thanks that he is no longer required to contribute. It is only right that I remind Parliament that, when we previously debated the tribunals system, so impressed was Graeme Pearson that he put it on the record that he felt that David McLetchie possessed the attribute of glamour. It is important to reiterate that. It is clear from the debate that members across the chamber agree that tribunals reform is long overdue, and that they desire to create a tribunals structure that is fit for the devolved landscape. I will respond to as many members’ comments as I can. Elaine Murray, Colin Keir, Rod Campbell and a fair few others spoke of our proposals for the Lands Tribunal for Scotland; a number of members made the point that it should more properly be regarded as a court, rather than as a tribunal. It might be true that it is the tribunal that looks most like a court—I do not think that anybody would depart from that—but it is not a court; it is a tribunal. It is a tribunal in legislation and it has a key attribute of a tribunal—it has lay members on its panels. Its being a court would pretty much rule that out. It cannot be a court, because of the lay members; it is a tribunal in legislation, and the lay members reinforce the idea that it is a tribunal. We need to remind ourselves of that when we talk about it. We desire to transfer the Lands Tribunal for Scotland into the new system, and we have made a proposal on where it would fit. The Government believes that it needs to remain in the system with the other tribunals. Each tribunal is different. Despite some of the concerns and fears that people have expressed, nothing in the bill will change how the tribunals operate in any way, shape or form, and there is no desire to do that. As new tribunals are discussed and perhaps legislated for, they will each have their own particular ways of working, which the proposed structure will simply absorb. That is as it should be. On a slightly related point, I confirm to Elaine Murray that the chamber structures will be set out in an affirmative Scottish statutory instrument, so we will come back to that. Margaret Mitchell reminded us that 80,000 people use tribunals every year. That is a lot of people, who are generally overlooked when we talk about the number of people who go through the court system. The reality is that tribunals probably see far more people than courts do. I gently point out to Stewart Stevenson that there is nothing at all “quasi” about the judicial decisions that tribunals make. He should not use the term; tribunals make judicial decisions. In a sense, John Pentland recognised the balancing act that the bill represents. Most committee members have understood that we are trying to strike a balance, with a better structure and a more efficient way of managing the whole framework while keeping the individual nature of tribunals clear cut. Colin Keir referred to the children’s hearings system. I agree with all his comments, which were, of course, exactly why children’s hearings are not listed in the schedule to the bill. Perhaps there has been some padding out of speeches by raising things that will not actually happen. The danger is that that could create concern in other people’s minds, and I do not want that to happen. Children’s hearings are not included in the bill for a very good reason. Building a structure that is flexible enough to cater for the many different tribunals in Scotland is challenging, but I think that we have achieved the right balance in the bill, which will create a simple and clear structure that will make it easier for users to navigate their way through the tribunals system. I reiterate my commitment to ensuring that the unique characteristics of all the tribunals that are transferring into the new structure will be protected. [Interruption.]

I know how important that is to those who are involved in tribunals. It is in everyone’s interests that the aspects of the current system that are valued are maintained and strengthened in the new structure. Those include the expertise, flexibility, sensitivity, specialism and ethos of individual tribunals. Nothing that the Government is doing is about interfering with any of that. I hope that the safeguards in the bill that I have already spoken about have gone some way towards reassuring members that those characteristics can and will be protected. The different leadership roles of judicial office-holders in the new structure—for example, of the Lord President, the president of Scottish tribunals and chamber presidents—will provide an important mechanism to safeguard the particular and distinctive operations of individual jurisdictions against any unintended drift towards more generalised arrangements or dilution of specialisms. The committee’s convener and other members, including John Finnie, have spoken about the position of the president of Scottish tribunals. I have made a point about saying that the role will not be an appointment. Appointments are a particular category of what a Government does. As I said, it will not be an appointment; the position is within the Lord President’s hierarchy, because it will have delegated powers from the Lord President. It is not a judicial appointment or an appointment in the general sense of the word. If the role is to have delegated powers, they need to flow directly from the Lord President. We expect the judicial leadership to work together across jurisdictions to bring coherence to the system where that will benefit through delivery of a high-quality service to tribunal users. The new leadership structure will also provide opportunities for tribunal members to share best practice and learn from one another’s knowledge and experience. Members have mentioned the number of tribunals that are not being transferred in to the new system. I accept that the creating and transferring into the new structure of tribunals will not happen overnight. Obviously, there is a landscape of reserved tribunals out there that must also be considered in the future. That is not currently our decision, but we are trying to create a framework that will be flexible enough to allow such transfer in, if and when that is required. The bill is a technical one that provides a framework for the creation of a cohesive system for tribunals as a whole. The process is designed to be manageable, because it will take time to bring in each of the individual tribunals. I remind members that there are other policy areas in which creation of tribunals is being discussed. I think that Elaine Murray mentioned one or two, but they are not the only ones. There is the potential for an increase in the number of tribunals on the landscape. It will take time to bring the tribunals in, partly because of the complexity of the tribunals involved and the attention to detail that will be required to ensure that the system works effectively. We have therefore ensured that there will be a high level of parliamentary scrutiny for the majority of the secondary legislation that will derive from the bill. [Interruption.]

We want to get this right first time, with no disruption to the service that is provided to the user. I am confident that we can do that. Before I finish, I draw members’ attention to “Just News”, which is the administrative justice newsletter that can found on the Scottish Government’s website. Its information is of use particularly to committee members who may not know about it. I advise members to have a look at it. Tribunals reform is long overdue; many expert reports have told us that over a long time. Members have debated the issue twice previously, and there was cross-party support on both occasions. Tribunals reform is quite simply the right thing now for the people of Scotland. It is the right thing for Parliament to do.

The Public Records (Scotland) Act 2011 promotes efficient and accountable record keeping by Scottish public authorities. It requires each body to prepare and implement a records management plan, which must set out proper arrangements for the management, archiving and disposal of the body’s records. Each plan must be submitted to the keeper of the records of Scotland for assessment and agreement. The keeper has published on the National Archives of Scotland website a timetable by which named bodies must submit their plans. The website also includes the keeper’s assessment of the plans that have been submitted to date. Scottish ministers have no separate proposals to review the document retention or disposal policies of criminal justice bodies.

Document retention and disposal policies are operational matters for each of the public bodies that are involved, which have to take account of relevant statutory provisions, for example under the data protection legislation. It is important that bodies in the criminal justice system have in place robust arrangements for the retention and destruction or disposal of relevant public records that they hold. Under the Public Records (Scotland) Act 2011, as I said, there must be a plan that includes details of the body’s document retention and disposal policy. I am sure that the member will want to have a look at the relevant plan in respect of the case that she is raising. The circumstances of any individual case in the criminal justice system are a matter for the relevant justice organisation within their independent powers or for the courts. It is difficult for me to answer when I do not know or understand any of the background to the question. I invite the member to get in direct contact with me and, if she does so, I might be able to help her further.

The latest Scottish statistics show that in 2012-13 the provisional figure for fatal fire casualties was 46, which is a drop of 23 per cent compared with the previous year and is the joint lowest figure for 10 years. Overall, there were 26,613 fires in Scotland in 2012-13, which is the lowest figure for the past decade. Although we know that statistics that are based on small numbers can fluctuate over time, the positive downward trend is undoubtedly testament to the hard work of the fire and rescue services and their partners in Scotland, and their continued focus on prevention, making Scotland a safer place to live.

I am sure that the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service will want to consider the use of fire investigation dogs and I invite the member to liaise directly with the service about that. As I recall, I have met one of the dogs in question and I think that most people would be impressed by their activities.

Throughout October and November, the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service is meeting key stakeholders across Scotland who will be directly affected by the plans set out in the strategic intent document.

Lewis Macdonald knows perfectly well that the decisions will be for the Fire and Rescue Service to take. What it has announced thus far, after a board meeting on 26 September, on the intent is that no final decisions on any aspect have been made, apart from the clear indication that Johnstone is the one control room that will remain open—it, of course, was the control room for the old Strathclyde Fire and Rescue Service area. The rest will be the subject of conversations that will be held over October and November. I understand that Lewis Macdonald has already met members of the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service, so he knows that those meetings are taking place. I understand that some people have concerns, but the progress that the Scottish Fire and Rescue service wishes to make on considering all its strategic assets is to improve the service to the public and includes looking at the proposals regarding control rooms.

Safety will always be first and foremost in the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service’s consideration. The chief fire officer, very particularly, looks precisely at public safety when he considers the decisions that the board has to make. I understand that members will all want to argue for their area, but I remind people that thus far, although the general intent has been laid out, the only control room that has been specifically mentioned is Johnstone. People will understand that that control room already deals with more than half of all emergency calls in the whole of Scotland. One emergency control room deals with more than half of all the calls and seven other control rooms deal with the remainder of the calls, to a greater or lesser extent. It is precisely issues of safety that are driving this look at the future of control rooms in Scotland.

The Scottish Government has regular meetings with the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service; indeed, I met the service as recently as last Thursday morning. Decisions on the allocation of its resources, including control rooms, are a matter for the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service Board.

I suggest to the member that using phrases such as “flogged off” in respect of a decision-making process of the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service Board and the chief officers is, frankly, not acceptable. The fact of the matter is that they must look at the strategic assets that they inherited from eight different services, which include eight different control rooms. I have already indicated to the chamber that one of those control rooms—the Johnstone control room—is responsible for dealing with more than half of all the emergency calls that come in across Scotland. Is the member suggesting that that control room cannot handle that work, when it has been doing so for a large number of years? One of the remaining seven control rooms handles an average of only four calls per day. I believe that it is quite proper for the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service to look very carefully at the provision that is being made in respect of control rooms. Safety is paramount. One control room—the one that deals with an average of only four calls per day—is at the limit of its information technology capability and viability. Such safety issues confront the service, and it is right and proper for that safety concern to be at the forefront of what the service is doing in respect of control rooms. To suggest that anything other is in the service’s mind is quite wrong.

The member is right to flag up the wider issues. She also makes the important point that what is being considered at the moment will not affect the outward-looking public face of the fire service. The public will not see any change. When an emergency calls comes in, the same appliance will, most likely, be sent out from the same fire station as previously, with the possible exception of the improved service that will come from there no longer being boundaries, which is something that people need to take into consideration. The safety issues that are at the forefront of the service’s mind include the fact that we currently have five different IT services across the eight control rooms. That makes it almost impossible for them to work as one, which from a safety perspective is the big advantage that the new system would offer. The member raises the fact that a broader range of services will be made available in Aberdeen and throughout Scotland as decisions are made about the full range of assets that are currently available and where they will be placed. I ask all members to engage directly with the board members, who will come out to speak to them in their areas, and the chief fire officer and the various hub commanders. That way, they will get a better understanding of the possible improvements that may be available in their area.

I thank members for their many—and even occasionally constructive—contributions. I particularly thank those members who sit on the Justice Committee and the Health and Sport Committee for all their work on the bill over the past few months. Christine Grahame rightly reminded us of all the individuals who gave evidence to one or other of those committees, and Duncan McNeil talked in those terms as well. We owe those people thanks for taking the time to give evidence even when it may have been a very difficult thing for them to do. A huge number of issues have been raised and, frankly, it would be impossible for me to deal with every single point in the time that is available. I hope to deal with some of the main issues that have arisen throughout today’s debate. Members throughout the chamber clearly share a desire to create a justice system that offers more support to victims and witnesses than there has been in the past. If we are honest, for too long victims were treated as nothing more than bystanders in proceedings. Jenny Marra mentioned a particularly distressing case in her opening speech, which directly affected a constituent of mine, with whom I have been working closely for a number of years. Many issues were raised by the experience of the family concerned. They were pleased to meet the cabinet secretary this morning to discuss the bill, which they see as a big improvement. The bill may not answer every single question that has been raised today or by others, but it is a significant step towards putting victims and witnesses at the heart of the justice system and it will give them more of a voice. For example, it will enable victims to make oral representations to the Parole Board for Scotland when life sentence prisoners are being considered for release on licence if victims feel more comfortable making their concerns known in that way. The bill also addresses one of the biggest issues raised by victims and witnesses—that there is a lack of information about cases. Practically every member in the chamber will have had experiences of people who felt that they simply did not have enough information about a case that involved them. The bill will give such individuals the right to certain information from organisations across the justice system, which will ensure that vital information is available to those who need it, when they need it. I hear Christine Grahame’s request that any information be supplied in plain English—we would all echo that desire. Outwith the bill, we have committed to working with our justice partners to examine the feasibility of setting up an online information-sharing hub, to make accessing information easier. It is important that everybody recognises that the bill is not the only work that is being done in respect of victims and witnesses. The creation of the victim surcharge will ensure that offenders contribute directly to a fund to assist victims of crime. The fund will provide prompt and practical support to victims when they need it most: in the immediate aftermath of the crime. There may be reservations about that, which I understand, but Stewart Maxwell is right to commend its introduction. Of course, the victim surcharge will be considered sensitively. A number of members, including John Lamont, raised the issue of the definition of the word “victim”. I confess that I am baffled by this sudden apparent confusion over the definition. Neither as an MP or MSP nor in my previous profession as a lawyer have I ever had any doubt about who or what a victim was, and I am curious as to quite how the concern has arisen. In the Government’s view, it does not seem to be a particularly well-founded concern, given that the word “victim” is used so much by the public and is well understood, as it is throughout the justice system. Sandra White and Jenny Marra requested that the Government give further consideration to the issue of trafficked victims and I confirm that the Government will be happy to do so. Colin Keir and Gil Paterson both raised the question of same-gender support, particularly in sensitive criminal proceedings. They will be pleased to know that the cabinet secretary is in discussion with Rape Crisis Scotland regarding medical examiners and is looking at the wider issue. The Government will discuss it further before stage 2 with the police and, crucially, the national health service.

Jenny Marra probably knows that those matters are under review and that the Government is working directly with the police on them. I know that each member asked about a number of different things, but I am trying to collate some of the key points. Alison McInnes asked about anonymity orders. There has been discussion with the police and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, but so far there does not seem to be compelling evidence to support the introduction of investigative anonymity orders in addition to the protections currently in place, such as witness anonymity orders. However, the discussions are on-going. Being a witness is a vital civic duty and giving evidence in court can be an unfamiliar and uncomfortable experience. Often that fact is forgotten by professionals in the system. Vulnerable witnesses often need help to give their best evidence, and the bill will make a number of changes to improve the way in which vulnerable witnesses are identified and supported to do that. The changes include raising the age at which a witness is no longer considered to be a child from 16 to 18 and introducing a presumption that alleged victims of certain crimes are vulnerable and should be able to access special measures. The bill will also ensure that every witness is given an individual assessment to determine their potential vulnerability, so that the appropriate support can be put in place. I was interested in a general theme in both Christine Grahame and Roderick Campbell’s speeches, which was an overarching concern about the management of expectations of both victims and witnesses and the need to ensure that people are not led to believe that they will get more than is realistically possible. That will be kept in mind. The bill will create a duty on criminal justice agencies to set out clear standards of service for victims and witnesses, and an effective route for complaints. That will ensure that victims and witnesses know how they can expect to be treated when dealing with each justice agency and how to complain if standards are not met. A number of members, including Malcolm Chisholm, raised the issue of the appointment of a victims commissioner. There has been some heated debate around that idea, but its proponents must respond to the opposition of both Victim Support Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid to the proposal. Along with Graeme Pearson and Willie Coffey, Malcolm Chisholm also raised concerns about how the standard of service is to be monitored and asked questions related to that. I reassure those members that victim support organisations will be consulted on the setting of standards and that the Government is willing to consider the establishment of a formal monitoring process. Those things are still under consideration. Christian Allard concentrated on access to information about fatal road accidents. It would be useful for the chamber to take a moment to commend the Dekker family and SCID for their tireless work on the issue of road deaths over many years in the Parliament. The establishment of the national confidential forum is a critical part of our SurvivorScotland strategy, which aims to improve the health and wellbeing of all survivors of childhood abuse. The forum will be unique in offering people who were placed in institutional care as children acknowledgement and belief without judgment or interrogation. It will also be uniquely placed to reflect the experiences that it hears in recommendations to policy makers and service providers to ensure that the mistakes of the past are not repeated. It is important and timely that people who grew up in children’s homes and other institutions are given a voice. That is particularly important for survivors of historical institutional abuse who may never have had the opportunity to share their experiences. The focus of the national confidential forum on institutional care is on evidence of what works. We know that the model of confidential acknowledgement that is to be offered by the forum works for people who were placed in institutions as children. It will be particularly important for people who were placed in care at a time when there were no national standards, no inspection regimes and few routes for children to raise complaints. It is clear that the forum is not the whole response. Many of Duncan McNeil’s comments were directed at that concern. I reassure him that the Government is considering how we might take cognisance of the issue of those who were abused while in foster care. They have not been forgotten. The centre for excellence for looked-after children in Scotland and In Care Survivors Service Scotland are currently undertaking work that is funded by the Scottish Government into how acknowledgement as a model could work in the context of foster care. I accept that some stakeholders think that the bill has not gone far enough. However, I believe that the forum must have a clear and distinct role and scope, which will enable it to complement but not duplicate the range of other responses that are available for survivors of childhood abuse. I have been heartened by the general support for the bill and for the wider aim of improving support for victims and witnesses. The Government is not, however, complacent and recognises that there is a need to give further consideration to some of the issues that have been discussed today. We will work with colleagues throughout the process to ensure that victims’ rights are embedded in our justice system.

I congratulate Hanzala Malik on securing today’s members’ business debate, and I thank the members who have participated in discussing this important matter. It is important because there should be no place in Scotland for any form of racial or religious intolerance and discrimination, at any time, at any place or in any community. As a Government, we deplore any attempt to exploit Drummer Rigby’s death, and we reaffirm the message that Scotland is a country where people of all faiths and none are welcome and can live in peace. Police Scotland reports that recent events have led to a slight increase in hate crime reporting in Scotland. Part of that is due to the excellent relationship between Police Scotland and local communities. Because we are having this debate against the wider background of the brutal killing of Drummer Rigby, it is right that people flag up and recognise the attempts by a small minority of people to exploit his death for their own divisive purposes. However, the increase in the reporting of hate crimes has resulted in robust enforcement action being taken in each case, and it is an important point of confidence for communities suffering any form of harassment or discrimination to know that their complaints will be taken seriously and acted on. As Police Scotland will always respond promptly to such reports, I encourage members of the public to report every instance of hate crime to the police as soon as possible. I hope that members who, like Malcolm Chisholm, Mary Fee and Anne McTaggart, have become aware of incidents of harassment or other attacks in their communities will encourage individuals to report those incidents to the police. It means, regrettably, that our hate crime statistics may look as if they are going up, but often it is not the number of incidents that is increasing but the confidence in reporting them, and that is important. People need to feel that they can report such incidents and be listened to, so I encourage people to report those incidents to the police.

I am sorry—can people not hear me? People do not often say that they cannot hear me. I, too, congratulate Amina—the Muslim Women’s Resource Centre on its I speak for myself campaign. That national campaign aims to encourage and inspire Muslim women by spreading knowledge of women’s rights and promoting positive images of Muslim women. As has been stated by many members, the campaign seeks to empower Muslim women to share their personal messages with their fellow Scots so that damaging stereotypes can be challenged. We have two male Muslim MSPs, and I personally look forward to our first Muslim woman MSP—perhaps she is sitting in the public gallery this evening. I am sure that Annabel Goldie, Mary Fee and Anne McTaggart would all join me in expressing that wish. To echo the campaign pledge, we want Scotland to be a place where all people can flourish and be themselves, free from being judged and labelled because of their race, faith or personal background. As a Government, we value Scotland’s ethnic minority communities for the contribution that they make and the important role that they play in making Scotland the diverse and vibrant country that we are today. Since 2012, we have committed nearly £6 million to supporting specific projects and initiatives to combat racist and religious bigotry and hatred. That includes work with Gypsies/Travellers, the Roma community, asylum seekers, refugees and the other groups that one might expect to see on that list. We have also developed our one Scotland campaign through a variety of media and we are now disseminating a one Scotland toolkit to enable local areas to develop their own anti-racism campaigns. That may go some way towards the skill sharing that Hanzala Malik wants to see. Officials are also updating the race equality statement, which is expected to be published later this year. The statement will underpin the themes of prevention and early intervention and will consider issues such as race equality and employment, poverty and hate crime. I turn to faith equality. We often see a combining of the two issues of faith and race. This is not the first time that that has happened in Scotland. The issues of faith and race or faith and ethnic minority have been combined before historically, which has often led to a disfiguring in some of our communities. We want to prevent that from happening to another community in the future. It is important that we continue to restate that the diverse faith and belief communities are valued in and for themselves and to emphasise the important role that they play in enriching our country. There is no place in Scotland for any form of religious hatred or intolerance any more than there is for hatred based on race. We will not tolerate any form of religious prejudice. A total of £768,000 has been allocated to faith projects specifically to tackle racism and religious intolerance for the current three-year spending review period. In addition, £360,000 has been allocated to Interfaith Scotland, in Glasgow, which I visited this morning. Interfaith Scotland is a place where all faith communities can come together to discuss and share issues and concerns. I was interested in Anne McTaggart’s comments on the work that is being done in her area. I have visited the schools that she talked about and I agree with her about the inspiring nature of the work that is being done by young people there. I am trying to remember the name of the play that the little kids do, which is based on “The Rainbow Fish”. It is well worth seeing not just how much they enjoy that but how much they learn from it. Announcements have been made about funding, and there will be more. As a Government, we have very good relations with Scotland’s faith communities, including the Muslim community. Ministers and officials meet faith leaders and faith groups regularly. In recent weeks—for good reasons in the post-Woolwich scenario—both the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice have visited mosques and have offered support and reassurance in the aftermath of that terrible event. In addition, I believe that, this morning, while I was in Glasgow meeting Interfaith Scotland, the cabinet secretary was in Dundee meeting people from the Dundee International Women’s Centre. I thank all the members who have participated in the debate, including Dennis Robertson, who brings his own unique perspective to such debates, in that he is physically unable to see what all these differences are supposed to be about. That is always a very good reminder for us. I join everyone in congratulating Amina—the Muslim Women’s Resource Centre on the I speak for myself campaign. Meeting closed at 17:40.

The National Autistic Society maintains a list of law firms that have experience of advising and representing people with autism. People can search the database on the Law Society’s website for legal services in their area. The Crown Office is committed to ensuring that the correct support is put in place for victims and witnesses and that it takes into account their individual needs. It has specific guidance on autism, including publications such as “Autism: a guide for criminal justice professionals”, which is produced by the National Autistic Society, and a guide entitled “People with Learning Disabilities and the Criminal Justice System”.

The “People with Learning Disabilities and the Criminal Justice System” guide was produced by the Scottish Government in 2011 in collaboration with the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Scottish Court Service, the Scottish Prison Service and NHS Scotland. It provides information on the Scottish criminal justice system to people with learning disabilities. In addition, autism alert cards have been developed to improve outcomes from interactions with members of the emergency services and others. The cards can be carried by people with autism and used in difficult situations in which those people may find communication difficult. The card has been developed by the National Autistic Society and has been launched in the Highlands, Lothian and the Borders, Orkney, Shetland, the Western Isles, central Scotland and Strathclyde. The autism spectrum disorder reference group has discussed national implementation of the card, and it is considering how to roll out the scheme across Scotland. Recommendations will be made to my ministerial colleague Michael Matheson for consideration later in the year.

The Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council and its Scottish committee were established by section 4 of and schedule 7 to the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. The AJTC, including its Scottish committee, is to be abolished under provisions included in the United Kingdom Public Bodies Act 2011. The UK Government wishes to abolish it, including its Scottish committee. That is apparently as part of its commitment to reduce the number and cost of arm’s-length bodies. The Scottish Government does not object to the abolition of the AJTC and we have brought forward alternative proposals. We are required to agree to this public body consent motion. I move, That the Parliament consents to the making of the Public Bodies (Abolition of Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council) Order 2013, a draft of which was laid before the UK Parliament on 18 December 2012 and which makes provision that would be within the legislative competence of the Parliament if it were contained within an Act of that Parliament.

Tackling antisocial behaviour and making communities safer and stronger remain a top priority for the Government. In March 2009, the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities jointly published their framework for tackling antisocial behaviour, “Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland”. That recognised that prevention, early and effective intervention and diversion should be at the framework’s heart. Our target of 1,000 extra police officers continues to be met, and that has helped to deliver the lowest level of recorded crime since 1975. That includes an 8 per cent decrease in recorded crimes of vandalism, including fire raising and malicious mischief, between 2010-11 and 2011-12. Furthermore, since 2007, more than £50 million has been recovered from the proceeds of crime and invested throughout Scotland, directly benefiting more than 600,000 young people. That is part of the prevention process to try to avoid young people becoming involved in antisocial behaviour and offending in the first place.

Hardly. The member no doubt will be happy to hear that a post-implementation report on the antisocial behaviour framework will be produced later this year. Of course, the Government has taken forward a massive programme of reform since 2007—and indeed 2011—that contributes to tackling antisocial behaviour and delivering improvements for the people of Scotland. We have done a number of things, including taking forward measures to address antisocial behaviour in housing, which I know is a particular concern for a lot of people. All of that has meant that the timing of the second report to Parliament has been attenuated somewhat. However, as I said, it will be published later this year.

I am aware of the situation that pertains in the member’s constituency. The Scottish Government has consulted on a range of proposals to toughen up the tenancy rules for affordable rented housing tenants who engage in antisocial behaviour. They include measures to allow previous antisocial behaviour to be taken into account in the allocation of housing, antisocial tenants losing tenancy rights, and a simplification of the process for evicting the worst offenders. The member may be relieved to know that the Scottish Government will make an announcement in due course about the policy content of the forthcoming housing bill.

There is a right of appeal to the Court of Session against a tribunal decision within 42 days of the decision. If an individual wishes to consider raising an appeal outwith that period, independent legal advice should be sought.

As the member will be aware, I cannot provide specific advice because the issue will always depend on the facts of the case. I have already indicated the option of making an appeal to the Court of Session, and the member’s constituent could go down the road of raising a further case with the Lands Tribunal for Scotland or in the Court of Session. However, if he feels that the material that he has found indicates an inaccuracy in the register, he can take the matter up directly with the keeper of the registers of Scotland in the first instance.

I congratulate Mary Fee on obtaining her first members’ business debate. Appropriately, it is on a subject that she pursues tenaciously. I know that she will quite soon meet the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and that she will meet the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, so I expect her to be back in the chamber with further comments on the issue. She has raised important issues in a thoughtful way, which is helpful. I also thank other members for their thoughtful contributions. In her motion and speech, Mary Fee rightly welcomed the £70,000 investment for HMP Greenock this year to pilot a new approach to throughcare services. Sandra White and Hanzala Malik also acknowledged and welcomed the good work that is done there. I therefore know that members will be delighted to hear that that investment will increase to £1.3 million next year for the construction of two new community integration units: one for men and one for women. The existing work is being built on, which is very important because we know that purpose, meaning and positive family relationships, which are important assets for anyone, are particularly important for shaping and supporting new beginnings for people who leave prison. Mary Fee referenced the debate around meaningful or purposeful activity for prisoners, and one or two other members also referred to it. I agree with the Justice Committee’s report on its inquiry into purposeful activity in prisons, which was published on 28 March 2013, that purposeful activity in prisons is an important part of rehabilitation because it can provide a work ethic and give structure to the prisoner’s day, it can give them a chance to build and enhance existing skills and hobbies, and it can better prepare them for rejoining our communities in a way that gives them the best chance of making a positive contribution and staying away from crime. I do not have the statistics to hand, but I think that we know that people who leave prison and go on to find work form the group that is least likely to reoffend. It is important that we see that link all the way through. There is no one-size-fits-all approach to reducing reoffending, because we are all individuals. Our approach to offenders’ rehabilitation, whether it is while they are in custody or in the community, needs to be person centred and linked to individual need, and it must build on offenders’ strengths and assets. Mary Fee is right to remind us that the word “asset” does not always have to refer to money—it is also about the assets that an individual can bring, which are often overlooked in this debate. The vital work that is required cannot be the sole responsibility of the criminal justice system, as the wider services that are required are not just in the criminal justice system. It is crucial to work with offenders as soon as they are in custody, but Lewis Macdonald and other members, including Jackson Carlaw, raised the problem of the services that are available after a prisoner’s release. Much of the support and many of the services that require to be in place were mentioned by Jackson Carlaw. They include suitable housing and timely access to addiction services, which is of particular concern to me, as the minister who is responsible for drugs policy. That has to be planned, and needs must be met by services on the other side of the prison gates. Historically, there has been a joining-up problem that needs to be overcome, which is why it is important for us to begin to highlight the whole issue of throughcare. Services in our communities will be vital, and communities should understand that they have a broader role to play. Hanzala Malik spoke about the stigma attaching to people from particular minority backgrounds; stigma can attach to all people leaving prison and can make it difficult for them to be reintegrated into their communities. There needs to be a bit of community learning about that. The discussions about that might be difficult in some areas, but they are important. People who work in mental health services, addiction services, employment and housing all have fundamental roles to play, and they have to open their doors. It is crucial that the whole public sector accepts its part in the rehabilitation of offenders—I will return to Jackson Carlaw’s comments about what is happening south of the border. Lewis Macdonald asked specifically about speech therapy. Some work is taking place on that at Polmont. The Government recognises the need for specialist interventions where they are appropriate, and those form part of the approach that is being developed to create a skills and learning environment in Polmont. Colin Keir highlighted some of the challenges around short sentences. It can be difficult to put in place meaningful interventions during very short prison sentences. We have all heard stories and anecdotal evidence about unfortunate release dates or times. We know that that happens. Those are important things to take on board and address. I return to the public sector versus private sector point. Jackson Carlaw commended the approach of the UK Government in this regard. As he might expect, we are open to constructive suggestions from elsewhere—wherever that “elsewhere” may be—but I gently point out to members that the payment by results programme was introduced after a consultation of only six weeks, and it is receiving widespread criticism. The jury is currently out on it, if Jackson Carlaw will pardon the pun.

I have about 35 seconds left in my speech, so I am not able to deal with that now. A number of members commended the change fund and the financial commitment to it. The mentoring service has been acknowledged and recognised by everybody. We are also working with the Scottish Prison Service in Edinburgh, Perth, Cornton Vale and Greenock prisons to improve the way in which short-term prisoners’ needs are identified, which is important. As the minister in charge of drugs policy, I regularly discuss the live matter of the prevalence of substance misuse and the particular problems that it creates on exit from prison. We have still not got that completely right. Part of our answer to that is the naloxone programme, but I recognise that it cannot be the only answer. I commend the work of Jim Kerr, the governor of HMP Greenock, and his staff, who are piloting the whole new approach for prison officers. Support officers will provide holistic case management for short-term offenders, and will work with them to create a plan for release. We are all behind that project, and we all want to make it work. We all want to see whether we can introduce it more widely. The outcome of the pilot will be extremely important; it will provide lessons for us and it will inform roll-out of the approach across the prison estate. This has been an interesting and thought-provoking debate. Thank you for your forbearance, Presiding Officer, in allowing me to take a few extra seconds. I thank all members for their speeches. 13:09 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

I am grateful to members for their speeches in this afternoon’s debate, which I think has been productive. It is clear that reducing reoffending and protecting victims and communities from crime is a high priority across the chamber. I suspect that Malcolm Chisholm had it right when he said that there is unanimity on the nature of the problem. I recognise the good work that has been and continues to be done by our community justice partners. Working with offenders can be very demanding, as they often have complex and entrenched problems. Changing their behaviour to help them to make a positive contribution to their families and communities and to make reparation for their crime requires a professional, competent and very skilled workforce. We must continue to support and empower practitioners, managers and leaders in the public and third sectors who work in that important area—I recognise that it cuts across both sectors. We cannot ignore the serious issues that have been highlighted by reports from Audit Scotland and the commission on women offenders. Those reports have identified a lack of strategic leadership, the absence of robust accountability arrangements and the need for a more strategic commissioning of services that are based on what works. It is crucial that structural arrangements support rather than hinder those who work in community justice if we want real and lasting improvements. A redesigned community justice system should meet the needs of offenders and their families, deliver services that are evidence based and cost effective, and have the confidence of the judiciary and local communities. Engagement with partners across the whole public sector is critical. Reducing reoffending is a matter not just for criminal justice but, as many members have flagged up, for those working in mental health, addiction, employment and housing. All those services have a key role to play. In addition to changes to the existing arrangements for the planning, management and delivery of offender services in the community, a host of other work is under way to reduce reoffending, and that work will continue. Under phase 2 of the reducing reoffending programme, we are establishing a community justice centre for women who offend. We are also introducing changes to existing funding arrangements to give more flexibility to local partners to commit resources to what works to reduce reoffending, and we are reviewing voluntary throughcare services for offenders in custody and on their release into the community. All those aspects of the programme were raised by members throughout the debate. All of our activity is underpinned by a strong preventative approach, whether that is diverting minor first-time offenders out of the criminal justice system or using the proceeds of crime to fund facilities and activities for young people who are at risk of turning to a life of crime. As most members here will agree, effective prevention and early intervention can make a positive difference. Such an approach has the potential to bring not only long-term savings for the public purse but benefits to individuals, their families and communities. Of course, that approach does not go without criticism, and we must be robust in our defence of how important it is. When prevention and early intervention are brought into play, they are not a soft option but an important part of all the tools that are available to us. The importance of early intervention was articulated strongly during the consultation exercise. As members will know, the consultation exercise ended only a few days ago. We held 13 events across Scotland and heard the views of more than 550 people. I could hardly pre-empt and summarise all those views, but I can tell members that the discussions were insightful and well informed and they will play an important part in our consideration of the way forward. Before the summer recess, we plan to publish a report summarising the findings from the consultation events, but members should be reassured that the discussion is continuing. Indeed, today’s debate is part of that.

If Annabel Goldie is a little patient, I will come to that aspect. I think it fair to say that most members will agree that, in Alison McInnes’s words, the status quo is not an option, although I detected a departure from that in Mary Fee’s speech. As Lewis Macdonald rightly articulated, a key point in the debate is whether the delivery of the various services needs a single national service or better local responses, and each option has its merits. I can reassure him that MAPPA funding will continue irrespective of the approach adopted, because the management of serious offenders remains a Government priority. Margaret Mitchell made a fair point about the almost guaranteed duplication that arises out of the many different agencies that are involved at present. Members across the chamber grappled with the real difficulty of achieving the right balance between localisation and central direction—Margaret Mitchell, Christine Grahame, Malcolm Chisholm and others mentioned that. I know that Malcolm Chisholm recognises the tensions that exist in that debate, as we have had some interesting conversations on Twitter precisely about the issue of centralisation versus the criticism of having a postcode lottery, which tends to come with localisation. We all have to be mature about that debate. On fine collection, Margaret Mitchell rather skated over the fact that a great deal of the money that she mentioned would go to the Treasury and would not be available to us to do what she wanted. On her specific question about the timing of the CPO evaluation, I can confirm that that will not be completed until November 2014. I am sure that she would not want us to hold things back until then, but we will consider any learning from it that we can. Christine Grahame reminded us that all the good work that is done in prisons can be undone when there is no joined-up delivery on the outside. She also introduced an ad hoc option to the list that she will not allow us to forget. A number of members, including Colin Keir, drew attention to the problem of working in silos. Colin Keir also raised a point about people being released from prisons that are far away from their local communities, which creates difficulties for joining up services. Other members, including Graeme Pearson and Rod Campbell, also mentioned their own experience of the problem. Annabel Goldie asked about the options. I think that she may have given some succour to Christine Grahame about her ad hoc option. Without committing the Government only a few days after the consultation has closed, I can say that other options, or even hybrid options, are still open for consideration. That is why we are having today’s debate. I am sorry that Jenny Marra introduced a rather discordant note at the end of the debate. In the main, the debate has been profoundly productive and positive, and there will be further debate before any legislation is introduced. Today’s debate has been thought provoking, I thank all members for their contributions to it, and I hope that we can continue to work together constructively in the future. With that, I draw my remarks to a close.

Figures on the Scottish Government website detail the numbers of vehicles that individual police forces seized under the provisions of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. Those figures cover the period from October 2004 to March 2008, although they do not detail the types of vehicles that were seized. Although we have not collected figures since 2008, Police Scotland has advised that the former Strathclyde Police seized a total of 23 vehicles from April 2011, including one quad bike and three off-road bikes, using the provisions of the 2004 act.

I am well aware that the member has a particular interest in the matter; I know that he has been pursuing issues related to the misuse of quad bikes for some time. I would be happy to take on board the suggestion that the member has made. We would possibly have to check whether we could do what he suggests, because the information would have to come from the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency and I am not quite sure how that would work. However, I am happy to discuss the matter with the member if he wishes. I am also aware that Police Scotland is developing a city-wide initiative to tackle the issue ahead of the summer holidays because, for obvious reasons, the misuse of quad bikes tends to be a seasonal issue. However, I am happy to discuss any suggestion that the member may have in respect of the behaviour in question.

Recent statistics that were published on 23 April demonstrate that our law enforcers are making good progress on seizing illegal drugs in Scotland. The statistics show that, during 2011-12, officers in Scotland’s police forces carried out 29,509 drug seizures, which represents an increase of 10.5 per cent on the previous year.

Methadone poses a particular problem. As members will probably be aware, it is not subject to importation issues in the way that many other illegal drugs are, and there are no thefts of methadone from pharmacists and carriers. Most of the illicit methadone trade appears to take place between individuals. One issue that will be considered by the chief medical officer’s expert group, which was set up towards the end of last year, relates to concerns about the prescribing of methadone and the extent to which that is robust as a result of the decisions that are made about how individuals can access it. We hope that, when the report is published, there may be some pointers to the way ahead in respect of the illicit use of methadone.

I apologise for my slight lateness at the beginning of the debate. Presiding Officer, you were quite correct in suspecting that I had become overly focused on the 3.10 start, and I accept your chiding of me.

Well, I am taking the opportunity to apologise. I listened with great interest to the debate. Along with my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, I readily acknowledge the genuine concerns that have been expressed by members in all parts of the chamber about the closure of some of the sheriff and justice of the peace courts, although most of the debate has been about the sheriff court closures rather than the justice of the peace court closures. Lord Gill, the Lord President of the Court of Session, said: “Determining the future shape of Scotland’s court structure is a serious responsibility. Doing so against a backdrop of significant change and in a time of severe pressure on the public finances is a difficult task, with few easy answers.” However, he went on to say: “I am confident that the proposals ... will contribute significantly to the success of the forthcoming civil justice reforms.” It is important to remember that the proposals are part of a wider set of reforms to create a modern justice system that is fair, accessible, cost effective and efficient, and which better meets the needs of the people of Scotland. The wider civil and criminal reforms that were recommended in the reviews by Lord Gill, Lord Carloway and Sheriff Principal Bowen will ensure that cases are more effectively managed and reduce the amount of wasted time and the number of hearings that are required for each case. Those outcomes cannot be fully achieved unless we rationalise the estate by taking business out of courts that are underused or which duplicate provision in an area. It is also important to remember that the volume of business that is carried out in the sheriff courts that are recommended for closure is only around 5 per cent of total business.

Yes, but it is still 5 per cent, so 95 per cent of business is not affected. Overall, court business is down. Civil business in the sheriff court was down 13 per cent in 2011-12 compared with 2010-11, and crime is at a 37-year low. All that will feed into and begin to show in the court system. The SCS is confident that the transferred business can be assimilated without difficulty into a smaller number of better-equipped courts that have modern facilities for victims, witnesses and jurors. The Scottish Court Service is not immune to the financial pressures that affect all public bodies, even though it is independent of Government. The service is seeking to save £4.5 million from its revenue budget and estimates that the proposals will save almost £1 million per annum and a maintenance backlog of almost £3 million.

I suspect that many SNP back benchers wish that Willie Rennie was correct, but he is not. Members: Oh!

Ministers are satisfied that the Scottish Court Service carefully considered its options against the principles of access to justice that are set out by the judiciary, which stipulate that court users should be able to get to court by public transport before their case proceeds and return home by public transport on the same day. That might mean that some cases will be set for later in the court day; the SCS is confident that it will be able to satisfy the requirement. A large court closure programme in England and Wales has involved the closure of 93 magistrates courts and 49 county courts—I see that Conservative members are rolling their eyes. I find it extraordinary that the court closure programme in England and Wales is not to be criticised, whereas the programme in Scotland is.

I need to press on. It simply costs too much to maintain old buildings that are not suitable for courts in the 21st century and which do not provide modern facilities for those who have business there. Some critics of the closures suggest that the closure of a sheriff court in a high street will have an adverse effect on the town’s economy, but the economic benefits of a court that sits only on certain days and rarely for a full day might be negligible. Furthermore, when the building is converted for alternative use it might have a more substantial economic benefit to the community. I think that the cabinet secretary made that point about Linlithgow. It has been alleged that firms of solicitors will struggle if a local sheriff court is closed, but where few cases are being raised in the sheriff court—there are a number of areas where that is exactly the situation—it is extremely unlikely that local lawyers are relying on the court’s continued existence for the wellbeing of their business. In such places, lawyers will likely have diversified into many other areas of law. It is understandable that many members, including SNP back benchers, focused on proposed closures in their local areas. We would expect nothing else. However, the consequences of taking that totally non-strategic approach would result in no closures of any court, anywhere, ever. It is simply not a tenable position for any Government to take, although a number of members seem to be of that view.

No, I need to press on; I only have a minute and 40 seconds. Remarkably, the members who are of that view include Margaret Mitchell, Alex Fergusson and Alison McInnes, despite their own parties’ Government south of the border taking a very different position. I presume that their position is court closures England good, court closures Scotland bad. Iain Gray spoke passionately about his sheriff court in Haddington, which I have heard him speak about before. In his desire to blame the cabinet secretary as an individual, he blithely swept aside the year-long consultation by the Scottish Court Service, whose job this is, of course. I do not remember who raised the issue of the drug court—I think that it was Richard Simpson. That is entirely a matter for the sheriff principal—it is his decision, and the member needs to accept that position. Richard Simpson became very animated in the debate, but I note that he made no submission to the consultation; no doubt he overlooked that last year. Graeme Pearson, Alex Fergusson and a number of others talked about the problems and difficulties that people will have, but the vast majority of court users will have no additional travel requirements as a consequence of the proposals. There were constant references by Labour members from a sedentary position to the fact that we are talking about only £1 million, as if that was an utterly negligible amount of money. Labour members are not quite so cavalier when it comes to their own cuts commission, which my colleague John Mason also spotted.

I am sorry, but I have run out of time.

Thank you. I will deal with some of the other points that have been raised—[Interruption.]

—including the point raised by Jenny Marra about the transfer of cases to the sheriff court as a result of forthcoming reforms. The reforms to move lower-value claims from the Court of Session to the sheriff court will affect around 3,000 cases. Sheriff courts already deal with more than 94 per cent of all civil cases. There will also be a personal injury court that will handle most of the cases involved. Lewis Macdonald raised the issue of delays in court, but that is not just to do with court availability—and Lewis Macdonald knows that. Many factors contribute to delays.

I need to close now. Many of Scotland’s courts date from Victorian times and simply are not fit for purpose in the 21st century. Many are underused and others lie closer to bigger courts, where business will be scheduled more efficiently in terms of court and shrieval time. Ministers believe that the Scottish Court Service’s recommendations for the future shape of Scotland’s courts will better meet the needs of the people of Scotland. I agree with my colleague the cabinet secretary and with his amendment to the motion.

It is important to say that the interaction process is an initiative led by the Scottish Human Rights Commission in which the Scottish Government is one of several participants. The first interaction process took place on 28 February and was attended by a wide range of participants, including those from local authorities, charities, religious bodies and universities, as well as individuals. I understand that a further event will be held in June and that more events are likely. One of the purposes of the process is to develop an action plan. Along with others, we will be interested in receiving that in due course.

The national confidential forum aspect of the debate is being pursued in the context of the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, and the Minister for Public Health will give evidence to the Health and Sport Committee on 30 April on the relevant sections. Neil Bibby may be aware that the Government has conducted a consultation on time bar, which is one of the issues about which victims of historical child abuse have expressed concern. That consultation closed only a couple of weeks ago and we are analysing the responses. We are considering a number of other things, but we must wait for the interaction to produce specific proposals. Further negotiations that will take place have already been agreed at the event, and that is an on-going process. We are waiting for that to come to fruition.

Notification of consultation, such as that on time bar, is widely available on the Scottish Government website, and the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill is in the legislative process. I appreciate that not all members will be keeping tabs on that, but they can do so if they choose to. Parliament will be updated on other aspects by ministers as and when appropriate.

We received 62 responses in that consultation, five of which requested confidentiality; the remainder have been published on the Scottish Government website. Unfortunately, a significant number of responses contained material that might be considered defamatory, and we had to carefully scrutinise them and redact sections of them. As the member may be aware, if the Government published a defamatory statement, it would become party to that defamation. Most responses supported changes to the legislation. There was also support for enhancing consumer choice by non-statutory means to make it easier for consumers to dismiss and replace their land maintenance company. However, difficulties were highlighted with the legislative approach where land is owned by the maintenance company, and careful consideration is having to be given to the consequences of that.

For obvious reasons, I cannot speak about anything other than what is in my portfolio. If the member is concerned about establishing how many other Government consultations are still outstanding, I have no doubt that he can ask what the position is across a range of them. I would have expected the member to be more concerned about what has been happening in practice over the past two years. Although there have been problems as a consequence of the submissions to that consultation, it is not the case that things have not changed. Through the implementation of the Property Factors (Scotland) Act 2011, a home owner housing panel was established, and home owners may complain to it about the level of service from their land maintenance company or property factor. The member should be aware—if he has not been up until now—that, quite separately, the Justice Committee has been looking into the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003, and some of its inquiry has related to aspects of this matter. It is therefore not the case that nothing has been happening. We are carefully considering the consequences of changing legislation in this area. As yet, however, we have not been able to come to a definitive conclusion on that.

I congratulate Neil Findlay on securing the debate. We have heard from members who represent communities and individuals who are scarred by the traumatic experience of the miners’ strike. Unlike younger members, I remember the strike only too well. I remember its extended nature and its huge impact on mining communities and on the wider community. As I recall, despair was felt far beyond the mining communities and very many people were emotionally caught up in the dispute, quite rightly. It is scarcely believable that it is nearly 30 years since the strike took place. The aftermath continues to linger. The motion refers to issues to do with the actions of South Yorkshire Police during and after the Hillsborough tragedy and to the procedures in England for referral of complaints about the police. It also refers to possible miscarriages of justice in Scotland during the miners’ strike. On police conduct, it is important to emphasise that there are specific and distinctive arrangements in Scotland for considering and investigating complaints against the police. Complaints that predate the establishment of the police service of Scotland on 1 April can still be raised with the new chief constable for investigation. Following an investigation, if people remain unhappy about how their complaint has been handled, they will be able to ask the independent police investigations and review commissioner to undertake a review. In the event that there are allegations of criminality on the part of members of the police operating in Scotland, whether from a Scottish or other UK force, such allegations can be referred to the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. The Scottish ministers, rightly, have no role or right to intervene in those processes for considering complaints against members of the police. It genuinely is not clear to me from the speeches in the debate whether specific complaints have been made. It would have been helpful to know that. In any case, even a successful complaint against the police would not in and of itself result in a conviction being overturned; one thing does not automatically follow the other. If the desired end is the actual overturning of convictions, I need to remind members that there is a proper path for that, which is not via the police complaints process, although I accept and understand that individuals might wish to utilise both paths. Convictions are dealt with differently. There is in existence a Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission. The crucial role of an independent criminal case review commission was recognised by the then UK Labour Government back in the late 1990s, with the commission being established in 1999. It provides precisely the route and potential outcome that I presume that Neil Findlay is seeking: the capacity to overturn criminal convictions and the possibility of doing so.

What Neil Findlay is asking for is rather more difficult to establish for some of the reasons that John Finnie outlined. Such an inquiry—I will come back to the couple of specific examples that Neil Findlay used—does not necessarily deliver the result that the member is looking for. It is the commission that has the responsibility in our system to investigate potential miscarriages of justice. It operates entirely independently of our courts, the police, prosecutors and Scottish ministers, which is as it should be.

There has been no indication of any specific complaints made to the police. I come back to the possibility of going to the commission: as I understand it, there has not even been any specific attempt to use the current processes that are available.

I really must get on; I have only a minute and a half left. I am sorry.

Thank you. Right, I will take another intervention.

That is not what I said—Neil Findlay ought to listen carefully. It is about using the existing processes that are available to people to pursue either complaints against the police and/or claims of miscarriage of justice and attempts to overturn convictions. Ministers cannot overturn convictions. If overturning convictions is the required end, I have to say that that is not something that a Government minister is capable of doing. It is right that members raise awareness of important concerns that are being raised within their communities.

Can I just make some progress? We have heard Neil Findlay and a range of other members all talk eloquently about the history of all this, and—understandably—about the impact on communities and individuals, and the lingering anger and resentment about what happened. However, it is also important to be clear that we do not want to go back to the time before we had the commission, when Government ministers had a direct role in deciding whether to quash criminal convictions. Ministers simply do not now have the power to quash convictions. That was not a healthy or appropriate state of affairs, and it is far better to have an independent review commission, which has completely depoliticised that critical part of our justice system.

I want to get on. I have taken seven and a half minutes and quite a few interventions already. The commission has a special power to refer back to court for an appeal cases that otherwise have exhausted the normal legal process. It will refer cases when it considers that a miscarriage of justice might have occurred and that it is in the interests of justice to refer the case for an appeal. Ultimately, only a court can now determine whether a miscarriage of justice has arisen and quash the original verdict. The established procedures are there to be used when necessary, and I am aware that recent press reports have indicated that at least one well-known legal firm—this might be what Neil Findlay was referring to—is seeking to bring together information from a number of people who were arrested and convicted during the strike, with a view to a possible application to the commission. Obviously, those are—rightly—matters for the individuals involved, their legal representatives and the commission. However, I strongly recommend that approach to individuals who allege a miscarriage of justice, to their legal representatives and to members of this Parliament. That is the right way to proceed; that is how convictions can be overturned, which I understood to be the actual outcome that is desired. Neil Findlay referred to other inquiries. I point out to him that the McKie inquiry took place after all other due process had been completed. That is, in a sense, what we are saying should happen now. I commend to members that way of proceeding. To sum up, in Scotland, we have robust procedures in place to investigate complaints against the police and to review historical criminal convictions and possible miscarriages of justice. We should rely on those tried and tested impartial processes to be used as needed.

Courts never cancel cases, as such, but many cases do not proceed, for a variety of reasons. No statistics are held by the Scottish Government or the Scottish Court Service on the cost of court cases that do not proceed. We cannot know what the costs are of non-Government parties and of agents, although we recognise that cases not proceeding can cause inconvenience to victims and witnesses as well as financial costs. There is no cost bearing directly on the Scottish Court Service as a consequence of court business not proceeding. That is because it recognises the inherent unpredictability of court business and organises its business accordingly.

I have explained to the member why it is almost impossible to come to a global figure on costs that covers civil and criminal cases. Since, for example, the reasons for not proceeding are so many and so various, to assign blame—as it were—for the cost would be extraordinarily difficult, and it would be almost impossible to assess unless one were to consider the issue on an individual, case-by-case basis, which would be inordinately expensive to do, because fees and other on-going expenses vary from one case to the next. We are concerned about the issue and the Government is doing a number of things to try to ensure that things change. On the civil side, we are consulting on a draft courts reform bill to try to ensure that cases are heard at an appropriate level in the civil court hierarchy, which would certainly make litigation in Scotland cheaper and quicker. We are considering changes to sheriff and jury procedure, which I think that the member specifically talked about. Those proposals arise out of recommendations by Sheriff Principal Bowen and will be implemented through a forthcoming criminal justice bill. We are conscious of the problem and are trying to do what we can to make things a great deal easier. However, I suspect that what the member is asking for would cost much more than the figure that we would get to.

The overwhelming majority of football fans are law abiding and want to enjoy the friendly rivalry that is part of any game. The Government has made it clear that bigotry and religious hatred should have no place in our national game and that we wish to stamp them out wherever and whenever they occur. That is why we introduced the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Act 2012, in response to calls from the police and prosecutors to strengthen the law. It is still early days—indeed, we do not yet have a full year’s worth of statistics—but the latest figures show that there were convictions in 54 of the 64 cases of offensive behaviour at regulated football matches completed by the end of 2012. A full evaluation of the act will be undertaken in due course, in accordance with commitments that I made when the act was considered, but I suggest to Parliament that a conviction rate of 84 per cent demonstrates that the act is already being used effectively.

Enforcing the legislation is of course a matter for the police. Like Michael McMahon, I have seen some of the extensive coverage that was in a number of newspapers a week or so ago and I have seen the allegations that have been made in a variety of different places, including social media. The difficulty for me and others in the Government is that none of the allegations or complaints has resulted in a formal complaint being made to the police or elsewhere. No human rights points have been taken by any of the lawyers concerned. As I have not noticed that the Scottish legal profession is backward in coming forward when it comes to human rights issues, I am sure that, if it was felt that there was a human rights issue, lawyers would want to take a point. There is an understandable feeling that people are being policed more vigorously but, in a sense, that is exactly what we want to do to ensure that the scourge of sectarianism is driven out of our national game.

I thought that George Adam went rather off-topic at the end of his speech; I will not be following him down the alleyways of football preferences. Like other members, I, too, congratulate Annabel Goldie on securing the debate. I know from conversations with her how enthusiastic she is about the street stuff initiative. Her opening remarks communicated perfectly how inspirational some of the projects can be. I welcome the debate. It emphasises the importance of partnership working and actively involving members of the community, even those who may be difficult to reach, in supporting our aim of a safer and stronger Scotland. As Minister for Community Safety and Legal Affairs, I believe that our local communities are our greatest strength, and the key to a flourishing, successful Scotland. All members of society, of all ages, have an important part to play. That includes young people who, in particular, are critical in ensuring a positive future. Local projects such as street stuff in Renfrewshire play an important role in offering young people opportunities to develop new interests and skills, and in diverting them from sometimes harmful and risky behaviour; we have had one or two examples of that. They provide what Neil Bibby identified as important—interesting activities that young people want and can access easily. Adults—particularly older folk—can sometimes be a little prescriptive in putting in place activities without thinking about whether they are what young people want. A particular activity might have interested us, but these days other things are important. It is vital that we ensure that what we put in place is what young people want. I am glad that Neil Bibby namechecked some of the individuals who put time and effort into making the street stuff project work. We sometimes forget that a lot of personal commitment is involved. I want to say a little about the cashback for communities programme. The Government recognises the value of access to high-quality diversionary activities for our young people, which is why we introduced the unique and innovative cashback for communities programme back in 2007. Essentially, it involves taking the ill-gotten gains of crime and investing them in community programmes, facilities and activities that are largely—but not exclusively—for young people who are at risk of turning to crime and antisocial behaviour. One hopes that, over the years, that will begin to create a more virtuous cycle. The programme helps us to create safer communities by providing young people with opportunities to get off the streets and into positive activities. Since 2007, more than £50 million that has been recovered from the proceeds of crime has gone back into communities the length and breadth of Scotland. More than 600,000 young people have benefited, and more than 11,000 young person volunteers are now putting something back into their communities. I am sorry, but I cannot remember which member made the point that some of the young people involved graduate to become peers and mentors. Of the money that has been put back into communities, more than £1.2 million has been invested in Renfrewshire and East Renfrewshire, which has benefited more than 47,000 young people in communities in those areas. I am delighted that street stuff is one of the local projects that have benefited from that investment. Since the start of the project, the cashback for communities programme has been a key delivery partner: it has funded street stuff coaches and has provided diversionary activities for boys and girls through cashback Scottish Football Association street football, midnight leagues and schools of football. We are committed to ensuring that the cashback programme continues to support local communities, and we will use the proceeds of crime receipts to fund the programme to 2015-16. The no knives, better lives initiative is part of the work that is being done. Street stuff has been working in partnership with the Government’s national youth initiative, no knives, better lives, which is an education and diversion initiative that aims to get across to young people the dangers and consequences of carrying a knife and encourages them to make positive choices. The partnership between street stuff, the cashback programme and no knives, better lives provides a safe, non-threatening environment for young people to discuss issues to do with violence and knife crime, which, in turn, gives them the skills to identify positive alternatives. The approaches that we and our local partners are taking to divert young people away from crime and antisocial behaviour are working—members have already indicated how they are working. At a national level, recorded crime is at a 37-year low; offence referrals to the children’s reporter have fallen by 66 per cent since 2006-07; and the number of recorded crimes and offences committed by children and young people—eight to 17-year-olds—decreased by 32 per cent between 2008-09 and 2011-12. Some extremely positive impacts are beginning to feed through into the statistics and the system. However, there is always more that we can do. The approach that has been taken by the street stuff project and all its local partners is exactly the kind of responsive partnership working that we would expect to see across community planning partnerships in Scotland. That approach of responding collaboratively to local need and having a clear focus on positive outcomes for communities is what the Government intends to support under the national priorities for CPPs. I thank Annabel Goldie for putting forward the motion and I thank other members for their valuable contributions to the debate. Stuart McMillan is right when he says that it is important that MSPs and others take time to recognise the hard work and dedication of those who lead local projects that are having positive impacts on their communities, such as street stuff. George Adam reminded us of the huge challenges that confront some of the young people who are involved. However, despite the challenges, we can often learn much from them. I say to Annabel Goldie that I would be only too happy to visit the project. My officials will set that up as soon as possible. Meeting closed at 17:30.

I will open the debate by talking about values, the principles that lie at the heart of this Parliament, Scotland’s deep-rooted attachment to concepts of fairness, justice and equality and the ideals that unite us all across the chamber without regard to party allegiance or political difference. Those values are reflected in the Scotland Act 1998, which embedded human rights in the practice and purpose of Parliament and Government, and they are part of a shared commitment to improvement, to doing better and to making a difference to the everyday lives of real people. This debate celebrates both our efforts in Scotland to make rights real for ordinary people and the existence of an overarching international framework of human rights law that helps to safeguard the vulnerable and the oppressed throughout the world. It also recognises the need for us to re-commit ourselves to making a difference to the lived lives of people in Scotland and, through the role that Scotland can play internationally now and in future, to helping to ensure that rights are protected, respected and promoted. Why are human rights important? As Eleanor Roosevelt—the driving force behind the 1948 United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights—famously said: “Where, after all, do universal human rights begin? In small places, close to home - so close and so small that they cannot be seen on any maps of the world. Yet they are the world of the individual person; the neighborhood he lives in; the school or college he attends; the factory, farm, or office where he works ... Unless these rights have meaning there, they have little meaning anywhere.”

I think that there are inquiries into that issue taking place right now and I know that the member has a great deal of interest in that. However, I am trying to take the debate on to an overarching level and discussion of wider values. [Interruption.] I am not entirely clear why the Labour front bench seems to think that that is so funny, but I will attempt to keep the tone of the debate elevated. Human rights are not just principles on a page, nor are they a charter for criminals, as has often been said. They are a concept and a reality that are of fundamental importance to us all. Every day, the Government works to progressively realise the fundamental rights of the people of Scotland. Reforms to policing, the criminal justice system and the health and social care sectors have human rights at their heart. Legislation on the rights of children and young people, and of victims and witnesses will be introduced this year. I will take a moment to address the Labour Party’s proposed amendment to the motion. Members will be aware that we take human trafficking very seriously. Our aim is to make Scotland a hostile place for traffickers. We are demonstrating leadership on that issue and progressing actions that were agreed at the high-level summit that was chaired by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice in October last year. We have already made it clear that we will introduce a specific human trafficking statutory aggravation to ensure that, when trafficking forms the background to an offence, the court can take that into account. Secondly, the summit agreed that there was a need to review the wider legislative framework for trafficking and identify any potential improvements to be made or gaps to be filled. That work is progressing with key partners, who met this morning. The group will report back in the middle of this year so, in a sense, we are already doing what Labour wants us to do and we have no problem accepting the amendment. It is within the wider perspective that we should be looking to address the wide-ranging challenges that are inherent in giving full effect to the rights of all. The Scottish Government is certainly of the view that everyone in Scotland should be able to access their rights. Indeed, if there is a theme that distinguishes this Government, it is a belief that individuals, communities and nations have a fundamental right to make decisions for themselves, to take responsibility, to exercise capacity, and to direct their own affairs. When Scotland votes in 2014, there will be, I hope, opportunities to take what we have already achieved to a new level, with new powers and a heightened sense of ambition. As the First Minister noted in London recently, the time is ripe for a debate on how Scotland guarantees and implements rights, and how we ensure that constitutional guarantees place the person at the centre of the system rather than at the bottom or at the margins. That includes the economic, social and cultural rights that are already reflected in the constitutions of many other democratic, modern nations. With that in mind, I warmly welcome the initiative by Scotland’s national human rights institution, the Scottish Human Rights Commission, to facilitate the development of Scotland’s first national action plan on human rights. The United Nations describes that approach as an international example of best practice in ensuring that the human rights within a jurisdiction are assured and not assumed. Other progressive jurisdictions such as Sweden and New Zealand have such plans and I welcome the fact that Scotland is joining them. The Scottish Government is certainly committed to playing its part in the development of a plan with realistic actions and measurable outcomes. The direction of travel is promising; we are delivering a step change in public service delivery and an increasingly focused approach to tackling inequality. I hope to see a plan that goes with the grain of those developments and feel it particularly important to rebut any suggestion that this will somehow be a plan for the Scottish Government alone to deliver on; instead, I see it as an exercise in co-production, co-operation and empowerment. Its ultimate success will be founded on a principle of shared ownership across this chamber, the wider public sector and the whole of Scottish society. It will be Scotland’s plan. This year, 2013, is an important year for human rights in Scotland. The debate can arouse strong passions and polarise opinions and I find it a bit worrying that parts of the United Kingdom Government are demanding the scaling back and, in some cases, wholesale removal of the domestic framework of human rights in the UK. The discourse of some in London is coloured by what seems to me a certain parochialism and a perception of human rights as an inconvenient barrier. The Westminster debate is sadly out of touch with real people’s needs. In Scotland, however, human rights are a positive thing. They are part of the very fabric of our society, which not only celebrates community and belonging but looks outwards to what the international community can teach us and how we might better ourselves as a nation. In bringing this debate to the Parliament, we wish to achieve—

Yes, of course.

With the greatest of respect, I think that that question would be better asked by someone not in a party whose Government is busily doing in other parts of the world things that anyone might suggest are transgressions of human rights. The Minister for External Affairs and International Development is, as the member might have noticed, sitting beside me in the chamber for the very reason that we will address the issue that he has raised. I have addressed myself to the SHRC national plan for human rights because it is the trigger for this debate and what I want everyone in the chamber to consider. Equally, however, we want a conversation about international human rights, and my colleague Humza Yousaf will address that issue directly. That said, members should take care not to express themselves with a degree of hypocrisy on this matter. With the very greatest of respect, I have not noticed any activity on the part of Westminster Governments of either the Conservative or Labour Party that any of us might consider to be appropriate, not least the promulgation of what was frankly little more than an illegal war. I will listen to what members in the chamber have to say, but if we are talking about international human rights we should talk about all human rights, including those of the people who have been violated over many years by Westminster Governments of both parties. I am kind of sorry that we had to get into this issue—

No. I am now in the last 20 seconds of the 10 minutes that I have been allocated and, in that time, I want to talk about the situation in Scotland in 2013. I invite members to support the motion and want them to reaffirm the Scottish Parliament’s commitment to the vision of an inclusive Scotland and a more equitable world in which human rights and fundamental freedoms are truly central to the lives of all. I move, That the Parliament reaffirms the importance in a modern, democratic Scotland of the values proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; acknowledges and asserts the inalienable rights enumerated in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and enshrined in international treaty; dedicates itself once more to the vision of an inclusive Scotland that respects, protects and realises the human rights of all; commends the work of the Scottish Human Rights Commission, Scotland’s independent national human rights institution; looks forward to the development of Scotland’s first national action plan for human rights over the course of 2013, and embraces the opportunities presented by Scotland’s engagement in the wider world to promote respect for the universal and indivisible rights of all of humanity.

Does the member intend to make any mention of the role that the United Kingdom Border Agency plays in the issue, or will she simply ignore that aspect?

I, too, congratulate Dave Thompson on securing the debate. I know that he has a long-standing professional interest in trading standards, and he is probably the right person to raise such an issue in the chamber. The debate is apposite, given that we have just debated human rights in general this afternoon. We are now discussing an individual right—the right to live our lives free from crime and the fear of crime. Everyone has the right to feel safe in their community and it is unacceptable for people to feel intimidated in their own home. Our aim is to make Scotland a safer and stronger place and an inclusive and respectful society. The United Kingdom Government’s plans to restructure the consumer landscape are being implemented. Of course, I believe that Scottish consumers’ interests would be best served if relevant Consumer Focus powers were devolved to this Parliament—members would expect me to say that. Consumer protection is devolved in Northern Ireland, but a request to do a similar thing in Scotland has been—inexplicably, in my view—declined. We must therefore focus on ensuring that the UK Government’s policies deliver for consumers in Scotland. The role of trading standards in local authorities is crucial in helping to safeguard citizens’ health, safety and environment. Trading standards services have an established history of protecting citizens and ensuring a fair market in which business can flourish. I take the opportunity to join other members in thanking trading standards officers for their contribution to combating rogue traders. I welcome all the good work that local authorities, the police service and trading standards already do across Scotland to tackle cold calling. In doing so, it is important to acknowledge that cold calling can be part of serious and organised crime networks. That aspect has not been debated tonight, but it must be taken on board. I welcome the recent report from Audit Scotland entitled “Protecting consumers”. I recognise the work that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and councils are doing to improve national co-ordination and I note the scope for better integration between councils, which is an important aspect of the intelligence gathering and sharing that are probably required to tackle cold calling. Members have talked about specific issues in their areas. The groups of people who carry out the scams do not confine themselves to just one area; they move from area to area, so intelligence sharing is extremely important. Fiona McLeod, David Torrance, Helen Eadie, Ken Macintosh and Graeme Dey are all right to raise the differential impact of such behaviour on older people. That is a function of the fact that older people tend to be at home during the day far more often; they are sitting ducks—sitting targets—for such activity. The stories that all the members related were harrowing. I was interested to hear of the local trial in Fiona McLeod’s constituency. I met the Scottish Pensioners Forum recently—in November last year—and I am only too aware of the physical and mental impact that cold calling can have on individuals who are often elderly and vulnerable, which in turn increases the fear of crime among individuals and communities. Alex Johnstone raised a particularly sensitive issue and he should be commended for making such points in the debate. He reminded us that not all cold callers are bogus; some might be acting for Government initiatives and others might rely on cold calling as a business model. That means that how cold calling is dealt with must be carefully thought through, to avoid the law of unintended consequences, of which Nigel Don reminded us. As members such as David Torrance and Ken Macintosh related, many initiatives to tackle cold calling are already in place across Scotland; perhaps they need to be more joined up, as I said earlier. For example, last year Lothian and Borders Police launched a new initiative that was focused on doorstep crime, which aimed to decrease the number of bogus callers and rogue-trader workmen who were targeting the communities of West Lothian. That initiative fostered in the community an increased feeling of empowerment to challenge such individuals and reduce the chance of becoming a victim. My colleague Kenny MacAskill saw the initiative for himself in March last year and was impressed by its impact. To date, we have provided funding of more than £400,000 to Neighbourhood Watch Scotland to support its work. It plays an important role in offering reassurance to local communities by sharing alerts on potential criminal activities in their area, providing advice on how to keep safe and encouraging members of communities to look out for one another, especially the elderly and vulnerable. The initiatives that the Scottish Business Crime Centre promotes are also crucial. Its adults at risk of financial harm conference in 2012 brought together a number of delegates from the Scottish Government, local authorities, the business community, law enforcement, fire and rescue services and the voluntary sector. All parties agreed on a strategic commitment to collaborate consistently and effectively with a common objective—the protection of vulnerable adults who might be subjected to financial abuse by others. Cold calling was addressed at the event in presentations by Scottish scambusters, Lothian and Borders Police and Angus Council—Graeme Dey might be interested to hear that. The SBCC is also working closely with a range of partners to deliver a scam-free Scotland, and a joint awareness campaign is to be launched in the spring. I recommend that members look out for that. My officials are already working with the SBCC to provide a central intelligence hub, which will go some way towards addressing the lack of national data on the issue. I thank Dave Thompson for lodging his motion and I thank other members for their valuable contributions to the debate. I recommend to members some of the existing schemes, the upcoming campaign and the work that is being done—as well as the work that is being looked at—in respect of cold calling for maintenance and repairs. Meeting closed at 18:17.

As part of a period of informal preconsultation discussion with a range of key stakeholders, the Scottish Government met the Law Society of Scotland on 5 March 2010 to discuss recommendations for the reform of the law relating to damages for personal injury that are contained in three separate Scottish Law Commission reports, one of which relates directly to the time bar in connection with personal injury actions. The consultation paper on the recommendations in the three reports will be published later this month and we anticipate that dialogue with the Law Society will continue after publication.

I am conscious of the time bar issue and how it relates to child victims of any crime. I assure Gil Paterson that the consultation that I talked about will invite views on time bar as well as other issues. We want to consider the consultation responses before we introduce any legislation. As the member knows, the matter is quite complex and interest groups will have the opportunity to contribute further at a series of events that we intend to hold during the consultation period.

In May 2008, the Parliament and members from all parties endorsed Scotland’s first recovery-focused drugs strategy, “The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland’s Drug Problem”. For the first time, we had a strategy that set out a long-term vision of recovery for Scotland and gave a message of hope to individuals, families and communities whose lives are affected by drugs. Two years later, my predecessor Fergus Ewing provided an update to the Parliament, which focused on the progress that had been made on implementing the strategy and acknowledged the commitment and dedication of those who work to make recovery possible. The strategy was unanimously endorsed by Parliament for a second time. In June, I was pleased to take part in a debate on families that was initiated by the Conservative Party, in which we spoke about the impact of drug problems on families and all the work that is going on across Scotland to help and support families in their recovery journeys. Now, four years on from the introduction of the road to recovery strategy and two years on from the 2010 update, I will use this opportunity to update Parliament on progress; to highlight the on-going and continuing plans for enabling recovery and implementing the strategy; and to recognise the significant efforts and personal dedication of front-line workers and all those who are working to deliver and support recovery. We are in very different circumstances now compared with 2007. Prior to 2007, there was no overall strategy and a culture of underresourced services. In four short years, we have significantly changed the landscape. In that period, £162 million has been invested in front-line drug treatment services, which exceeds our manifesto commitment. We have maintained the funding year on year, despite a backdrop of economic austerity. That continued investment recognises the significant ambition of the strategy and offers people who are struggling with drug problems an opportunity of recovery. We recognised that financial investment alone was not enough, which is why we established 30 alcohol and drug partnerships to support the delivery of recovery across Scotland. Each partnership has a local strategy that is focused on helping individuals, families and communities to recover from the damaging impact that drugs and alcohol can have. Since 2007, drug use among adults in Scotland has fallen and levels of drug use among young people are now at their lowest in a decade. Among 15-year-olds, there has been a fall from 23 per cent in 2002, when Labour was in power, to 11 per cent in 2010. Prevention is essential, and the statistics show that our approach on that is working. However, we can never become complacent. The curriculum for excellence is the bedrock of prevention activity across Scotland. To support that, we have invested more than £5 million since 2007-08 in a national programme of substance misuse education. The innovative choices for life initiative, which is delivered in partnership with the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, provides an interactive alcohol, drugs and tobacco education programme for schoolchildren across Scotland from primary 7 up to secondary 6. Activities are provided throughout the year, supported by a website that was launched in September. An online event for P7s was broadcast only yesterday. Our know the score website and helpline continue to offer credible and accessible advice and support 24 hours a day. All that work is closely tied to our on-going efforts on new drugs or so-called legal highs. The Government is very serious about identifying and addressing any threats to the health of people in Scotland. We continue to work with the United Kingdom Government, other devolved Administrations and Scottish police forces to gather and share information on those substances and their dangers. We are not simply waiting for the substances to be banned; we continue to ensure that information is available to those who need it. We are ensuring that people who need help with their existing drug problems get faster access to the support that they need. Before 2007, waiting times of more than a year for drug treatment were not uncommon. The problem was frequently raised in the Parliament, as longer-standing members will recall. Change was a priority. Four years on, statistics show the progress that has been made. Ninety per cent of people started treatment for their drug problem within three weeks of their referral between April and June 2012. That means that the target that we set for March 2013 has been achieved nine months ahead of schedule. In 2011-12, 15,600 people started drug treatment and began their recovery journey. That is in addition to the 40,000 people who received a specialist assessment of their drug use and care needs between 2007 and 2011. Now that we have reached a high level of national performance, we are committed to ensuring that such access to treatment is sustained and that people in all parts of Scotland get the treatment that they need.

I am absolutely in accord with that. It bears repeating—I am sure that Dr Simpson agrees with this—that recovery means different things at different times to different people, and decisions about the most appropriate treatment can only ever be made on an individual basis. That applies to methadone, as it does to every other treatment option. Does methadone reduce the incidence of drug-related deaths, blood-borne viruses and crime? We know that it does. Does it stabilise lives? Yes, it does. However, methadone is only one of a number of treatment options that are available. We are clear that it can be effective, but only as one component in a package of care, treatment and recovery. Members should remember that not all drug problems are opiate based. We know that fewer than a fifth of the 19,000 drug treatments that were started in 2011-12 were for prescribed drug treatment—including, but not exclusively, methadone. There is a tendency to assume that everyone is on methadone. That is simply not true. Sadly, we must recognise that we lost 584 people to drug-related death in Scotland last year. Each of those deaths is a family and community tragedy. We know that of that number, only 14 might be wholly attributable to methadone. In most deaths more than one substance was found, and in nearly all deaths alcohol was a contributing factor. That is the reality. I want to ensure that all drug services in Scotland are high quality, effective and recovery focused. That is why I recently commissioned the chief medical officer, supported by expert members of the independent Scottish Drugs Strategy Delivery Commission, to gather evidence on opiate-replacement therapies that are used to treat people with drug addiction. I look forward to sharing the group’s findings with Parliament in spring 2013. We have also introduced a world-leading naloxone programme, to support people who are most vulnerable to opiate overdose. That is an important intervention, as part of a range of available treatment and support, which can help to reduce harm and support people towards recovery. At a fundamental level, the intervention can bring people back from the brink of death. In the programme’s first year, 3,500 take-home naloxone kits were issued, and we are still rolling out the programme. I recognise that evidence is essential if we are to maintain a clear sense of what progress looks like. Much of the information that we needed to deliver the strategy was simply not available in 2008. That is why we have continued to invest in data collection and analysis. For example, for the first time, we have a range of evidence that has allowed us to identify the ageing population of people with drug problems in Scotland—the group that I term “the ‘Trainspotting’ generation”. After years and even decades of drug use, many people have become increasingly unwell and are experiencing a number of chronic health conditions in addition to their drug use. We now know more than we have ever known about the people whom we support, but we do not know everything and there are still gaps.

We continue to use every scrap of evidence that we can lay our hands on. Through our investment in the Scottish drug misuse database, we will start to get access to even more information from December 2012. From that report, we will know more—one concern has been that we have not had enough information—about people in treatment and the outcomes that they achieve in housing, employment and training, not just for opiate-replacement therapies but for all treatment types. We need to look across the board at successful outcomes.

There is a significant debate around the figures that have been published with regard to cocaine. Some of the figures from international databases are very out of date, and it is worth looking closely at what they are in fact measuring. However, I reassure Margo MacDonald that we are aware that there is a cocaine issue in Scotland that must be addressed. I emphasise that the work we are doing involves looking at the outcomes not just for opiate replacement therapies but for all treatment types. That will help us to decide which treatments are working best. I am committed to improving the evidence on what recovery looks like, especially on the wider outcomes that people in recovery achieve in—as I said—housing, employment and training. There is a growing grass-roots recovery movement throughout Scotland that is led by organisations such as the Scottish Recovery Consortium, Scottish Families Affected by Drugs, the Scottish Drugs Forum and Scottish Training on Drugs And Alcohol. We have established the world’s first recovery consortium. It is encouraging to see that, through the consortium’s recovery campaigns and recovery college, the visibility of recovery is increasing, the role of advocacy is getting stronger and the voice of those in recovery is getting louder. However, there are challenges, which the director of the Scottish Recovery Consortium has described so well: “People in recovery from addiction do not stand out in a crowd, they are anonymous; quietly going about their business of living life on life’s terms … If they didn’t tell you they were in recovery, you might never know.” How can we tell that people are recovering? Mutual aid and peer support are essential. There are 180 Narcotics Anonymous meetings taking place daily in Scotland—97 in Glasgow alone—and there are now fast-growing locally based recovery communities such as Edinburgh’s Serenity cafe, Fife’s Restoration cafe and Glasgow’s recovery groups. Each of those provides a safe social setting for people in recovery. It is also encouraging to see a growing virtual recovery community, which is providing support to people throughout Scotland wherever they live. Currently, there are more than 1,000 Scottish members of the online group Wired in to Recovery. Recovery is also increasingly visible. Building on the success of Scotland’s first national recovery walk in 2010, which promoted and celebrated recovery, I was pleased to hear about Ayr’s recovery walk and Aberdeen’s first recovery day. There are many individuals, groups and organisations that are helping to make recovery possible in Scotland, but it starts with an individual’s strength, determination and hope for something better. To take hold, recovery needs the nurture and enduring support of those who are closest to us: the family. However, families need support too, which is why the work that Scottish Families Affected by Drugs does is so important. William White, who is a world expert in recovery based in the United States, supported that type of approach when he argued: “the leadership of the recovery movement must come from the recovery community, and the movement’s agenda must be that of recovering people and their families”. Such evidence confirms that the approach that we are taking to recovery in Scotland is the right one. We want to build on those achievements and continue to support the development of recovery communities. Scotland in 2012 looks a lot different and has changed for the better, but that changed landscape means that we must continue to adapt and evolve the road to recovery. The next phase will focus on quality and ensuring that delivery happens right throughout Scotland. I have spoken about the work that we continue to do, and the independent expert advice panel that I have set up to gather evidence on opiate-replacement therapies. That work will continue to support us in learning how to make the road to recovery work for the landscape in which we now find ourselves. However, I warn all members about the dangers of stigma that attach to the issue because stigma is one of the biggest challenges that people who are using drugs have to face. We cannot and must not do anything irresponsible that increases that level of stigma. I want to build on the success that we have had so far and move forward, and I look forward to a full debate. I hope that it is constructive and responsible. I move, That the Parliament recognises the progress made in delivering Scotland’s national drug strategy, The Road to Recovery, and in particular the continued efforts and dedication of all those working to make recovery from problem drug use a reality; acknowledges the significant progress made in improving access to treatment and reducing waiting times, and calls on all relevant national and local agencies to continue to drive this long-term strategy forward with a focus on improving all aspects of quality with regard to how recovery is delivered, informed by advice on opiate replacement therapies arising from the review being carried out by the Chief Medical Officer, supported by an independent expert group.

Would the member like to tell us how many of those questions would have been answerable prior to 2007, when her party was in government?

It is “naloxone” with the stress on the second syllable.

We have certainly had an interesting debate, but we should not lose sight of the fact that we are talking about people’s lives and that we have a duty to be responsible in all that we say and do. Only last week, the Scottish Drugs Forum—which is made up of experts in the field—articulated its continued support for the road to recovery, which it feels “articulates a clear and sound vision for services to work to and it would be unfortunate if party politics were to muddy the waters.” I could not put it better myself. The debate has provided evidence of the issue’s complexity. That complexity means that those who reach for simplistic solutions will fail. This Government has never shirked from the challenge that drug addiction poses to society, and four years’ hard work is already making a difference. However, no one has ever claimed that there was not more to be done. I do not think that any society anywhere in the world has reached that point in respect of drug policy. Everybody here recognises that all drug deaths are more than just statistics; they are individual, family and community tragedies, and more needs to be done to get behind the figures and understand what is happening. I accept that, but I have never not accepted that. Stigma from the media continues, which we need to address, and emerging legal highs are a constant source of concern. The delivery of the road to recovery cannot be determined by political timescales. It requires long-term partnership working and collaboration, and huge achievements have already been made. We are beginning to see the successful impact of the Government’s commitment to increased investment in front-line drug services. We have heard about the successes, such as improved access to treatment—more than 15,600 people entered treatment in the single year 2011-12 alone—and a reduction in waiting times to three weeks from referral to treatment. If Labour members are serious in saying that three weeks is too long, I still challenge them to say what the period should be.

Can I just get into my speech? Services are increasingly offering a choice of treatment that meets people’s needs, and of course we want more of that to happen across the country. We have a world-leading naloxone programme, which is setting a pace that is being recognised internationally, and we have the lowest rates of reported drug use in the general population and among young people in a decade. Perhaps Mary Fee can tell me what waiting time she thinks would be appropriate.

I should very much hope that the member welcomes the waiting time since, not very many years ago, the waiting time might have been a year. We have made huge efforts to get the figure to where it is. It would be ideal if, after every person crossed the threshold, their immediate referral was immediately dealt with through treatment, but I suspect that it might be a little while before we get there. Is everything perfect? Is the problem solved? No, of course not. We do not claim that—nobody would. However, we are starting to see the presence of recovery communities, which are an important part of the debate, as they make a difference to people’s lives. For the first time, more people are moving on in their recovery journey. In Glasgow, 111 people have taken part in the Scottish Drugs Forum’s addiction worker training project, which supports, trains and prepares individuals with a history of problem drug and alcohol use to work in social care. The majority of graduates have secured full-time jobs in the social care and addiction fields, which cements their long-term recovery and contributes to the recovery of others. I ask members just to think about that success for a minute. We now have to do what we have always said needed to be done—we must move on to the third phase of delivery, which is about quality. The work so far is only the beginning. For recovery to become a reality for everyone who is affected directly or indirectly by drugs, we must not start to question our commitment to the national strategy—we need to start moving with pace to ensure that recovery is at the heart of service provision. The evidence that we have gathered has allowed us to identify the existence of the ageing cohort of drug users who have complex medical problems. That presents more and new challenges, which we will need to address. We will need a better connection between clinical treatment and follow-up support in the community whenever it is needed, to ensure that recovery is sustainable for people who are moving towards a life that is free of problem drug and alcohol addiction. I know that everybody here wants to see that. That means a renewed emphasis on support for sustained recovery in communities. I want quality to be at the root of services—I want people to have access to the right services at the right time, with support from a workforce that has the knowledge, skills and attitudes to support people into and through their recovery—but that takes time. I want to see good-quality data that tell the full story. I want good-quality data, information and evidence that tell us about opiate-replacement therapies and their place in recovery, and I want good-quality data that tell us where we need to learn and improve and how we can continue to provide evidence-informed interventions for those who need them most. Lewis Macdonald talked about the timing of the debate. I have a simple answer to the question of why I wanted to discuss the drugs strategy now rather than in December. The independent expert group on opiate-replacement therapies, which I commissioned last month, will meet for the first time tomorrow, and I wanted it to have an opportunity to be able to consider a debate in the chamber and the range of issues that members raise.

I would expect variations, given that there is a locally based system. Different choices and decisions are being made, and that is an important part of the progress that we are making. We have already heard about different areas prescribing in different measures. There is an interesting question behind the issue that Richard Simpson raises, but this is not just about the need for uniformity across the whole country. The group on opiate-replacement therapies will objectively consider the evidence that supports the role of those therapies in the treatment of substance misuse. That consideration already includes, at my behest, addressing leakage, for example. That will mean looking fairly robustly at the prescribing guidelines and considering whether they are not being entirely adhered to in some cases. I have asked the group to look at that matter. I will also ask the group to take on board the comments by the Conservatives and extend the review to include the broader rehabilitation picture, including the use of residential rehabilitation, and to take up points about the variation across the country in the use of the available beds. I look forward to the outcomes from that group, which will be considered in the Parliament. I say to a number of members, including Jenny Marra, that a range of treatments are currently not just on offer, but being taken up. Of the 15,600 people who entered treatment in 2011-12, more than 8,000 were given structured preparatory and motivational interventions, and prescribed drug treatment, including methadone, was offered to 3,700. That is the figure that I referred to—fewer than 20 per cent. Community-based detox was given to 345, community-based support and rehabilitation were given to more than 6,000, and residential detox and rehabilitation were given to around 678. If we add up all the figures, we discover that the figure comes to more than 15,600 because frequently more than one treatment is offered, and people take up more than one treatment. Therefore, the notion that people are on methadone alone is not necessarily true. Members who think that that might be happening perhaps need to do just a little bit extra work to discover the truth.

No. I need to get on, as I have only a short time left. A number of speeches were very powerful. Richard Simpson raised many very important points, as I would expect. I want time to consider some of the specific things that he talked about, and I will get back to him in that regard. Jim Eadie’s speech on methadone usage was well focused. He will be happy to know that I have already tasked the review to investigate many of the points that he raised. Duncan McNeil made quite an important point. There are people who may never want treatment. If more than 60,000 people in Scotland have a drug problem, many are not coming forward for treatment. I have met individuals who have been on drugs for a very long time, but one day something snapped and then they have been off them. I spoke to a woman in Dundee who had been a drug user for 32 years. She woke up one day, decided that she had had enough, presented herself to Narcotics Anonymous, and that was it. I do not want us to assume that there are people out there who cannot be dealt with. They can, but it is not easy—it is tough. I take Duncan McNeil’s point. I have run out of time. I accept the Conservative and Liberal Democrat amendments but, sadly, not the Labour amendment.

It is hoped that the report of the review of expenses and funding of civil litigation in Scotland will be published before the Scottish Parliament’s summer recess, which, as members will know, is set to begin on 29 June 2013.

Although the Government does not implement anything in isolation, the Taylor review is independent and any recommendations will be a matter for Sheriff Principal Taylor. Ensuring that people can exercise their individual and collective rights and helping to resolve disputes fairly and swiftly are important pillars in creating a flourishing economy, and the Scottish Government has embarked on a series of national programmes that will deliver the most radical set of reforms to our courts and tribunals in more than a century and which must all be taken together. The making justice work programme will improve Scotland’s civil and criminal justice system by improving procedures and case management, which will widen access to justice and will also significantly change court structures on the basis of the proposals of the Lord President, Lord Gill. The findings of Sheriff Principal Taylor’s independent review, too, will be integrated into the making justice work programme. Of course, we cannot reform the structure of our courts without reviewing the court estate. The Scottish Court Service has issued a consultation that is also independent of Government and on which responses are invited from interested parties by 21 December. It will be for the Lord President to decide on the basis of that consultation which of the proposals should be pursued, and they will come before the Scottish Government and Parliament. I assure the member that all these matters will be looked at together.

I have asked Colin McConnell, chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, for his comments in regard to this. He has indicated that a number of factors have impacted on the number of drug finds, including the use of additional drug dogs, additional intelligence-led searching and the opening of HMP Low Moss. Additional drug finds are also indicative of the success of those targeted measures. The Scottish Prison Service has a substance misuse strategy in place that reflects the aims of the national drug strategy in “The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland’s Drug Problem”. The strategy focuses on robust security systems to divert, disrupt, detect and deter the supply of illicit substances and it supports the provision of treatment services to encourage prisoners to reject the illegal drug culture. Following legislative change in 2011, national health service boards are now responsible for the delivery of health and addiction services to prisoners, based on assessed needs.

As I indicated in my original answer, a number of things are already being done that have resulted in an increasing number of drug finds. It is important for people to take it on board that sometimes the figures are evidence of the success of the work that is being done. Another initiative that is being rolled out is called prison watch, which has proved very successful in HMP Edinburgh and which we hope can be rolled out to many other institutions. It has reduced the presence of illicit substances and products in prisons by a significant factor. It is not yet available in the surrounds of HMP Kilmarnock, but I will advise the member when that is the case. An addiction testing policy is already in place in prisons. A sample of prisoners are tested for a range of illegal substances—annually, on reception into and on liberation from prison, as well as during their time in prison—to assess drug use. Testing is not currently done across the entire prison population. If that is what the member is suggesting, resource issues would have to be closely looked at. Testing the entire prison population on a regular basis would be resource intensive indeed. I would want to discuss with the member the precise details of how he imagines that that would work.

I am not entirely clear what the member intends with that question. The recovery strategy that the Government put in place in 2008 has delivered enormous changes to the way in which things are managed in Scotland and has resulted in great advances. However, it is on-going and is constantly the subject of internal review. Indeed, as part of that, we are looking quite closely at the issue of opiate replacement therapy. In that sense, review of the drug strategy in Scotland is constant.

Can the member indicate what this has to do with the drink-driving limit?

I congratulate Hugh Henry on obtaining the debate. There are certain things with which we all agree across the chamber. One of those fundamental things is that every individual has the right to live free from crime and the fear of crime, whether in their own homes, at work or out in the public domain. Therefore, I can say at the outset and without equivocation that I welcome the aims of the USDAW freedom from fear campaign, which seeks to prevent violence, threats and abuse against shopworkers. We all start from the premise that violence is never acceptable. The person who commits a violent act—physical or verbal abuse—is responsible for their actions. It is important to start from that principle. We must have effective criminal laws that protect workers and deter individuals from carrying out such attacks. As members have recognised, we have protection in the common law of assault. It provides legal protection to public-facing workers as they go about their daily lives. Indeed, it provides protection to every member of the Parliament. Let us not forget that we are also public-facing workers, albeit not within the terms of the debate. As I understand it—I was not actively involved in the committee consideration at the time—the specific statutory offence that was proposed in Hugh Henry’s Protection of Workers (Scotland) Bill a few years ago would not have extended the scope of the criminal law in any way but would have recast the common law of assault and made it into a statutory offence. It would not have changed the nature of the criminal law. I think that we all agree that laws are only part of the answer. Several members, including Margo MacDonald and Nigel Don, said that a much wider cultural problem may need to be addressed. We believe that tackling the underlying causes of assaults is far more important because it will help to reduce the number of attacks. Initiatives to prevent violence also have an important role to play. I will come back to those topics, but I think that it is appropriate for me to pick up on some of the specific points that were made in the debate, because there are some interesting issues here. Like Mary Scanlon—I am grateful for her intervention—I was slightly nonplussed when I read in Hugh Henry’s motion what looked like a contradictory set of statistics, so I asked for more background detail. In some ways, the reality raises more questions than it answers. The 83 per cent increase is a single year-on-year increase against a background of consistently declining figures from 2004-05. However, it is interesting that the figure has jumped up and down, and I do not understand what lies behind that. There was a big fall from 2004-05 to 2005-06, and then the figure jumped up in 2006-07. It dropped back down in 2007-08, jumped up in 2008-09, dropped in 2009-10, and jumped back up in 2010-11. There is something quite odd going on here, and we need to go behind it to find out what is happening.

I can certainly ask that question, although I am not sure that it will explain the fluctuation that is going on. The figure of 58 incidents per 1,000 employees in 2004-05 has fallen to 26 incidents per 1,000 employees, so that trend is down. However, year on year, we get quite wild fluctuations. I wonder whether what happens is that when the figures are high there are awareness-raising campaigns and the following year the figures fall, but they go back up again when complacency sets in. There might be something in that, but we need to go a bit further behind the figures. It was interesting to see them, as they form an odd graph and the trend is quite strange. A number of members understandably raised the issue of the difference between what are termed emergency workers, because they were included in the 2005 act, and wider public-facing workers. I presume that that issue was debated under the previous Government and a decision was made. I have a quote from the then Lord Advocate, Colin Boyd, on the issue. People might feel that it is not satisfactory, but it explains what was behind the decision to confine legislation to emergency workers: “The situation is different for emergency personnel. These workers perform a unique and vital role in our society. The nature of their work renders them, and those who assist them, particularly vulnerable to attack. When emergency workers are assaulted, obstructed, or hindered, in the course of dealing with an emergency, it is not only their lives which are put at risk, but the lives of those they are working to protect.” That informed the Government’s thinking at the time when the original emergency workers legislation was put through. There is a big issue there.

I have only a few seconds to go. I am sorry. I make the broader cultural point that we need to tackle alcohol and drug-fuelled antisocial behaviour, because a lot of what we are talking about this evening is generated by that. There are on-going campaigns on those subjects. Prevention is important, and the Scottish Business Crime Centre is crucial, as are the initiatives that it promotes. I want to highlight some of the practical measures and the benefits that they bring, such as the facts that more than 340 licensed premises are now accredited under best bar none, a scheme to address alcohol-related crime; 400 businesses are now accredited under the Scottish Business Crime Centre’s safer retail award; and 12 major shopping centres have the safer shopping award. Those are schemes that will help to drive down the crime figures.

I am almost out of time. I am in the Presiding Officer’s hands.

I will give way.

I will need to send that information to the member since I do not have it with me. I also want to point in the direction of the work of the violence reduction unit, which is about the broader culture of violence and violent crime. I am conscious that I am probably well over time so I will skip through things like cashback for communities. More broadly, the Scottish Government funds the Scottish centre for healthy working lives—that is part and parcel of the issue. I was interested in comments about the possibility that incidents are not being reported because it does not suit employers to have them reported. That is probably an issue that we need to look at quite closely. Following the previous members’ business debate on the safety of shopworkers, the then Minister for Community Safety committed to meet USDAW to discuss its excellent work. That meeting took place and the minister showed support for USDAW’s work. The meeting resulted in USDAW’s participation in the Scottish Government-led age-restricted products enforcement group. I hope that the member accepts that the Government is as concerned about the issue as he and other members are. However, the issue is not as straightforward as it might look on the surface and it bears closer examination. Meeting closed at 17:47.

Before 2007 and the introduction of the road to recovery programme, such information was not available. To fill the gap, the Government has invested in and enhanced the Scottish drug misuse database. That has improved the information that is available on people who enter drug treatment, people’s pathways through treatment and the outcomes that they achieve. The first release of the information will be published by the Information Services Division of NHS Scotland on 18 December 2012. The report will include information on a cohort of people in specialist drug treatment, including information on prescribed and illicit drug use. We are committed to ensuring that drugs services in Scotland are as effective as we can make them. That is why we recently commissioned an independent expert group to gather further evidence on opiate replacement therapies that are used to treat people with drug addictions. The road to recovery programme does not favour one form of treatment over any other. Decisions on the most appropriate treatment for an individual are clinical decisions and are taken in line with the UK guidance, “Drug misuse and dependence: UK guidelines on clinical management”.

The information will contain as much as we can possibly provide at this stage. As Annabel Goldie knows perfectly well, we have made constant and consistent improvements in the information gathering on drugs since the Government came into office in 2007; far more information is available now than there ever was before. However, we are not complacent about the situation that we are in with any aspect of the policy, and that includes opiate replacement therapies. I know that Annabel Goldie has a great interest in the issue and I will continue to have private discussions with her about the way forward.

The Justice Committee has chosen an important and topical issue for debate. I look forward to hearing the views of all members, and I have no doubt that those will be wide ranging, given the complexities involved in how the media and our courts should appropriately interact. This is very much about striking the right balance. We need an open and transparent court system, but one that also ensures a fair trial and is sensitive to all those involved. The issues bring into focus the way dearly held rights and freedoms act on one another. Members will be familiar with many of the almost universally accepted propositions involved: the press should be free; individuals have a right to express their own opinion; accused persons are innocent until proven guilty; accused persons should have a fair public trial, free from prejudice; and victims and witnesses should be protected from threats and adverse comment. We can immediately see how those basic propositions may impact negatively on one another. Balancing them will always be difficult, but necessary. At the outset, I point out that almost all our trial proceedings take place in open court where the public can sit and watch. The issue is whether the communication of trials can be modernised while the rights of all parties, including the right of suspects to a fair trial, are respected. I will mention some of the issues that have been raised. A major one is the televising of court proceedings. As Christine Grahame said, Lord Hope issued directions in 1992, which were supplemented in January 2012, that allowed television cameras in courts in Scotland with the permission of the courts and the parties involved. The Lord President announced last week that he will review that policy. I have utmost confidence in him and in judicial office-holders to do that—the judiciary are best placed to consider when TV cameras should be allowed in court while maintaining an open and fair court system. I look forward to seeing the outcome of the review. Applications are rare. In recent years there have been 10 applications, of which seven were granted. The first broadcasts were for the BBC2 series “The Trial” in 1994. Some members may remember that—I grant that many will not. The televising of sentencing decisions in some high-profile cases, such as that of David Gilroy for the murder of Suzanne Pilley, has been mentioned. I welcome the filming of sentencing decisions in which there is a high, justified public interest—when the courts allow it. There are likely to be fewer issues to consider with the televising of sentencing decisions as opposed to the televising of the trial itself. For example, the difficult issues surrounding the filming of witnesses are not relevant in the context of sentencing. However, it is right and appropriate that the Lord President and the courts decide on those matters, in the light of each individual case. The use of live text-based communications from court is another issue that has arisen recently. Again, there have been relatively few applications: three have been successful to date, one has been turned down and there are no applications outstanding. Again, the decision rests—rightly—with the presiding judge. The judicial council for Scotland is considering producing a practice note on the matter. As some members will know, as one of the members in the chamber with an active Twitter account, I am conscious not only of the attractions of using that medium to disclose information coming out of a court, but of the dangers of using that medium. With comments confined to the small number of characters that are allowed, it is a little challenging to see how justice could be done to a court trial, although, no doubt, some people would like to try. On the media’s reproduction of materials that relate to trials, a joint protocol is in place between the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service on working with the media. That sets out information that can be provided at various stages of a criminal investigation and prosecution. Since work with the media is a day-to-day operational matter for those bodies, that is not an area in which the Scottish Government would—or should—interfere. On other issues, there has been some concern that Scotland’s interpretation of contempt of court legislation is more restrictive than in England. The existence of the law of contempt of court is important. Our court system deserves to be treated with the utmost respect. I acknowledge the responsible approach by the Scottish media—newspapers and broadcasters—to reporting criminal cases and, in particular, to protecting the anonymity of victims of sexual offences, even though that is not, in Scotland, a statutory requirement. Our law on contempt of court contributes to that responsible culture. I certainly want the position of victims to be at the centre of our considerations, rather than at the margins. The discussion should not therefore be just a technical one about the pros and cons; it should be about the victims, first and foremost Points have been raised about the possibility of jurors doing independent net-based research, and whether there should be professional jurors who would not need to be instructed on appropriate behaviour. The Government carried out a major consultation exercise on juries in 2008. The responses clearly established the value put on independent, randomly chosen representatives of society applying their common sense to cases of all descriptions. The Government accepts that and strongly agrees with it. In response, we widened the juror pool by abolishing age limits. Using the wisdom and experience of older members of society is extremely important. Jurors are given guidance on how they should conduct themselves, which includes a clear warning that they should make their decisions only on the evidence that is presented to them. All those examples show that there is a balancing act to be performed, in which politicians should tread particularly carefully. That was one of the considerations that led us to establish, clearly and beyond doubt, the independence of the judiciary and the courts in the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008, which establishes the Lord President’s position at the apex of an independent court system. That is an arrangement in which we can have great confidence. We can all agree that Lord Hamilton, to whom the act gave those responsibilities in 2008, is a man of the utmost skill and integrity who discharged his responsibilities impeccably and that, in Lord Gill, he has a worthy successor. The propositions that I set out at the beginning of my speech must be applied carefully. It is difficult to provide in statute for all situations that might arise. It is not always helpful to set in legislation long, complicated clauses or endless exceptions that make the law difficult to understand. Again, it is necessary in legislation, as elsewhere, to strike a balance. The interaction of my original propositions is best decided by people of the highest integrity applying their training and intellect to the specific circumstances before them, which will always be different. One size will not fit all. The Government is confident that our courts are run by people who have precisely those essential capacities. That is why we have confidence in our system of independent courts. We believe that the judiciary are best placed to make decisions on how to balance the rights of the media with an open and fair court system. I am confident that they will continue to do so in the future against the background of the rapidly changing challenges that are posed by this digital age.

I suppose that it is in the nature of such a debate that we have more questions than answers at the end of it, but I have been struck by the almost unanimous expression of caution from all sides of the chamber—almost every member who has spoken has expressed exactly the same reservations. It is instructive that, on such an issue, there is virtually no difference between individual members’ views, regardless of party. It is important to state that, because we are discussing an area in which we want to be able to proceed as one, and it is quite clear that that will happen. Understandably, a wide range of topics have been covered, and I might not get to mention them all. It is not surprising that such a variety of subjects have been raised, given the fundamental nature of the propositions that any debate on the media and the courts will involve and the fact that the issue touches on many principles that we hold dear. Therefore, I commend the Justice Committee for its courage in the face of a very large task. As the First Minister remarked on one aspect of that task to the Leveson inquiry in June—this will be the only reference that I will make to the Leveson inquiry— “it’s much easier to say it’s an undesirable thing to merge news and comment than to work out what to do about it.” We could apply the same dictum here. Nevertheless, a number of interesting suggestions have been made on what to do about the issue in the course of the debate. We listen carefully to all such suggestions with interest and to the deliberations on the wider questions that are posed in such a discussion, which include that of how we can continue to protect victims and witnesses of crime and to ensure fair trials. John Lamont made some useful references to studies of juries in other countries and other jurisdictions that suggested that juries were less easily swayed by biased reporting than might have been imagined. Their exposure to the reality of court processes may be quite telling in being a rather brutal reminder that regardless of what we see—particularly on American television programmes—a court process can be a lengthy, detailed set of days that is not easily encapsulated in the edited highlights version that one sees in fiction and from across the Atlantic in practice. Jurors who confront that reality may reflect on some of the comment that they then see and realise that they have to consider it quite carefully. Sandra White talked about a number of things including the possibility of some kind of expert who would be provided for the jury. We need to be careful about going down that road in our discussions, because although there are complex and challengeable areas of law, the provision of some kind of expert who was not giving evidence in the trial would become a complex and challengeable position, too. We need to remember that most trials involve expert witnesses as well as outside experts who may wish to comment or not. Joan McAlpine made some interesting points, particularly because in a sense she turned the debate on its head and challenged the mainstream media about their coverage. She implied—she did not use this terminology, so I hope that I do not put words in her mouth—that the mainstream media had effectively opened up a vacuum that had allowed the social media in. That is interesting to reflect upon. Joan McAlpine then raised the interesting notion of accredited bloggers. Again, I am sure that the Justice Committee will have taken that on board and will consider whether that is a good point to pursue. On the issue of a court TV channel, which one or two other members also raised, most people would accept that we could really only progress on that if we were going to forbid editorialising or the selected highlights version of events. There are a lot of questions. Each time that someone comes up with what might seem to be an answer, the answer leads to a whole other set of more questions. To respond to Colin Keir, two Twitter requests have already been agreed to in Scotland. The sentencing of Tommy Sheridan in 2011 and the sentencing of David Gilroy in 2012 were both permitted to be communicated by Twitter from the court, but of course that is not the same as tweeting throughout a trial—that would be an entirely different question. A number of interesting points were raised, but equally each point that was raised begs many more questions. The Government is listening, but it is listening from a definite position, which is that it has put in place robust protections for the independence of the courts and the judiciary and it trusts in the people who operate those protections. In the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008 we established for the first time in Scotland a statutory guarantee of the independence of the judiciary and we placed the Lord President firmly in control of the running of the administration of our courts. That was not merely a grand declaration of principle. It was also the way, we believe, to promote the efficient, professional running of the court system and to guarantee people’s rights within it. It makes abundantly clear the separation of Government from the judiciary. As the cabinet secretary said, the people into whose hands the act entrusted the courts system deserve the highest confidence. They are the people who can best be trusted with balancing the issues before us. The use of public media in court requires a careful balancing act to be performed at times between the principle that justice should be open and subject to public scrutiny and the requirement that trials should be conducted fairly. We must not risk prejudicing the outcome of criminal cases through our appetite for more modern communication of trials. As the judiciary are the guardians of fair trials in this country, ultimately we should leave it to them to decide what role the media should have in individual criminal trials. That will vary according to the circumstances of the case. A trial for a sexual offence will raise very different issues—particularly of protecting victims—from those that are raised by a tax fraud trial. Moreover, the kind of issue that publicity might raise may become apparent only during the trial itself. The cabinet secretary alluded to the difficulty of Parliament making rules for all those and other eventualities. Lewis Macdonald and Alison McInnes, among others, rightly reminded us how intimidating court proceedings already are for victims and witnesses without a further complication being added. It is very much the view of the Scottish Government that we must counterbalance the public interest with upholding the criminal law, and it is our view that upholding how our courts operate alongside the media should be left to those whose job it is to do so—the courts and the judiciary. Undoubtedly, it is harder to deal with the impact of the uncontrolled third-party comment in the cybersphere and its implications, although it is not clear to me how the committee might investigate that. The Lord President’s review is confined to the issue of television in court, but I doubt that the issue of social media coverage is far from the minds of all our judges. This has been a timely debate about a fast-changing situation. I look forward to the further work of the committee on the subject and, as always, I will examine its conclusions with interest.

I am rather astonished by the intimate knowledge of gambling shared by colleagues in this chamber. I have a confession to make: I know next to nothing about the practice of gambling. I know nothing about even the alleged trap of the People’s Postcode Lottery, to which Dave Thompson referred. Gambling is something that I do not get, and I guess that there must be others in the chamber who have not spoken in the debate who are in the same position. I congratulate John Mason on securing the debate, which is a valuable attempt to draw attention to an important problem. As most members have recognised, gambling is reserved to Westminster and the levers of control lie there. However, the consequences of problem gambling are manifest right here in Scotland—up to and including broken families, suicides and criminality. Both Graeme Dey and Anne McTaggart reminded us of those very negative impacts. I welcome Hanzala Malik’s comments, which informed us about a differential impact of gambling on different ethnic groups. I was not aware of that. That was an important contribution. The Government cannot be complacent about the consequences of problem gambling. In March, the cabinet secretary spoke at a conference that was organised by Money Advice Scotland at which those who see the effects of gambling problems every day and those who can make a difference came together with the intention of ensuring that help gets to those who need it. Constitutional constraints mean that the Government cannot do as much as we would like, but it is important that we at least do what we can to ensure that there is a more widespread acknowledgement of the problem. Scarcely enough effort has been made to quantify and research the scale and nature of problem gambling, never mind to deal with its consequences, particularly given the changes to the industry in recent years. Although there is anecdotal evidence—as a number of members have mentioned—of problems that are related to fixed-odds betting terminals, it is currently unsupported by detailed research in the UK. I am not saying that the anecdotal evidence is wrong—just that it is not substantiated by research. My impression is that other countries have benefited from far more comprehensive studies that go further in exploring problem gambling, which may offer a response to some of Nanette Milne’s comments.

Yes.

I suppose that it is possible for any Government to commission research, but one of the difficulties would lie in knowing what we would do with the research if we did not have the powers to act on it. That is a hurdle that cannot be overcome, although I do not doubt that we need more information. Britain’s gambling industry contributes voluntarily to gambling research, education and treatment, so there is a wider research context, but the UK Government’s decision that it will no longer fund the highly comprehensive prevalence survey is regrettable. I am concerned about other recent developments south of the border. I find it extraordinary, for example, that the recent House of Commons Culture, Media and Sport Committee report called for relaxation to allow more rather than fewer betting terminals in betting shops. There are some contradictory voices out there. The 2010 prevalence survey provided data by specific area for the first time, and what it revealed about Scotland is interesting. Scotland had the highest levels of gambling participation in no fewer than seven categories: football pools, slot machines, bingo, fixed-odds betting terminals, sports betting, betting on non-sports events and online betting. There must be concern that that will translate into higher levels of problem gambling. The wider picture of gambling liberalisation over the past twenty years has been significant. It was right that the 2005 act addressed developments that were simply unimaginable to previous legislators who did not have to consider internet and mobile phone betting, and I fully accept that the act could not put genies back into their bottles. The difficulty of regulating gambling internet sites that are based offshore is not to be underestimated. I recognise that, as gambling is a widely enjoyed activity—although, as I indicated, I cannot say that I have ever seen the attraction—there is no inherent reason that people should not place their bets using modern methods of delivery. However, I wonder whether the act fully recognised the potential consequences of the all-pervasive nature of gambling in the 21st century, including the advent of 24-hour gambling. People can bet from their mobile while they watch football in the pub, and come back from the pub and power up the computer for a session of poker or switch on a late-night interactive bingo channel. Internet sites are available 24/7, and there are 24-hour casinos available as well as many other options. Graeme Dey’s comments were certainly an eye-opener in that regard. I have mentioned our limited scope for action in Scotland, but we are determined to do what we can. John Mason asked about teaching in schools. As he will appreciate, I cannot make commitments for the education portfolio, but I will communicate his inquiry to those who are working in that area. I can confirm that the Scottish Government has already called on the UK Government to fund research, examine specifics such as the clustering of shops and take any necessary action. I am happy to provide an assurance that we will work with the Gambling Commission and others on those occasions where we do have a locus or simply to ensure that agencies work together to ensure better enforcement. As I indicated, the cabinet secretary has already written to John Penrose, the Minister for Tourism and Heritage—who is apparently the relevant minister for this policy area south of the border—in respect of research on fixed-odds betting terminals. John Mason’s speech reminded me that we should acknowledge the tremendous work that Gamblers Anonymous has done in helping to pick up the pieces. A wider debate on gambling is certainly worth having, as there are questions to be answered. Are there greater concentrations of betting shops in particular localities? Are those localities in areas of deprivation? Is there an association between the number and location of licensed gambling premises and problem gambling? I certainly welcome the fact that the debate has been opened up. There is no complacency on my part, and I fully recognise that problem gambling is a serious issue that can blight lives. We need to begin a debate on what an independent Scotland can do differently to balance the economic benefits and the enjoyment that gambling undoubtedly brings with a new approach that better mitigates the harm that problem gambling can bring. Those two things—the good and the harm—must be recognised together. We must consider what we can do now, and what we would be able to do if we had the powers in future. Meeting closed at 17:45.

We know from the Scottish drug-related deaths database, which published reports in 2011 and 2012, that around 80 percent of drug-related deaths registered in Scotland are opiate related; that half of those who die have been in prison before; that the majority of fatal overdoses are witnessed or have others present at them; and that there is ambulance attendance at the majority of fatal overdoses but the patient has already died. That makes a compelling case for a national programme to ensure that those who use opiates, their families and their communities are made aware of, and trained to use, naloxone to save a life. Scotland’s national naloxone programme is described in the Drugs: Education, Prevention and Policy journal as “One of the most important public health interventions to emerge aimed at tackling rising Drug-Related Deaths”. That is an assessment of the global situation so, in carrying out the naloxone programme, we are at the forefront of the struggle against drug addiction in the world.

John Finnie will be aware that, at the moment, naloxone is administered by intramuscular injection, but I am conscious that Highland NHS Board has agreed with local partners to pilot intranasal naloxone. It is one of the first health boards in Scotland to have developed a take-home naloxone programme, which is why it wants to further develop the programme. However, we are still in the very early stages of the national naloxone programme, so perhaps now is not the right time for all health boards to trial it. We look forward to information from Highland NHS Board, which has agreed to keep the national naloxone advisory group up to speed on the progress of the pilot and evaluate its effectiveness over time.

We have to be honest and say that naloxone is not a magic wand that will be available to every person. The group of people that Duncan McNeil described is indeed one of the hardest groups to access for any form of treatment. A significant number of people in the addicted population have now been using for between 20 and 30 years and are exhibiting many difficulties across the health spectrum. Whether a programme such as naloxone would be useful for people in those circumstances would be a reasonable debate. Naloxone is an important tool in our armoury, but there are big issues concerning the group of people that Duncan McNeil spoke about, and we are well aware that there are people we are currently not reaching. Part of what we are trying to do is establish mechanisms to get to those individuals.

I recognise that Jenny Marra and others are passionate about gender equality, although others are passionate about all equalities. Given my position, I am hardly likely to disagree about increasing women’s representation on the boards of public bodies. However, I disagree with Jenny Marra’s idea that setting such quotas for the bodies that the bill will establish would be a helpful approach.

We want to appoint the best people to run the Scottish police authority and the Scottish fire and rescue service on the basis that they have the right blend of skills and experience to manage those vital public services.

I will let in the member in a moment! Members: Ooh! I do not accept that the choice should be constrained by quotas for any one group. Now I will let the member in.

As Johann Lamont must be aware, many organisations that involve her party—including some of the new local authority administrations—can impose such measures internally if they wish to do so. It is interesting that they do not do that. Parliament recently supported a motion recognising the progress that has already been made by the Scottish Government to improve diversity in the public appointments process, resulting in 34 per cent of public appointments in 2011-12 being held by women. That is not the end result, but the picture is improving and we accept that there is more to do. In fact, I had a conversation about board membership with a fire board yesterday morning. We did not just discuss gender equality because we need also to look at other equality issues. Appointments to the SPA and SFRS will be made through the public appointments process that all Governments have been happy to use in the past, including Johann Lamont’s own party’s Government, and we will ensure that underrepresented groups are encouraged to apply. That, of course, includes groups other than women. We will actively raise awareness of the forthcoming appointments through senior women’s networks and other diversity and equality organisations. We are also raising awareness in more general ways by opening up registration this week for packs to be issued on the date of publication of the advert. Ms Marra’s amendment 42, which seeks to impose gender quotas on local authority committees, is even more restrictive. Not quite 25 per cent of local councillors are women. Although that might be a record high, if a quota of 40 per cent women is set for police and fire committees, I presume that committees that work on other issues are likely to end up being all male, which is certainly not a desirable outcome. The Government recognises that women should be more equally represented in public life, and we are working to improve the situation. We need to increase the number of women who are putting themselves forward for appointments and we need to make sure that more women are able to progress through organisations to gain the skills and experience that public appointments panels look for. I cannot support the imposition of statutory quotas for individual bodies.

The amendments in group 14 relate to membership of the Scottish police authority and the Scottish fire and rescue service. Amendment 18 will adjust the size of the SFRS board and amendment 25 will adjust the size of the Scottish police authority, increasing their memberships so that in addition to the chairs, the boards must have a minimum of 10 other members and a maximum of 14. Amendments 22 and 27 are minor amendments that are consequential to that change. As members will know, there has been much debate on the issue. During stage 2, Kenny MacAskill indicated that he was willing to reflect further on the issue. Having listened to views throughout the bill process, including those of COSLA, we are now persuaded that the size of the board should be increased to a total minimum of 11 and a total maximum of 15. The Government has been clear from the outset that members of both bodies should be appointed solely on the basis of their skills and expertise, through a fair and open public appointments process. We debated earlier the steps that we are taking to encourage women to apply for the posts. I now want to take this opportunity to encourage people from all walks of life, from all political parties and from different areas and communities to put themselves forward so that the board truly serves all of Scotland. Amendments 53 and 71 in the name of Lewis Macdonald would require ministers to have regard to representing persons with knowledge of specific communities, fire and rescue services and policing respectively in all regions of Scotland. Amendments 54 and 68, which are also in his name, seek to ensure that at least a third of the SFRS and SPA membership is from local authorities and that Scottish ministers should select those members from nominations that would be made by COSLA. The committee rejected Lewis Macdonald’s similar amendments at stage 2. It does not matter whether he is seeking half or a third; it is essential that members of the SPA and the SFRS all have equal status on the boards and that they work collectively in the best interests of the whole of Scotland. Accordingly, I also cannot support amendment 69 in the name of John Lamont, which seeks to ensure that in appointing members of the SPA, ministers have due regard to the need for various areas and interests, such as being members of a local authority, representing or having knowledge of communities and policing in the regions of Scotland and having no direct connection with policing. I share Kenny MacAskill’s view that the police authority must have the maximum flexibility to seek a wide range of experience and have the necessary skills to hold the chief constable to account. Alison McInnes’s amendment 3 proposes that membership of the SPA be approved by Parliament. I cannot support an amendment that confuses the lines of governance between the Parliament and the SPA. The SPA is not a parliamentary body so it would not be right for Parliament to scrutinise members that it has agreed to appoint. I encourage Parliament to support amendments 18, 22, 25 and 27. I will not support amendments 3, 53, 54, 68, 69 and 71. I move amendment 18.

We have again heard mention of a future unscrupulous Government that may emerge were the unhappy possibility that the SNP is no longer in government to occur. Given that that future unscrupulous Government can come only from the Labour Party, the Tory party or the Liberal Democrats, we should be told which party is likely to deliver such a Government. It certainly would not be the SNP. I say to John Lamont that I am slightly entertained by the notion that we would use legislation to start to design job specifications. That is not the basis on which anybody governs now, and it should not be in the future. Some of the issues that Lewis Macdonald has raised will properly be for a parliamentary justice committee to address. That is where, in parliamentary terms, the power lies to bring people to account, and that is what should be done in the future instead of our complicating the issue and providing for other organisations elsewhere that would do the job that the Justice Committee should do. I say to Lewis Macdonald that, even on the basis of what he said, it is hardly possible that all the areas of Scotland can ever be represented on a board, even at the maximum size that will now pertain. Therefore, the amendments would not achieve what it is claimed they will achieve.

I had actually finished my comments, but does Lewis Macdonald seriously think that we will appoint people who have absolutely no qualifications or experience whatever to the boards? What a piece of nonsense. Amendment 18 agreed to. Amendment 52 moved—[Jenny Marra].

I am happy to support John Lamont’s amendments 19 and 26. From the outset, we have made it clear that the SFRS and the Scottish police authority will carry out their respective functions in a transparent way and that it has always been our expectation that meetings should and will be held in public. The Justice Committee concluded that the SFRS and the SPA should hold meetings in public and publish their papers, while also recognising that certain occasions might necessitate consideration of items in private. Following stage 2, we have been happy to work with David McLetchie and John Lamont and can support an amendment that achieves that aim. Accordingly, I welcome the amendments, whose sensible intention is to ensure that the SFRS and the SPA meet in public unless there is good reason not to and that both bodies make clear and publish the circumstances in which proceedings will be held in private. Again, I support amendments 19 and 26.

An amendment in exactly the same terms was lodged at stage 2 and rejected by the Justice Committee. The Government is well aware that, for genuine reasons, certain stakeholders would like to see the general functions of the SFRS on the face of the bill, along the lines proposed by Ms Marra. However, we are not convinced that that is either necessary or desirable. The Justice Committee supported that view in its stage 1 report and at stage 2, as did the Chief Inspector of Fire and Rescue Authorities in his written evidence. The Government recognises and values the wide prevention and response roles that fire and rescue services in Scotland have developed, but we consider that they are fully covered by the existing legislation. The principal fire and rescue functions are set out in the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005 and the Fire (Additional Function) (Scotland) Order 2005. The 2005 act provides the flexibility to confer additional functions by further additional functions orders. It also sets out ancillary fire and rescue functions, including a power for the SFRS to prepare for other eventualities and take action that it considers appropriate to respond to them. That structure, together with the fire and rescue framework, provides flexibility to adjust or expand on the functions in future, without the need for further primary legislation. The new framework will also include a new purpose for the SFRS with a clear focus on prevention and community safety, which the Fire Brigades Union and the SFRS will have the opportunity to input to. Therefore, I do not consider that amendment 59 is necessary. Amendment 59 could have unintended consequences, as its scope is extremely wide. It would place no limitation on the functions, and it would impose duties on the SFRS to save lives, protect property, and render humanitarian services across Scotland in all circumstances. I do not think that that is reasonable or achievable, so I cannot support amendment 59.

I fear that I will disappoint Lewis Macdonald once again. I am not persuaded that the bill should make provision for the SFRS annual report to include details of average staffing numbers for the reporting year as proposed in amendment 66.

If the member will let me get beyond my first paragraph. The average number of staff takes no account of the many different roles that staff play or the differences between whole-time, retained and volunteer firefighters and the range of duties that are carried out by other staff. It is clear that the average number of SFRS staff is meaningless and that reporting it would not improve transparency.

The information that the report contains will include a wide range of figures, and I am sure that it will not be beyond the average individual to tot up and work out what the average number might be, but that is not a particularly useful figure in itself. Ministers, fire and rescue stakeholders and Scotland’s communities want a service that is focused on outcomes, not inputs. The SFRS annual report should tell us how the service has used its resources, including that most valuable of resources, its people—all of them—to deliver improved outcomes for the people and communities of Scotland. I cannot support amendment 66, and I ask Lewis Macdonald not to press it.

Said with no irony whatsoever.

It is a good job that Jenny Marra was not here before last year. I do not recall much constructive working across parties in the Parliament when her party was in government with the Liberal Democrats from 1999 to 2007. Far more constructive working has taken place since 2007—that is easily seen by members. Members who have been here since 1999 know perfectly well that, when Labour was in government here, there was nothing by way of constructive engagement.

We listened to others and we are still listening to others, as is evidenced by the fact that we accepted some Opposition amendments today. I do not recall many Opposition amendments being accepted by the Labour Government before 2007, and I would be surprised if Annabel Goldie can remember any. Despite those points and the fact that some speeches appeared to relate to another debate entirely, there is consensus behind the proposals, although members would not always know it. Stakeholders and the Parliament agree that the police service and the fire and rescue service need to be reformed, to safeguard and improve the services that they provide to Scotland’s communities. We and the services have looked at the issue for more than two years. A wealth of evidence demonstrates that single services will deliver the most benefits. The services and stakeholders accept that and are working constructively with us to deliver the reform. John Finnie was right to remind us of the positives of that reform. I thank the Parliament and the Justice Committee for their positive contributions to the bill. I thank the Local Government and Regeneration Committee for its consideration of key aspects of the bill; I also thank the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee. I extend my thanks to all the stakeholders who worked with us to shape the bill and who continue to contribute to the reform programme’s success. That work goes on—particularly in the services and in staff associations, trade unions, local government and other bodies. Members would not know it from Alison McInnes’s speech but, when it has been right to do so, we have changed the bill. For example, we listened to the calls for larger boards, to ensure that they have the necessary range of skills and expertise. As for her nonsense about the destruction of community working, it is just that—nonsense. In truth, the opposite will happen—local links will be strengthened, as described by Colin Keir. As the minister with responsibility for the fire and rescue service, I particularly thank the Chief Fire Officers Association Scotland and the FBU for their constructive approach. I have been greatly impressed by the way in which the existing services and the FBU have worked together, and continue to work together, to plan for the single service. A huge amount of work has been done to ensure that the public continue to receive a high standard of service from day one of the SFRS. The joint working between management and employees has been exemplary and it provides a strong employee relations model for the new service to build on, so the contribution has been invaluable. We want to build on that partnership approach. That will include the opportunity at some point for a trade union representative to be a member of the SFRS board. To facilitate that, we lodged an amendment to the bill at stage 2 to allow ministers, by order, to lift the disqualification on staff members, including union representatives, being board members. Discussion of that continues to be active. I will talk about specifics. Graeme Pearson has—with great consistency, to give him his due—suggested a parliamentary commission. The Government fully supports the need for robust parliamentary scrutiny of policing and fire and rescue, but, as Christine Grahame reminded us, Parliament and its committees already have powers to inquire into any aspect of policing or the fire and rescue service, including requiring any person to attend proceedings to give evidence or to produce documents for such an inquiry. In addition, we have built into the new structure plenty of opportunities for Parliament to scrutinise. Strategic priorities, strategic plans and annual plans will all be laid before Parliament, as will the SPA’s annual report and reports from Her Majesty’s chief inspector of constabulary and the police investigations and review commissioner. Graeme Pearson spoke eloquently about his proposal to establish a Scottish policing commission, but Parliament is already responsible for scrutinising policing and there is a real risk that responsibilities would be blurred if we superimposed a new structure. It was for that reason that we could not support Graeme Pearson’s amendment. However, we were happy to support John Finnie’s amendment, which sought to make clear that scrutiny of police and fire and rescue services is a key role for Parliament but did not seek to dictate how that role should be carried out. I repeat our commitment to work with the Parliamentary Bureau to establish a new committee under existing standing orders, which would be a more flexible solution that could be adapted as the new service beds in. Lewis Macdonald and others referred to the VAT issue. We are asking not for special treatment for Scotland, but for equal treatment for our essential police and fire and rescue services, and equal respect for this Parliament’s clear wishes. The Treasury’s decision is in stark contrast to its recent decisions in relation to new police commissioners for England and Wales and academy schools in England. For those who have criticised our approach, I reiterate the fact that we have made every effort to co-operate with the Treasury and achieve a positive outcome for Scotland’s police and fire and rescue services. The Treasury has the powers to enable Scotland’s services to recover VAT; it just does not choose to exercise them, which is not acceptable. It is a tax on Scotland. We costed our outline business cases responsibly on the basis that VAT would be payable, not because we assumed that to be the case, but because we knew that it would be the prudent approach. Even without the ability to recover VAT, the establishment of a single police service and a single fire and rescue service is the best option for Scotland and will deliver estimated savings of £1.7 billion over 15 years. John Lamont talked about resources and savings. We believe that the police and fire budgets provide sufficient funding for the services to fully undertake their functions. Future budgets will be agreed following future negotiations around service requirements. As I said, the single police service and the single fire and rescue service will deliver estimated savings of £1.7 billion over 15 years, with annual recurring cash savings in excess of £130 million expected from 2016-17. CFOAS is certain that savings can be made by removing duplication. ACPOS has assured us that it is committed to implementing the police reform programme within budget. Lewis Macdonald and John Lamont also talked about the business cases. Both business cases demonstrated that single services were the most likely to deliver the necessary savings and other benefits of reform. It was on that basis that we introduced the bill. Full business cases are produced to set out in detail the effect of delivering single services, but to enable full business cases to be produced, a series of critical decisions on the design and delivery of the services is needed. It is sensible and right that those decisions should be taken by the SPA, the SFRS board and the chief officers once they have been appointed. Parliament and the services would rightly be critical if ministers sought to take such decisions on the services’ behalf. The new services need to take ownership of the new structures that we are creating and make the detailed decisions that will enable full business cases to be produced. It does not therefore make any sense for the Government to produce full business cases before those decisions have been made. Had we done so, I do not doubt that we would be accused of trying to micromanage the new services. Reform is vital if we are to protect and improve on the services that our communities receive. The bill provides the framework for that necessary reform. I therefore ask that members support our motion and pass the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill.

I welcome the motion and the Labour amendment. Nanette Milne is absolutely right—the role of families is key to the success of our national drug strategy “The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland’s Drug Problem”. To set the context for the debate, it is important to consider the considerable amount of information that we have on drug use and its impact on families. Recently published reports show us that illegal drug use in the general adult population in Scotland has declined by more than a fifth since 2006. We also know that reported drug use among our young people is falling steadily. That said, 59,600 individuals use opiates in Scotland. There were 485 drug-related deaths in 2010, of which many—but not necessarily all—can be attributed to opiates. Although fewer and fewer young people contribute to that tragic statistic, we have an ageing cohort of drug users who have experienced poorer health over the past decade. We can see that group moving through the population. It is important that in the debate we recognise not only the support that is given by families, but the support that is needed by families. Those are two different things—they are not exactly the same. In Scotland, we recognise that recovery is a long-term process that involves patience and the potential for relapse. By its nature, it requires a person-centred approach and yet it must be supported by a wider recovery community. The role of families in recovery and the impact of drug use on families were eloquently explained to me when I first met the chair and director of Scottish Families Affected by Drugs last year. I then attended the organisation’s national conference to make clear the commitment of the Scottish Government to support our families and communities across Scotland on their own road to recovery. Nanette Milne used a word that I have used frequently after meeting those people: “inspiring”. Their experience and their commitment are an inspiration to all of us. Such is our commitment as a Government to Scottish Families Affected by Drugs that I provided additional funding in 2012-13 to support it through a challenging period of transition and reorganisation. Nanette Milne also mentioned the Scottish Recovery Consortium, which is another key organisation in the recovery movement. The consortium has set in motion an innovative and ambitious programme for 2012-13 and beyond. The work programme, which is directly funded by the Scottish Government, outlines proactive steps to accelerate the growth of recovery communities across Scotland—communities that start with peer and family support and grow into a network of peers, families, services and advocacy, making recovery a reality. The consortium also plays a leading role in tackling stigma in the context of recovery. It is clear that stigma is a significant barrier to people accessing help. It is a further and unjust pressure on families and is not tolerable in the 21st century, when—more than ever before—altruism and our sense of community will underpin success in bringing about recovery. The battle against stigma is one that has been long fought on behalf of vulnerable individuals by the Scottish Drugs Forum. The SDF has an important role in developing peer support, advocacy services and family support across Scotland. Together with the Scottish Recovery Consortium, individuals across Scotland in recovery are being supported to give something back to their families and their communities. I meet people who are in the process of doing precisely that on a regular basis. The stories that they have to tell—and sometimes the length of time that it has taken them to get there—are astonishing. That work requires patience on the part of communities and families as well. The Scottish Government provided the Scottish Drugs Forum with a package of funding to help us jointly to implement our world-leading naloxone programme. The programme empowers not only individuals but families to save a life. The reality of drug misuse is that individuals put their lives at risk. To lose a family member is a terrible tragedy, which is why I committed a further £400,000 in 2012-13 to the national naloxone programme, to ensure that naloxone is widely available throughout Scotland. As naloxone is not an antidote that can be self-administered, the programme has proactively engaged families, peers and communities in training and awareness programmes. At its best, the programme encourages an early discussion within the family about drug use and the risk of overdose. From there, it is but a small step to recovery.

The member will accept that, in a speech of seven minutes, I cannot touch on every issue, but I am aware of the mental health problems that go along with drug use, which are beginning to be particularly evident in the older group of drug users. That is a big challenge for mental health services. Scotland’s 30 alcohol and drug partnerships have the role of delivering on the agreed commitments that are articulated in “The Road to Recovery”. Through our investment in front-line care, treatment and recovery services and the commitment of our local partners, we are beginning to see some green shoots of that recovery across Scotland. We are witnessing the growth of family support organisations throughout Scotland, some of which are funded jointly by us and the Lloyds TSB Foundation for Scotland’s partnership drugs initiative. Those include First Step in East Lothian; the family matters project in Fife; North United Communities in Glasgow; the Children 1st supporting families project in Aberdeen; the carer support service in Moray; the Armadale community families project in West Lothian; the kith ‘n’ kin service in Tayside; the lifeshaper project in the Western Isles; and, of course, the inspiration for this debate, the Grampian Family Support Forum, which in its own words is an example of using “‘lived experience’ to make positive changes within our communities.” I welcome the Parliament’s commitment to this area and the consensus on the importance not only of family support, but of support for families on the road to recovery, which means recovery for the individuals and their families. In turn, that will mean recovery for communities and for Scotland. I move amendment S4M-03394.1, to insert at end: “; further supports the direct investment of the Scottish Government in national organisations such as Scottish Families Affected by Drugs, the Scottish Recovery Consortium and the Scottish Drugs Forum, which support families in playing their vital role in building recovery communities across Scotland, and endorses the role of the Road to Recovery in putting the individual at the centre of care, treatment and recovery services and, in doing so, promoting the essential role of families and communities in supporting sustained recovery across Scotland.”

I thank members for the many thoughtful contributions on a significant issue affecting families in Scotland. One of the essential values of the Scottish Parliament is its capacity to educate and to highlight important issues and, on occasions, genuinely to speak with one voice. This is an issue on which we are doing that. However, we also need to highlight some of the work that Parliament is doing through the education and community partnerships team and its community partnerships project. That is a strong example of the Parliament giving a voice to people who might otherwise be underrepresented. I want to say to those families that we have heard what they have said to us, that we will not forget about them, and that we will continue to listen and to work to support them. We can do that through our commitment to bringing down waiting times—access to services for drug users has changed overwhelmingly compared with what it was a few years ago—through our record funding of front-line drug treatment services, which is being preserved against the backdrop of difficult economic circumstances; through our direct funding for voluntary organisations such as SFAD; and through our commitment to tackling stigma and supporting the growth of recovery in communities the length and breadth of Scotland. No one who has participated in today’s debate, or who has been involved in the community partnerships project, has not been moved by the challenging daily experience of families who are struggling with drug or alcohol problems. As Maureen Watt and Sandra White reminded us, decisions that are made elsewhere, such as in welfare reform, and which are designed for a very different approach to the drugs problem, can put those partnerships at risk. At the moment, we are still struggling with what looks to be a rule that says that no benefits can be given until the first substantive appointment, which does not include the first conversation with the GP. Even the three-week waiting time that we are getting down to will be a challenge for people who will have to face three weeks without benefits. There is no clarity about the way in which relapses will be treated, but in our system, we accept that relapses can sometimes be part of recovery. Those are outstanding issues that we cannot get to the bottom of and are a worry for us, which is why welfare reform is an important part of the debate. I am proud of the steps that the Scottish Government is taking to support strong professional services and more rapid access to specialist care and support. However, we must remember that it is the families who are coping with their family member’s addiction 24/7 and who are supporting them in their recovery. I have met many such families in different parts of Scotland and I am always impressed and inspired by their resilience and commitment to the individual whom they love, and their capacity to forgive and to keep going, never giving up on their family and never losing sight of the potential of an individual to recover from addiction. The value to those families of the organisations and local support groups that we have heard about this morning is immeasurable. Across Scotland, such organisations and groups are all punching above their weight and working from the strongest motivations of care and support. Organisations such as Scottish Families Affected by Drugs offer access to advice and support, bring people together to share and learn from their experience, and continue to raise awareness of the needs of families. As Richard Simpson suggested, we should also remember the families who have experienced bereavement as a consequence of addiction, and we should continue to build our awareness of the needs of families who are in recovery. We can learn a good deal from families on that aspect of what happens to them. The recovery happens event that was held in Parliament on 1 March was a great example of how politicians can learn from the lived experience of those who are directly affected. At local level, ADPs across Scotland play their part in supporting community groups as part of local packages of action to tackle drug and alcohol problems. They make local decisions on the basis of local needs. I continue to be grateful to the partnership drugs initiative for its wise stewardship of Government funding while working locally across Scotland. Funds are being distributed, but we are also building capacity in local organisations to describe the impact and value of their work, and to share learning across the country. To answer Neil Bibby’s point, I say that that includes the looked after children regulations which, for the first time, empower local authorities to pay an allowance to kinship carers. In agreement with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, funding for that has been put in place. In March 2011, we also launched a national advice and support service for all kinship carers. Liz Smith rightly reminded us of the major challenges that remain, and that evidence gathering and measuring outcomes are huge issues. That is correct, particularly when we want to empower local groups and not overwhelm them with bureaucratic demands. Kezia Dugdale and Alison McInnes also reminded us of how complex that can be. Today, we can recommit to continue to listen to the families who need our support; to ensure that valuable examples of good work continue to be shared as a source of inspiration and example to others; and—as Mark MacDonald reminded us—to take care how we, as politicians, contribute to the debate in the comments that we are sometimes called upon to make. To return to the specific point of Nanette Milne’s original speech, I say personally to Sheila McKay and the Grampian Family Support Forum that they have my thanks for the commitment that they have shown. I thank Sheila, for being, as a mother, a source of support and inspiration in the community; and I thank the forum for the work that it has done to raise Parliament’s awareness of this important issue.

All hate crimes are deplorable and have no place in modern Scotland. Earlier this month, we cautiously welcomed newly published figures that show a decrease in racist incidents recorded by the police in Scotland for 2010-11. Although those figures showed a decrease in racist incidents, there is absolutely no room for complacency and the Scottish Government is committed to tackling all types of hate crime and supports all efforts to stamp it out. That is why we are providing nearly £9 million in funding during the period 2012 to 2015 to organisations whose work is aimed at tackling racist attitudes and improving the lives of minority ethnic communities, including refugees, asylum seekers, migrant workers and Gypsy Travellers. That includes £2.9 million to strategic partners such as the Council of Ethnic Minority Voluntary Sector Organisations, Black and Ethnic Minority Infrastructure in Scotland and the Scottish Refugee Council to deliver race equality at a national level and represent the views of minority ethnic groups and individuals in Scotland. We also provided funding of £5.9 million to organisations to deliver projects working towards race equality at a grass-roots level. Even one racist hate crime is one too many and we continue to work with those organisations to create the one Scotland to which we all aspire.

It is often the case that there are variations in the national figures. Sometimes, that is to do with issues such as changes in recording methods or the fact that there has been a specific focus on a particular crime. The member is quite right to flag up the differential between Fife and other parts of Scotland. I undertake to have a closer look at the matter to try to establish the underlying causes and determine whether the issue is simply a technical one or whether a problem is developing in Fife. I will meet the member in the near future, if he wishes.

The applause perhaps gives the member the answer that he might expect. I suspect that every member in the chamber is united in their abhorrence of the message that is being promulgated in Scotland by what is a small group of individuals who insist on making arguments that the rest of us simply do not and never will agree with. I commend those councils that are taking active steps to prevent that message from being broadcast even more loudly on the streets of Scotland’s cities.

The curriculum for excellence provides the right environment to enable our young people to develop as informed and responsible citizens, and education remains central to the Scottish Government’s approach to tackling sectarianism. I am therefore delighted that Education Scotland will highlight its work to combat sectarianism at this year’s Scottish learning festival, which will showcase best practice in the area. That best practice includes a range of projects that are currently funded by the Scottish Government and which use many approaches, such as the arts, sports and classroom-based learning, to deliver real outcomes for our young people.

I am delighted to join my colleague Christina McKelvie in applauding the creativity of the Machan Trust and staff and pupils on the initiative. That initiative is an example of the great work that is happening in Larkhall and the surrounding area, and is one of the reasons why Larkhall has become the first area in Scotland to receive the Nil by Mouth award, which recognises several years of hard work in uniting people of different religious and cultural backgrounds. I have visited a variety of schools in the past few months, and would be delighted to visit the member’s constituency, meet those who are involved in that excellent project and see first hand some of the other exciting initiatives that are taking place across Larkhall and the surrounding area. There are, of course, such initiatives in other parts of Scotland, too. An enormous amount of very good work is being done in Scotland right now on sectarianism, and I commend everybody who is involved in it, but I particularly commend Larkhall for being the first to get champion for change accreditation status.

I, too, congratulate Jamie Hepburn on obtaining the debate. The issues that are highlighted in his motion are not abstract issues for “far-off countries of which we know little”— to quote Neville Chamberlain’s infamous phrase. Today’s world is global and interconnected, and no one can profess ignorance. Scotland has its role to play as a respected and responsible nation within the global community. I pay tribute to David Grimason and the work that he has been doing in conjunction with Amnesty International and Oxfam to raise awareness of the human consequences of the unregulated international trade in weapons. Today’s debate is testament to his efforts to date, and I hope that it serves as both recognition of and encouragement for his efforts and those of the many others who are campaigning for change at the international level. Jamie Hepburn has explained how David’s campaign arose out of the heartbreak of personal tragedy and the loss of his young son, Alistair. The impact of such a crime on a family is difficult to comprehend, but David has sought to connect the private and the political, the local and the global, and to shine a light on the human impact of inadequate gun control and the terrible consequences that the unregulated trade in arms has for many innocent people worldwide. His campaign is a reminder that the arms trade is also about small arms, although a lot of the media focus tends to concentrate on the larger items of military hardware. The shocking fact is that, worldwide, there are an estimated 750,000 victims of armed violence every year. The unregulated trade of weapons destroys not only lives but livelihoods, communities and human dignity. All too often, the arms trade puts tools of oppression into the hands of unsavoury regimes that are implicated in the abuse of human rights. Where controls are inadequate, even legitimately traded weapons can cascade downwards to militias, local warlords and criminals. The people who pay the heaviest price are invariably the vulnerable and the powerless: women and children, the young and the elderly, and non-combatants of all kinds including those who, like David Grimason’s son, have the misfortune to be in the wrong place at the wrong time. Behind the faceless statistics lie personal tragedies, lives lost and lives ruined. Effective international control of the arms trade is now long overdue. In Scotland and the United Kingdom we have good reason to be conscious of the need for effective controls on guns and other weaponry. The Dunblane massacre horrified us all and we took action to confront the threat that was posed by legally held guns in the wrong hands. However, similar horrors are visited on innocent people around the world and we should remember that uncontrolled international transfers of arms are not a problem only for the so-called third world. There is genuine cross-party consensus in this chamber and across the UK on the need for a treaty to regulate the international arms trade. People such as Malcolm Chisholm, Jean Urquhart, Bill Kidd, Alison Johnstone, Jim Eadie and Mark McDonald have spoken eloquently today on the issue. Fortunately, it is an issue on which the Scottish Government sees eye to eye with the UK Government. We fully support the efforts that the UK has been making to negotiate an effective arms trade treaty. That initiative has been eight years in the making and has gathered momentum and widespread support. Next month’s negotiations in New York have the capacity to deliver real change and to provide the kind of international framework of controls that are desperately needed. Roderick Campbell and others discussed some of what is required. However, the negotiations will succeed only if they can proceed with the support of a wide coalition of nations. As has been said, we need an obligation to be placed on UN members to refuse to allow arms shipments where the risk exists that the weapons will be used to violate human rights and international humanitarian law. There is, of course, no more fundamental human right than the right to life. This is, of course, a sector in which Scotland has a direct stake, particularly with regard to the naval and aerospace sectors. Governments and non-governmental organisations recognise that states have a right and sometimes a pressing need to acquire armaments for defence and security purposes, but legitimate trade should be transparent and it must be properly monitored. In line with other UN treaties and conventions, every state should be accountable for its record and for the credibility of its arms control measures. The hope must be that objections can now be overcome and that a substantial arms trade treaty will be concluded this year. In closing, I note Jamie Hepburn’s proposals that the Scottish Government write to the UK Government to express its support for the current initiative and to relay the views of members of this Parliament. David Grimason and Amnesty International will meet the First Minister next week to talk about the current campaign. That campaign, and David’s story, serve to remind us all of the reality of the arms trade. This is a debate not about abstract claims and faceless statistics but about the rights and hopes of real people. It concerns the right to a life free from fear and heartbreak and from threats, poverty and injustice. That is the ultimate reality of the current situation, and it is long past time for the international community to take a stand. Meeting closed at 17:48.

I thank members for their contributions to the debate. Underlying all that has been said is a broad agreement in the chamber that the interests of victims and witnesses of crime should be at the heart of reforms to the justice system. Let us all agree, at the outset, that there is probably no perfect justice system anywhere in the world and that it is our job to make Scotland’s system as good as it can be, although we acknowledge that it is not perfect now and never has been. The truth is that there are flaws, as there have been for a number of years. However, I believe that we have an opportunity to make our justice system far better than it has been. Central to that is how we treat victims, and how victims feel they have been treated must be a measure of that system’s success. Obviously, victims are a crucial part of the justice system, but witnesses are a crucial part, too. We must recognise the clear problems and distinctions that are attached to both groups. If witnesses are to come forward and report what they have seen or heard, they must have confidence in the system. They must have confidence that their contribution will be worth while and that they will be supported as witnesses, just as victims must have confidence that they will be supported as victims. Improving the experience of both those groups of people is at the heart of the Government’s making justice work programme, which is quite broad and runs over a number of areas. That is why we set out various proposals in our recent consultation paper, some of which have been discussed today. The cabinet secretary outlined general principles that will be vital to judge our success in improving the information and support that are available to victims and witnesses. Those principles, which I hope will have broad support, are worth reiterating. Annabel Goldie ran through them in her speech, but it is worth putting them on the record again. Victims and witnesses should know what is going on in cases that affect them—we all have examples from our constituencies in which that simply has not happened, for victims or for witnesses. They should know what to expect in relation to proceedings, including that hearings will go ahead when scheduled—again, we all have experience of constituents who simply did not understand the processes and did not have them explained to them. People should feel confident in coming forward that their personal safety will be protected—we have heard a number of cogent examples this afternoon in which that has simply not been the case. They should be able to contribute effectively to cases that affect them, and they should have access to appropriately tailored support before, during and after proceedings. Also, offenders should pay for the injury, loss or distress that they have caused. There has been a bit of discussion about victim surcharge. It is worth saying one or two things about that, as a number of members raised the issue. We are considering ways by which such a surcharge might be brought in, whether it should be a flat rate or pro rata, and what level it should be set at. Even at a basic and minimal level, it would produce a fund of money that would go right back to where it was needed—that is an important point to make. We believe that the proposals in the consultation paper will make a real difference to victims and witnesses. Measures such as the victim surcharge, which I have just mentioned, and the restitution orders will ensure that offenders contribute financially to the support that their victims need. We want to see that happening in our system. Extending the availability of special measures will enable vulnerable witnesses to give evidence effectively. Special measures were mentioned by a number of members, and we are considering extending them and even creating an automatic right to them in certain cases. I heard what was said by several members, particularly Malcolm Chisholm, about the possibility of extending special measures. It is worth remembering that there is sometimes a capacity issue about what can be done and where it can be done. Not all of our court buildings are capable of being used in some of the ways that we would prefer to use them in order for special measures to be taken. That is one of the issues that we must understand and take on board. There is no magic wand that can be waved to make all the special measures that might be brought in easily introduced in the current circumstances. Nevertheless, we are considering them carefully—I hope that members will accept that assurance on my part.

I welcome that. We must all accept that, in parts of the country, there is a huge challenge confronting us in our court buildings. In my constituency, there is an issue about wheelchair access to Perth sheriff court. At the moment, people in wheelchairs find it almost impossible to get into the court, which is not an acceptable situation for anybody to be in. Improving the information that is available will help victims and witnesses. The availability of high-quality information is consistently raised as a key factor in determining the experience that individuals have of the justice system, but there are issues around the question of providing information, as was noted by several members including Nigel Don, Malcolm Chisholm and others. We will commission a feasibility study into how we can provide much better information for victims and the public about specific cases. Some security questions arise out of the provision of information, such as who will get access to the information and what precisely the information will be. Malcolm Chisholm highlighted the fact that one can overprovide information to those to whom it might be better not to grant access. There is a whole set of issues around that, and we will consider the matter carefully to see how we can manage all those issues, including data protection. I hope that that is understood.

We understand why that would be regarded as a big step forward and we are happy to consider the matter. There are issues to do with security and policing, so the proposition is perhaps not as simple as it appears to be on the surface. We will consider the issue, among other things. I had better press on, because I have only four minutes left. The planned bill is important, but we need to see it in the context of other initiatives that are being planned or undertaken under the making justice work programme. Our focus is on the package of reforms as a whole and on how we can improve the experience of victims and witnesses, whether we do so through legislation or by other means. Let us not get so focused on legislation that we forget that there are other ways of making the experience better. The bill is part of an on-going programme. In addition, the EU directive will soon be finalised, and the proposals in the bill will help to ensure that we meet our obligations under the directive, as we are required to do. However Ms Goldie might feel about a directive that will set only minimum standards, we will be expected to give evidence that we are meeting its demands. Dave Stewart spoke passionately about his proposal for a victims commissioner. I understand where he is coming from, but our rough costing of the proposal suggests that it would cost in the region of £0.5 million. We think that half a million pounds would be far better spent directly on victims than on creating a new public body or appointment. We are maintaining the level of funding to organisations that support victims and we will improve support through the bill. The criminal injuries compensation scheme was mentioned by several members, including Jenny Marra, who managed not to mention that the salami slicing of the scheme began under a Labour Government. Of course, the scheme is reserved. I appreciate Jenny Marra’s generosity in asking the Scottish Government to step forward and fill every gap that is opened up by the Westminster Government, by providing more money, more courts and more of everything, but the truth of the matter is, as she must know, that it will not be possible for us always to close the financial gaps that a Westminster Government opens up. We regret the impact that the proposed changes will have on some groups of victims, but we acknowledge that the CICS is in need of reform and we are keen that changes should result in a faster, simpler and less bureaucratic scheme, which is more focused on victims who are seriously affected by crime.

I am sorry. I am in my final minute and I must press on. A full examination of costs will take place as our proposals are developed, in collaboration with the Scottish Court Service and the Crown Office, and the position will be set out in full in the financial memorandum that accompanies the bill. We are looking into the longer term, because we want to explore a separate compensation scheme for Scotland, but in the meantime we will continue to work to ensure that the Scottish Court Service and the Crown Office will be able to work practically and efficiently in the context of the measures that will be in the bill. We are talking about an area on which there are few disagreements in principle. We need to get the detail right. We want to improve the system for victims and witnesses. We will be as bold and ambitious as we can be and we will make radical changes where necessary. I encourage members and other people who have listened to the debate to respond to the consultation paper and to engage with the bill as it goes through the Parliament.

As you can see, Presiding Officer, I am going to try to read my speech from my iPad. It is the first time that I have tried this in the chamber, so there may be one or two hiccups, for which I apologise in advance. I congratulate Liz Smith on securing the debate. I am sure that everyone in the chamber agrees with her sentiments. Although I do not profess to be a Munro bagger, from time to time I have been able to wave to Liz while we have both been out walking separately. I congratulate her on what is about to be a personal achievement. I am sure that she has enjoyed every single minute of it. The civilian mountain rescue teams in Scotland are a powerful example of the culture of voluntary service of which Scotland can be proud. My colleagues Michael Matheson and Fergus Ewing have been actively involved in mountain rescue teams in the past so, even within the Government, we know how important the teams are. In 2011, the mountain rescue teams were deployed 573 times and committed more than 23,000 hours throughout Scotland to search for and rescue those in need of assistance. That is a remarkable achievement by a service that is staffed entirely by volunteers. The teams are a vital service to those who use Scotland’s hills and mountains. Many mountain rescue teams get involved in building community resilience in lowland areas. We have become accustomed to thinking about them only in terms of the high hills, but they are important in lowland areas, too. We need only look back to the severe winter of 2010, when Scotland experienced the worst winter weather since 1965, to discover mountain rescue teams transferring patients to hospital when road ambulances could not function and transporting doctors and other essential workers to and from work. Their efforts supported the NHS and kept vital services going. There is no doubt that mountain rescue teams provide excellent support to emergency services and to Scottish communities, as well as just simply saving lives in our mountains, hills and remote areas. The Scottish Government supports the Scottish mountain rescue service financially and it has an excellent and productive on-going working relationship with the Mountain Rescue Committee of Scotland. That is a partnership that we are very proud of. In December, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice announced at the Ochils mountain rescue centre that the Scottish Government would increase the Mountain Rescue Committee’s annual grant funding by 4 per cent, from £300,000 to £312,000. Scotland is the only part of the UK that provides an annual Government grant to voluntary mountain rescue teams, so let us at least give ourselves a pat on the back for that. Members may be aware that the new facilities in the Ochils were built with financial support from St John Ambulance in Scotland, which has provided significant funding for mountain rescue bases and transport since the late 1990s. I commend its continuing support for the mountain rescue teams. The Government has provided a further £12,000 for communications and is providing a further £50,000 in partnership funding over two years—last year and this year—towards a project manager’s post. Overall, funding in 2012-13 will total £322,000, which will help to continue the delivery of a first-class, front-line, voluntary service that is free at the point of delivery. The motion highlights the need for public education, and I think that we all agree on that. Through sportsscotland, the Scottish Government provides funding of around £155,000 each year to the Mountaineering Council of Scotland to promote public education on mountain safety issues. There are a number of different organisations involved in the network. The funding supports a mountain safety adviser to provide education to the public. That includes skills courses, free winter safety lectures and online training resources that target the common causes of mountaineering incidents, such as poor navigation, bad planning and the effects of winter conditions. The MCS provides a range of services, such as mountain training and the mountain weather information service. A further £137,000 goes to the avalanche information service at Glenmore lodge, which also plays a key role in information gathering. I will pick up on a couple of the points raised by Liz Smith. I think that she said that the cost of calling out a helicopter is £6,000. That may very well be the true cost of each call-out but, of course, that is not a charge as such on the mountain rescue services, the Government or anybody else, because it is borne by the Ministry of Defence, which treats each call-out as a training exercise. I think that I am right in saying that Prince William is still a pilot who is used in exactly that type of scenario. Liz Smith also mentioned personal insurance. That approach is superficially attractive, but I think that I am right in saying, along with Rhoda Grant, that it would not be universally welcomed by the mountain rescue teams. Apart from the point forcibly made by Rhoda Grant that it would put barriers in place, there is a fear that it would result in professionalising what is currently a voluntary service. In Switzerland, the mountain rescue workers are full time and paid, and that is done through insurance.

I am happy to look at anything that will help the situation and, if Dave Thompson wishes to writes to me, I will see what can be ascertained for him. The move to single services next year was mentioned. When that happens, land-based search and rescue will continue to be a police responsibility, which will give us an opportunity to further improve co-ordination. In any case, circumstances must already be worked out across different services. I assure the Mountain Rescue Committee that officials are engaging with police and fire representatives and other organisations about future resilience arrangements. I will quickly mention, for obvious reasons, the Tayside mountain rescue team, as the motion recognises how well it is linked to existing resilience structures. It is important that the team assisted in the development of the Tayside strategic co-ordinating group’s rescue plan, which is looked on as a good example by other parts of Scotland because of its effective, joined-up, multi-agency approach to incidents. Liz Smith referred to the increase in the number of overnight visits to Scotland. I cannot be the only one in the chamber who listens to radio reports about someone in difficulty and, while waiting with a sinking feeling to hear what happens to them, learns that they are individuals from outside Scotland who started off their walk or climb on a beautiful day only to discover very soon that they were in a different climate altogether, not understanding what our climate is like. That point was well made by Liz Smith. I have no doubt that, with continued support and assistance from the Scottish Government and others, the voluntary mountain rescue teams will rise to the increasing challenge. They represent the very best traditions of community voluntary service. I am sure that members will join me in sincerely thanking them for their admirable courage and dedication in assisting, wherever and whenever they are called upon, all who need them. Meeting closed at 17:45.

Tackling antisocial behaviour and making communities safer and stronger remain top priorities for the Scottish Government. In March 2009, the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities jointly published their framework for tackling antisocial behaviour in “Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland”. It followed a thorough review of national antisocial behaviour policy and recognised that prevention, early and effective intervention and diversion should be at its heart. Acceptable behaviour contracts are simply one of the tools that are at the disposal of local partners in tackling antisocial behaviour. We have no current plans to assess the effectiveness of acceptable behaviour contracts, and the extent to which they are used is a matter for local partners.

As I said in my initial answer, acceptable behaviour contracts are only one of the tools that are at the disposal of local partners in tackling antisocial behaviour. I understand the member’s interest in focusing on them, but all members should be aware that this is about more than acceptable behaviour contracts. For the minority of individuals who may disregard both acceptable behaviour contracts and ASBOs, the breach of an ASBO is a criminal offence. The member may be interested to know that the Government has recently consulted on changes that would allow, among other things, social landlords to consider an applicant’s previous antisocial behaviour in deciding on their priority for housing and the granting of, or converting of an existing tenancy to, a short tenancy in cases of antisocial behaviour. We are constantly reviewing aspects of the matter, and we will publish the analysis of the particular consultations in due course.

Is the member seriously suggesting that, in areas such as mine where the vast majority of fire services are delivered through retained fire stations, someone somewhere is going to say that that will not continue to happen? What an absurd suggestion.

I am grateful to all members for their speeches and their participation in the consideration of what is a very significant bill. We will reflect on all their contributions as we take the bill forward. After all, this is just stage 1 of the process and, as members know, a lot of discussion will take place from here on in. Nevertheless, I think that we all agree on the need to reform, safeguard and improve police and fire and rescue services. I hope that even Alison McInnes will at least accept that, because the services are vital to the people of Scotland. Reform also offers a unique opportunity to sustain and strengthen Scotland’s services in the face of Westminster cuts. As members recognise, the services and the success of reform would be nothing without the skills and talents of all those who work in whatever capacity in our services. Indeed, that is why they will transfer on the same terms and conditions. We and the services have been examining the issue of single services for more than two years now. A wealth of evidence demonstrates that single services deliver the most benefits. The services and stakeholders accept that and are working constructively with us to deliver that reform. Understandably, the debate has centred principally on the police. However, I am also responsible for fire and rescue services and I hope that members will indulge me for a few minutes as I say something about them. It has become something of a joke that the new Scottish fire and rescue service should simply be called “and fire” because in the discussions on the bill everyone has talked about the police—“oh, and fire”. We need to emphasise how vital fire and rescue services are to every community in Scotland. For a considerable time now, a great deal of work has been going on with different levels of the eight fire and rescue services. Some members might be surprised to learn that the FBU has been included in every stage of the reform process, and I thank the union for its consistent and constructive involvement. Not all the issues that the FBU has, or that we have, are completely resolved, but it is important that we are able to continue those constructive conversations. As we do that, we are resolving some of the issues. One such issue is about the potential for FBU representation on the new board, which was an issue that I wanted to raise. We have been working closely with chief fire officers, the FBU and others to ensure that the new single fire and rescue service provides the best service to all communities. That will require a partnership to underpin the new service. As the service develops, I want the board and management to work constructively with the trade unions and the employees whom they represent. More to the point, we are exploring ways in which the board can ensure that it has direct input from the employee side. That is an on-going conversation.

I appreciate Jenny Marra’s point, but it is on a slightly different issue and I want to finish my point about representation, on which points still need to be discussed and resolved, on the union side and on our side. I come to the issue of the fire and rescue functions, which Jenny Marra asked about. The current functions were debated and agreed by Parliament fairly recently. At present, we do not consider there to be any difference between the functions that are covered in primary legislation and those in the Fire (Additional Function) (Scotland) Order 2005, so we are not convinced that restating them in one place would be of any benefit. Any need for greater clarity is best dealt with through the fire and rescue framework, which sets out the overall strategic priorities and objectives for the service. Lewis Macdonald referred to the framework, which is a vehicle that can be amended more easily and rapidly than primary legislation. That view is shared by the chief inspector of fire and rescue authorities, although it is fair to say that the issue is still under discussion. Indeed, I talked to the FBU about the issue and other matters at lunch time yesterday and last night. The primary function of the boards is to govern the new services and to hold the chief officers to account. We agree whole-heartedly with the Justice Committee that the composition of the boards should not be prescribed in legislation. However, we take the view that the boards should reflect all relevant experience, including that of local authorities. We want to ensure that that experience is represented at board level. We have heard the views of stakeholders and members on the size of the boards, but we have yet to take a final decision on that—we will do so after this debate. We understand the arguments about smaller versus larger. We all want to achieve an optimum number that provides the best way for the boards to develop. I will mention some non-bill issues that have been raised. One of those is to do with resources and savings, which I say is a non-bill issue because it is not covered in the detail of the bill. We believe that the budgets for police and fire provide sufficient funding for the services to undertake their functions fully. Future budgets will be agreed following future negotiations on service requirements. The single police and fire and rescue services will, together, deliver estimated savings of £1.7 billion over 15 years, with annual recurring cash savings in excess of £130 million expected from 2016-17. The CFOA is certain that savings can be made by removing duplication. ACPOS has assured us that it is committed to implementing the police reform programme within budget. Of course, budgets are an on-going issue to which all Governments at any time must have serious regard. The full business cases for the new police and fire and rescue services will influence and determine the detailed design of the new services, so their production is a matter for those services and not for the Scottish Government, although we expect them to be completed as soon as possible.

As Lewis Macdonald knows perfectly well, delivering legislation and delivering budgets are not the same. We wanted to involve people in the whole process and not simply to provide a fait accompli. That approach goes to the heart of how we have tried to manage the process all along. On VAT, the purpose of undertaking the reform is to protect front-line services against Westminster budget cuts. It would be a travesty if some of the potential benefits of that reform were lost to the Exchequer in VAT, and officials continue to explore the options with the Treasury. I reassure Lewis Macdonald that the outline business cases prepared by the Scottish Government assumed the worst-case scenario that VAT could not be recovered. If the new services are able to recover VAT, the annual savings deliverable from reform from 2016-17 would be £157 million, rather than £131 million. That is an outcome that we all wish to see. I will deal with some of the specific issues that members raised. Lewis Macdonald talked about the timing of reform. We agree that the 1 April 2013 timescale is a challenge—the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and I have said that all along—but we wanted to reduce the period of uncertainty, so a judgment had to be made. However, we accept that work will be on-going after 1 April 2013. Graeme Pearson made a very strong case for a particular scrutiny position that he wishes to see brought in. Indeed, I heard about that position in detail at last night’s reception. When he was outlining his case, I do not know whether he was aware that the issue is one for the Parliament to consider rather than the Government. I noticed the Presiding Officer carefully attending to the detail of his proposal, so who knows what conversations may yet take place on the back of his thoughtful contribution? Alison McInnes’s was the one discordant voice in the debate. It is unfortunate that the Liberal Democrats have not yet taken the lesson that the electorate continues to deal out to them, particularly in relation to this issue. There are quite clear arrangements to enable local authorities to shape local service delivery, and it will be for local authorities to make the decisions on how to do that. That, in a sense, is also a response to some of the comments made by Hanzala Malik. We will see a variety of different models emerging. Local authorities are entitled to make decisions about how best to deliver local scrutiny and accountability, and it is only a matter of time before we will be able to ascertain which model turns out to be the most useful. It is worth reiterating that what is being shaped in Scotland is a better, more streamlined and more efficient future for both services.

I will carry on, as I am in my last minute. I ask members to compare the position in Scotland with that south of the border. In England, the police are in uproar over the Winsor review, which is not being implemented in Scotland—20,000 police officers are out demonstrating—and there is effectively piecemeal privatisation of fire services. We have not wanted to take, and we will not take, either course of action in Scotland. What we are doing is in stark contrast to what is happening south of the border. I thank every member for their contributions. A lot of points have been raised, but not all have been dealt with and we promise to follow-up on the specifics. Reform is vital if we are to protect and improve on the services that our communities receive. The bill provides the framework for that, and I ask members to support it.

The Scottish Government takes mediation services very seriously; indeed, the member might be interested to learn that I will be speaking on that very subject at a conference next Wednesday. However, although such services can play a valuable role in resolving family disputes, the Scottish Government believes that, where parents cannot reach agreement, it is right for a court to regulate matters in relation to contact.

I am aware that the member has a long-running constituency interest in these matters. The difficulty is that the member’s suggested approach raises some problems. For example, if domestic abuse were involved, mediation would not be appropriate. Moreover, a mediation service cannot act in a judicial way and compel parents to appear before it. The fact is that mediation works well only if people undertake it voluntarily; if they are forced into it, it ceases to be mediation. There are also cost implications in giving extra functions to mediation services. Issues of contact can be very complex, and there might well be good reasons why contact does not happen after the court has ordered it. In the longer term, however, we should—and will—take a further look at issues around the enforcement of contact orders.

I had to hesitate before I could say thank you, Presiding Officer. I am grateful to members for their speeches in what has been a good debate. It is quite clear that women offenders are a matter of concern across the chamber. In bringing the issue to Parliament, the Government intended to encourage all members to make their views known and, from their comments, they clearly join the Government in thanking the commission for its hard work. In its report, the commission provides a compelling, commonsense vision for the future of the criminal justice system in Scotland. It chose to be ambitious and aim for changes that would genuinely change Scotland for the better, and it clearly looks to this Parliament to rise to that challenge. The commission’s proposals are neither simple nor straightforward. It has looked closely at the criminal justice sector and asked how each part can contribute to the achievement of more positive outcomes. As the report makes clear, the roots of women’s offending run deeper than just criminal behaviour. Very often, there are problems of prior abuse, addiction, deprivation and mental illness. Such issues must be understood and addressed if women are to be helped to genuinely rehabilitate themselves and reintegrate successfully into society. That issue will not be resolved quickly and there is no simple solution that will solve every aspect of the problem. There has been considerable discussion of members’ agreement with the recommendation to demolish and replace Cornton Vale. As he has already indicated, the cabinet secretary has tasked the SPS with considering how all the commission’s recommendations on prisons could be put into practice. However, the truly important question is not just what would be demolished, but what would be put in its place in terms of not only bricks and mortar but the structures of our communities. We need to build up our public services’ capability to address the deeper concerns that relate to women offenders and to build the public’s confidence that such an approach is appropriate and that the methods are both robust and cost-effective. The commission’s proposals would not only ensure that offenders repay society for their crimes but provide them with a real opportunity to turn their lives around. That is, of course, the goal that we are all hoping to achieve. As a result, the Government will engage with partners in the criminal justice sector to agree how new structures and new ways of working might realise the commission’s aims and ambitions. It will also engage with the wider public sector, because this is a challenge for the whole of Scotland to respond to. Clearly, those working in health, mental illness, addiction, employment, housing and across the voluntary sector can play a role and, indeed, members have mentioned those services. This is not just a matter of criminal justice—of courts and social work—alone. Just as women offenders’ problems have consequences for many Scottish families and then for their communities so there is a need for all parts of society to take a hand in responding effectively to the concerns that have been raised. I turn to some of the specific points that have been made this afternoon. I thought that Lewis Macdonald was quite right to emphasise the huge amount of hard work that will need to be put in. Those of us who have been members of Parliament for more than one or two years will know that we have been grappling with the issue over the lifetime of the Parliament. If the job was easy, it would have been done by now. We must all recognise that Lewis Macdonald is correct when he says that the problem requires hard work. I thought that David McLetchie’s speech was predictably depressing; he seemed to be making a thinly veiled call for more women to be locked up, as if that was somehow a solution to the problems that we face. It is not. He must realise that. He was just taking the easy line. David McLetchie also made a point about new non-executive members of the board—I think that he was talking about the possibility of such members having a specific function. When the cabinet secretary meets the new chief executive they will discuss that recommendation, among other topics, so there might be some movement on it. We must allow the new chief executive who is coming in some time to get into the job properly. Christina McKelvie rightly emphasised the need to break the cycle of reoffending but also to prevent the process from starting in the first place. That is a very important aspect. In contrast to David McLetchie, she reminded us that only 2 per cent of female offenders are in prison for violent crime, which is the most serious of all crimes.

The 2 per cent figure comes out from the Angiolini commission; I am relying on that information. I will discuss the detail with David McLetchie afterwards, but as he knows, in reality, sometimes behind the statistics are multiple incidents that might relate to only one or two individuals. We are talking about female offenders—we are talking about people. Women themselves are victims of crime. That is not news—it was one of the big things that we were talking about back in 1999 and 2000. As Roderick Campbell said, most women who are in prison were themselves victims of crime in their childhood and as they were growing up. I welcomed Elaine Smith’s speech because she has a long track record on the issue. There is a question about who gets sent to prison. We have made some progress: 10 years ago, the debate was about the number of people who were in prison because of fine defaults—[Interruption.]

Richard Simpson pointed out that the position has changed markedly in the intervening period. We have made some progress; let us not pretend that we have not. A great many similar, good points were made by a number of members, and I want pick out one or two in particular. First, Mary Fee made a point about child impact assessments. There was some consternation among the Labour members about the fact that they had opposed that suggestion during a previous parliamentary session. I am afraid to say that they did indeed oppose it in committee, during scrutiny of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. The Government tried to introduce such a measure, but it was voted down by a combination of Opposition members. Perhaps those members should go away and look at the rationale behind their decision. Secondly, I commend Claudia Beamish for a particularly strong and effective speech. If we take away two phrases from today’s debate, they will be from her speech: “criminalisation of distress”, and “falling into the justice system”, which is an apt way to describe what happens at the start of the process. I have probably given rather short shrift to many other members who also made good speeches. I have referred to many of the debates that we have had in the past and, like Annabel Goldie, I feel that I am a veteran of such debates. I reiterate the point that that tells us that if the job was easy, it would have been done by now. The Government wants to tackle the problem as strongly and as effectively as possible for the future. Prison is not the right response to women who commit minor offences, and we look for members’ support for that position. For many women offenders, only a robust community sentence will ensure that they are rehabilitated or that they repay their debt to society. It just takes the political will—and support—to act. Today’s debate has shown that almost all the other parties, and probably almost all the members of the party that is a little recalcitrant, share our concern, so I look forward to receiving support from across the chamber in the future.

Today’s debate focuses on tribunal reform in Scotland and highlights our proposals for modernising how tribunals operate. Tribunals are a valued and distinctive part of our justice system and provide specialist forums for efficient and accessible legal dispute resolution. However, the system has developed in an ad hoc and unplanned fashion over many years, and the tribunals that are its constituent parts do not have a collective identity. The time has come to address the widely acknowledged need for reform. In 2001, Sir Andrew Leggatt described tribunals in Scotland as “exceedingly complicated”. I share that view. For more than 100 years, tribunals were considered to be a part of the state’s internal administration, which had been designed as a mechanism whereby citizens could challenge the initial decisions of Government officials. From the early 20th century, the number of established tribunals has increased and their case load has grown. There are more than 40 tribunals in Scotland, which deal with devolved and reserved matters and cover a multitude of subject areas. In excess of 80,000 cases are heard each year. That is almost as many cases as are heard in the civil courts in Scotland, which is an indication of the reach of tribunals in Scotland. Over recent years, the system has developed into a quasi-judicial one, with constituent tribunals deciding the cases that are brought before them more independently, more expertly, on the basis of evidence and in accordance with the law. However, developments have been ad hoc and have involved piecemeal improvements being introduced unsystematically in the separate tribunal jurisdictions. As well as developing in an ad hoc manner, tribunals in Scotland are referred to in different ways in law. They are referred to sometimes as panels, sometimes as boards and sometimes as committees. What connects them is that they are all bodies that make decisions in law that affect the lives of tens of thousands of people across the country. Tribunals make decisions on a diverse range of subjects, whether that is to determine someone’s liberty, as happens in hearings of the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland, to decide whether a landlord has carried out necessary repairs to their property, as the Private Rented Housing Panel does, or to consider how best to meet a child’s additional educational needs, as the Additional Support Needs Tribunals for Scotland do. When the Parliament last debated tribunal reform back in September 2010, there was a general consensus that reforming the tribunal system was the right thing to do. I asked for the debate so that I could highlight the proposals that were published last week, on 23 March, to consult on the introduction of a new tribunal system in Scotland. Those proposals aim to create a coherent structure in which to integrate devolved tribunals over time, to provide clear judicial leadership, greater consistency in practice and improved transparency. In December 2010, we took the first steps in reforming tribunals in Scotland by integrating the administrations of six separately operating bodies: the Additional Support Needs Tribunals for Scotland; the Lands Tribunal for Scotland; the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland; the Private Rented Housing Panel; and the Scottish Charity Appeals Panel. That has proved to be a significant step and one that has already produced benefits. It has enabled the sharing of venues, the integration of administrative support and the introduction of common budget control systems, and it has established a platform for developing a programme of continuous improvement. The Scottish Tribunals Service will continue to develop as an integrated service that provides access to comprehensive information concerning the quality of decision making in public authorities. As such, the service can play a powerful role in ensuring that there are continuous public service improvements across Scotland. There will be feedback mechanisms to inform public authorities whose decisions are not quite right first time. In today’s financial climate, we have to do all that we can to make the best use of our resources while continuing to provide a consistent, reliable service to tribunal users through an efficient, well-organised and sustainable administration. Savings of around £1 million have already been realised since the establishment of the Scottish Tribunals Service through a combination of consolidating efficiencies that judicial leaders and administrators have identified and rationalising organisational structures and support services. We are confident that those efficiencies will continue to be realised through further organisational integration and further streamlining of administrative processes. The creation of a single administration was phase 1 of tribunal reform. We are now moving to phase 2, which we are convinced will deliver further judicial and administrative gains. In our consultation paper, we propose to introduce a new integrated structure for tribunals. We want to create a structure of two tiers—a first tier and an upper tier—that can accommodate existing tribunals. The first-tier tribunal will be for initial decision making. In most cases, it should be able to resolve satisfactorily the cases that are heard before it without the need for further appeal. However, we realise that that is not always possible, so we propose to create an upper-tier tribunal to hear appeals from the first tier. That will enable the bulk of tribunal business to be kept within the tribunal system, thus avoiding the need to go to court. We are aware that it may be more appropriate for some appeals to be heard by the courts. Last year, the report of the Scottish committee of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council, “Tribunal Reform in Scotland: A Vision for the Future”, considered the issue of rationalising appeals from tribunals. The committee thought that standardising the route of appeals to a single body would facilitate the development of expertise among appellate judges; make the appeals process more accessible for tribunal users; speed up justice in comparison with appeals to the Court of Session; streamline and simplify case-handling processes, thus supporting the development of expertise among administrative support staff; and make it easier for support organisations to provide advice to tribunal users who wish to appeal a tribunal’s decision. Currently, there is no single mechanism in Scotland for appealing against a tribunal decision and appeal routes vary from tribunal to tribunal. That is why simplifying and rationalising appeal routes makes sense. From the perspective of the tribunal user, we should consider how we can assist them in accessing a justice system that puts them at the centre of the process. Courts are often seen as less accessible and likely to be less affordable than tribunals. The court procedures have not been designed with self or lay representation in mind. In addition, the current system of separate tribunals is often seen as inflexible, and the type of information that is available about tribunals and their appeal processes varies. Those factors may well act as a barrier to appeals and result in users being put off taking matters further. The creation of a new structure provides an opportunity to standardise the information that is provided to users in laypeople’s terms, making it easier for them to understand the working of tribunals and how decisions are arrived at. We considered users, too, when we were writing the consultation document and we published an easy-read guide to accompany the document. Members who have seen that guide may wish that all consultation documents were so accompanied. While keeping the centrality of users at the forefront of any changes, I would like to turn for a moment to how the proposed changes affect the tribunal judiciary. It has long been said that judicial independence is an important aspect of a fair tribunal system. The Franks report in 1957 established that tribunals should be adjudicative rather than administrative bodies and, as such, should be fair, open and impartial. Sir Oliver Franks said: “Tribunals are not ordinary courts, but neither are they appendages of Government Departments.” According to Franks, impartiality means “independence from the real or apparent influence of the original decision-making administration.” Users of tribunals need to be sure that decisions in their cases are being taken by people with no links to the body that they are appealing against and that the framework for taking decisions in their case, including rules of procedure and the appointment of decision makers, is not constructed in the interests of the other party. We propose bringing the tribunal judiciary under the leadership of the Lord President of the Court of Session. The Lord President will be responsible for the training, welfare, guidance and performance of judges and other members of the new tribunal system. He will also be responsible for the allocation of members to hear individual cases and the handling of complaints made against any member of the tribunal. The Lord President will be able to delegate any judicial leadership functions to other judges of the tribunal and, in particular, will nominate a senator of the College of Justice as the president of Scottish tribunals—a new office that will be responsible for the day-to-day running of tribunal business. Bringing judicial leadership under the Lord President will not mean that tribunals will lose any of their distinctive characteristics. The consultation proposals ensure that there are measures in place to protect each tribunal’s distinctive culture and specialist nature. That is assured by the tribunals’ own rules of procedure and relevant primary legislation. As I said earlier, we are taking tribunal reform forward in a phased approach. We are proposing that only a few of the devolved tribunals transfer into the new structure straight away. That will help the judiciary in transferring tribunals to settle into the new first tier and get used to the new arrangements. As we move to the next phase, we expect to begin discussions with relevant parties to allow further devolved tribunals to integrate into the first tier and also benefit from the support that the Scottish Tribunals Service can provide. What is being proposed in our consultation may seem like a massive change in how tribunals operate. Members might think that it will adversely affect tribunal users and cause confusion to them about who will hear their particular case. The answer is quite the contrary. Tribunal users will still appear before the same tribunal members and decisions will still be made in accordance with the law governing their jurisdiction. In addition, current rules of procedure, which protect the distinctive ethos of individual tribunals, will be adopted in the first-tier tribunal. Greater confidence in the tribunals’ impartiality will be assured by future appointments and changes to tribunal rules being made only following ministerial receipt of independent advice. The current tribunal landscape is complex. It is generally agreed that there is a clear appetite for reform and that that reform should be phased to secure steady improvements. We have started that process with some success by bringing together the six tribunal administrations to create the Scottish Tribunals Service, but that is only a small step in a longer journey. I ask that Parliament support the motion and agree that we now need to press ahead with creating a coherent, simply structured, more integrated and more effectively led tribunal system that ensures that users receive a high-quality, fair and timely service that is responsive to their varied needs. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the publication in March 2012 of a consultation that sets out proposals to reform Scotland’s tribunal system; notes that the proposals provide the opportunity to integrate Scotland’s devolved tribunals into a coherent, unified structure; further notes the importance of tribunals in the administrative justice landscape and the complexity and diversity of their business, and acknowledges their rightful place at the heart of a modern civil justice system

The member might be interested to know that there is a conversation between us in Scotland and the Ministry of Justice south of the border about the possible transfer of the administrative functions, even in reserved tribunals. That conversation is already taking place.

There will be the possibility of sheriffs, sheriff principals and other very expert individuals adjudicating at that level. We are talking about a high level of legal input.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am grateful to members for their thoughtful and insightful comments, on the proposals to reform Scotland’s tribunal system, although it must be said that, mostly, I am grateful for the length of their comments. We have been having a little fun this afternoon at our own expense, but it is worth reminding ourselves that, although tribunals might seem to be a Cinderella part of our judicial system, they are in fact the judicial equivalent of constituents’ concerns about littering and bins and so on. That is to say that, to each and every individual who is caught up in the tribunal system, that might be the single most important thing that is happening to them at that time in their lives. We need to remember that in the debate. I am glad that so many members agree that we have a huge opportunity to improve our tribunal landscape for the better and to ensure that our citizens get access to a first-class system. I will pick up on a few specific points that members have raised. David McLetchie raised a question about the chamber structure. We believe that it should be sufficiently flexible to allow for the integration of other tribunals as and when required. I will perhaps say something about that slightly broader issue later. John Finnie reminded us how wide ranging issues of accessibility can be and how some tribunals have moved much more in the direction of professional legal input than was perhaps originally envisaged. Having listened to members, it seems to me that I might in fact be the most experienced person in the chamber in respect of tribunals, as I have represented the City of Glasgow District Council at industrial tribunals and employment appeal tribunals. Also, rather unusually, I have been called as a witness, in my capacity as a constituency member, for a constituent at a tribunal. I have therefore seen tribunals from both sides. In my capacity as minister, I have taken the opportunity to sit through a mental health tribunal to see how it worked. Legal representation was involved, although it was informal. The interesting thing about my experience with the industrial and employment appeal tribunals was that the council had professional legal representation at every one of those tribunals, whereas most of the people on the other side did not. That is worth remembering. We are embarking on the most radical reforms of our court and tribunal systems for at least a century. Members need to think about the changes to tribunals as part of that much wider programme of work that the Government is undertaking. In 2011, we launched the making justice work programme, which aims to pull together a range of current and potential reforms to the structure and processes of the justice system, access to justice and alternatives to court. The programme involves major, complex and long-term change. We are committed to ensuring that the reforms happen. It is important to emphasise that, as I said in my opening speech, we have the infrastructure in place to support the administration of Scotland’s tribunals as a result of the establishment of the Scottish Tribunals Service. I referred to the development of the Scottish Tribunals Service and the progress that it has made in the past 15 months. The service is ready to meet the challenge of administering a new integrated tribunal system and of ensuring that the new structure and its users get the best-quality service. Christine Grahame said that she was uncertain of the phraseology that is used in the consultation document about the integration of the court and tribunal services. That refers to the potential for or possibility of integration into a single administration under the leadership of the Lord President; it is not about merging courts and tribunals. If there was confusion, I hope that those comments have clarified the issue. The supporting infrastructure is only part of the story. The only way to guarantee a first-rate tribunal system is to ensure that the appropriate structure—including judicial leadership, appointments, security of tenure and rule making—is provided for in legislation, and to have that legislation uphold the independence of tribunal judiciary. I cannot emphasise enough that our proposals do not seek to dilute the specialism or the uniqueness of different jurisdictions but will support their more effective and efficient operation. The new system has to give effect to its intention by using the more coherent structure to improve the effectiveness with which each constituent tribunal discharges its specific statutory duty. An integrated structure can bring a broader range of knowledge, experience and perspectives to bear on the matters that come before it. The consultation paper marks the next phase in our journey on tribunal reform. As I have said, the realisation of the proposals in the consultation and the establishment of the Scottish Tribunals Service will provide the support structure and framework for integration, while giving the flexibility to ensure that the specialist nature of tribunals is maintained. The consultation paper lists the tribunals that will be integrated into the proposed new system once it is in place. They are the tribunals that are currently administered by the Scottish Tribunals Service and relate to devolved matters. One or two members have referred to what they regard as slow progress. The integration of other tribunals will require careful consideration and consultation with those affected, to ensure that the right balance is struck between maintaining specialism and the integration of systems and support. It may appear to be a simple and straightforward move, but it will not always be. We expect that, over time, tribunals in Scotland dealing with devolved matters will be integrated into the system. Creating a cohesive unified system is ambitious; it will take time and will involve close working with existing tribunals, their users and their stakeholders. It will not be an easy task; by their very nature, as some members have pointed out, tribunals are diverse, unique and individual. For example, those who are not currently supported by the Scottish Tribunals Service cover subject matters such as police appeals, valuation appeals and, as has been mentioned, education appeals. There is even a tribunal that deals with horse betting levies. The system that we are proposing will provide the framework to accommodate and support such wide-ranging and diverse subject matters. I reassure Jenny Marra that the consultation period will include five separate stakeholder events across the country, as well as a separate and specific event for mental health stakeholders, because of the importance of the Mental Health Tribunal. We intend that our journey on tribunal reform will take us even further. When we last debated tribunal reform and the wider administrative justice system, we discussed an announcement that was made by the Lord Chancellor on 16 September 2010. He alluded to the prospect of the responsibility for judicial leadership of reserved tribunals sitting in Scotland transferring to the Lord President. He also raised the prospect of the administration of reserved tribunals transferring to Scottish ministers. There was cross-party support for that, as has been mentioned by David McLetchie, Rod Campbell, John Pentland and others. Since then, the Scottish Government has been in regular and detailed discussions with the Ministry of Justice to develop the proposals further, and the Lord Chancellor wrote to me on 31 October last year, setting out the basic terms of his proposal. Some thinking is still required on the detail, but we are moving in the right direction. The Lord Chancellor has recently confirmed that he remains committed to delivering the proposal. I understand that the UK Government intends to consult on its proposals for the integration of court and tribunal judiciary later this year. That will require primary legislation. The Scottish Government remains committed to continuing such discussions. We will do that—not only because discussions may result in the transfer of functions to Scotland, which we would welcome, but because they would allow us to develop a system that works for all Scotland’s tribunals, not only those where the subject matter is devolved. We have spoken about ways in which tribunals can increase access to justice, and I hope that members will get an opportunity to consider the simplified version of the consultation document that makes it clear what is being discussed and what is intended. It is important to recall that tribunals are set up to be accessible, even if some of them have moved away from that. We have debated the proposals that are set out in the consultation paper, and we welcome the views of members. We also welcome views from interested groups, tribunal users and members of the public as part of the consultation process, and I hope to get input from all of them. All the discussions will help us to refine the proposals into a deliverable policy on which the Parliament can legislate with confidence. It is a prize worth obtaining and one that the Government is committed to working towards. For the avoidance of doubt, I state that we will accept the Labour amendment. I thank all members for today’s debate.

I have been taking a close interest in this issue, and I welcome the work of the peer support team and other services that are being offered to Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service. I understand that the service is already addressing issues that have been raised.

It is the case that safety—of the community and of the officers in the service, whether they be full time, retained or volunteer—is paramount. The chief inspector, my officials and senior officers from other fire services are all in regular contact with the service to find out how it can best be helped. I spoke to the convener of the Highlands and Islands fire board not long ago. Of course, this is primarily a matter for the board, but I am willing to consider any requests for further help that are made.

Why do I get the feeling that Murdo Fraser is being a little mischievous with that question? As he probably already knows, that will be a matter for the Scottish fire and rescue service itself to decide in due course and I am sure that it will look at all the available options very carefully. Until then, Perth community fire station will provide a convenient, cost-effective venue from which a small senior management team can lead the new service from 1 April 2013. Because the station is not currently a service headquarters, basing the new service at Perth will help to ensure that there is no disruption to the public or senior officers.

Murdo Fraser is tempting me to put myself into the position of the new Scottish fire and rescue service. No doubt he would be the first to complain if I started to make its future decisions for it. That said, I can confirm that in considering possibilities for interim headquarters we looked very closely at precisely the issues that the member highlighted and, in the end, only a fairly small number of communities ticked all the boxes. I have absolutely no doubt that the new Scottish fire and rescue service will look at exactly the same issues and, for all I know, might reach the same conclusion.

I congratulate Iain Gray on securing the debate. Obviously, proposals for major changes to court structures merit full and robust consultation. Consideration of changes must include access-to-justice issues, which should be at the forefront of everyone’s minds. That is precisely what will happen. Of course, since 2010, the Scottish Court Service has been an independent body under the leadership of the Lord President. It is currently considering a range of proposals centred around the efficient use of its estate. Some of the ideas are operational matters for the Lord President, but proposals by the Court Service to close courts will need the approval of ministers—as Iain Gray correctly identified and in relation to which Claire Baker requested reassurance—and will come before the Parliament. I am one of the many members who have rural constituencies and I understand the challenges that rural communities face, as well as the challenge that is faced when any local institution appears on a list of options for closure. I understand perfectly what is happening here. However, as indicated by my colleague John Finnie, people in many communities in Scotland—including people in my constituency—travel far greater distances than were alluded to by Iain Gray. We have received assurances, as has Iain Gray, about the work that will be done by the Scottish Court Service in relation to future court structures. It intends to discuss relevant issues with staff. That is one of the issues that Lewis Macdonald rightly identifies. It will also have discussions with the judiciary and other justice bodies and will hold dialogue events—that is what it calls them; I think that we would call them consultations—with the legal profession, local authorities and groups representing the needs of users, such as Victim Support Scotland and Consumer Focus Scotland. It is doing so in order to ensure that any proposals are informed by a wide range of perspectives. This is not a secret process. I expect that members will wish to contribute to it as much as possible in relation to their local areas. On 1 November, the Lord President confirmed to the Justice Committee that consideration was being given to the issue of future court structures. The Court Service wrote to inform stakeholders about that work in September and again in December 2011, making it clear that further dialogue was planned during 2012. There is therefore nothing particularly secret going on.

As I understand it—I was not there; I was not involved in the meeting—the Justice Committee took evidence from the Lord President on 1 November about some of the issues that are being discussed.

As ever, when the options list appears, the communities that see a local institution on that list are those that immediately become exercised. That is understandable and I accept that. Any specific proposals for court closures that emerge from the discussions will be the subject of wider public consultation that involves local communities. As I have already said, I would expect local members to be very much involved in that consultation. That local consultation is a statutory requirement before any proposals are brought before the Parliament for approval. No decisions to close courts have been made and no courts can be closed without consultation and an order in the Parliament. I hope that that is of some comfort to members.

I need to press on, as my time is rather restricted. If I think that I am making some progress, I will let the member back in. As may have been expected, many members have passionately made the case for courts in their own constituencies. That is understandable—I would do exactly the same if I were in their position—but there is a wider context that we need to look at. There is no point in simply sweeping aside the issue of the funding cuts that the Scottish Government has to deal with. Indeed, in its report on the budget, the Justice Committee accepted that the rationalisation of court premises could make significant savings, although it was recognised that, at times, that may involve making difficult choices. In November, the Lord President said: “We face a number of challenges, including the fact that we are only part of the justice system. Other bodies such as the police, the Procurator Fiscal Service and the community service organisations all have their respective parts to play. On our own, we cannot secure the best and most efficient arrangement for the processing of court cases.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 1 November 2011; c 389.] Everybody must understand that more money being spent in one area means less money being spent in other areas. We can secure access to justice only by working right across the system, and the Government is trying to do that through the making justice work programme. We have had a number of reviews. Sheriff Principal Bowen’s sheriff and jury review and Lord Gill’s civil courts review set out the basis for a fundamental change in the way that business is conducted. They emphasised greater specialisation and a move away from a model in which all types of business are conducted at all court locations. In the previous session of Parliament, members from all parties welcomed the findings of those reviews, but there are implications. Perhaps we now have to think about what those implications might be. We cannot deliver better access to justice by avoiding the need for change. It has already been mentioned that the towns that we live in, the places in which we work, the way that we do business, the availability of transport and the way that we travel have all changed radically since the times in which the court buildings were built. Justice should be about not only the physical building of a court, but delivery in a range of ways that are best suited to users of the system. There are many issues. We can use new technology to cut back the numbers of people who require to travel to pay fines. The use of videolinks could be extended. Mr Gray raised the concern that victims and witnesses may find it harder to travel if court locations are closed, but the issue is not always straightforward. In some areas, it will be easier to travel to a major centre than to another small town. Indeed, I understand that in Mr Gray’s constituency, residents of Prestonpans have far better transport links to Edinburgh than to Haddington. It is not always a simple question of mileage. It is about access. Members have already mentioned the difficulty of segregating or the failure to segregate victims from the accused, or witnesses on opposite sides of major civil actions. It is important that we take that on board. In conclusion, I have noted the Scottish Court Service’s paper on future court structures and agree that any proposals for major changes to the court structure merit full and robust consultation. However, the Court Service is right to examine options, and we should broaden our understanding of what access to justice means and think creatively about how the system should best serve the needs of users in the 21st century, not the 17th, 18th or 19th centuries, when the buildings in question were created. Meeting closed at 18:24.

The Scottish Government’s reform of the fire and rescue services will protect and improve local services by creating more equal access to specialist and national capacity across the country and will create a new formal relationship with each local authority in Scotland. Local plans and a designated local senior officer for every local authority will strengthen co-ordination of the emergency response arrangements for all our communities.

The issue that the member raises will be for the new national fire service to make a decision on in considering a variety of other issues. We do not want to mandate that new fire service in advance with our view of what it ought to do. It will be for the new chief officer and the new fire service to put in place the appropriate mechanisms to ensure delivery on the ground. The whole purpose of the move is to strengthen the local delivery and the quality of the emergency services, and I am certain that that will happen.

The retained fire service is a vital part of Scotland’s national fire service and will, of course, continue in existence after the emergence of the new single national fire service, although the precise logistics of that will, no doubt, change over time, as they have changed in the past. It is something that the new service will have to look at and consider. As every member will know, there are issues in some areas that need to be addressed. However, in a country with the geography that Scotland has, the intention must always be for the backbone of much of the fire service to continue to be provided through the retained service.

I will start again—I am not quite sure what happened to the console that I tried to use. Few people who see the film footage of the opening of the concentration camps at the end of the second world war come away with any emotion other than sheer horror, so we should congratulate Stewart Maxwell on obtaining the debate to focus on Holocaust memorial day 2012. The debate gives all of us an opportunity to remember that 11 million people were executed because of their race, their religion, their sexuality or their disability. They were ordinary men, women and children. When all the numbers are added up, they come to twice Scotland’s population. That figure is astonishing, staggering and almost unbelievable. This year, Scotland’s national Holocaust memorial day commemoration will be held in Dundee tomorrow, when John Swinney will represent the Government. A full programme of events has been planned, and I am sure that everybody in the chamber joins me in sending our best wishes for a successful event. It goes without saying that the Scottish Government is committed to tackling all forms of discrimination and to promoting a multifaith and multicultural society that is based on mutual trust, respect and understanding. We can build that only if we do not allow ourselves to forget those who suffered and died in the Holocaust and those who continue to suffer because of genocide. A number of members have mentioned the funding to ensure continued support for the Holocaust Educational Trust’s lessons from Auschwitz programme. The extra funding will enable a further 380 pupils from schools and colleges to participate in the four-part programme. Stewart Maxwell and Siobhan McMahon talked about the importance of that experience for young people. The trips to Auschwitz offer an important link to the terrible events and their continuing implications for society. There are lessons and attitudes about discrimination and diversity to be learned. Since the Scottish national events were set up in 2000—we should commend those who were involved in doing that—public awareness of the Holocaust and other genocides has been greater. Stewart Maxwell eloquently read out Pastor Niemöller’s poem, so I will not repeat it. It is the inspiration for this year’s Holocaust memorial day speak up, speak out theme, and it challenges us to think about the responsibility and duty that we all have to speak up when we see or hear something that we believe to be wrong, not just on a mass scale, but on a small scale. The poem concludes with a powerful and challenging observation: “Then they came for me And there was no one left To speak out for me”. It challenges us to learn about what happens when we do not speak out and about what can happen when we use our voice. Humza Yousaf reminded us that many people did not turn away, even in the midst of the horror, and even at great personal danger—such people existed then, too. Bill Kidd put a name to one of those people when he talked about Jane Haining. Over the weekend, I heard about a similar individual: Edith Stein, who is now a saint. We should, of course, always speak up and speak out in our lives. By remaining silent and taking the position of bystander, we may think that the problem will disappear, but we could be enabling vile and despicable behaviours that, as we are only too aware, can have tragic and far-reaching consequences. There is the old cliché, which is really not too clichéd, that for evil to triumph, it only needs good men to stay silent. Such behaviours and consequences are utterly unthinkable, but the reason why we acknowledge Holocaust memorial day every year is that such unthinkable atrocities actually took place within living memory. Stuart McMillan talked about how cruel and callous humans can be. Sadly, the Holocaust was not the last attempt at genocide. Members have mentioned one or two other attempts. I scribbled down the attempt in Cambodia, which has not been mentioned so far. I vividly remember the dreadful events there. In fact, at the time, I knew Cambodians who heard nothing more from any of their family ever again—that was it. However, they were lucky because they lived in Australia and did not experience what was happening. There is also what happened in Srebrenica in the Balkans. We have only to think about what happened a few years ago to know that we could still be doing such things if we are not vigilant. I have named only two places. Such dreadful events continue to happen, so education is vital. We know that, during times of economic challenge, tensions can become exacerbated and can sometimes lead to a breakdown in community cohesion. Maintaining vigilance internationally and domestically is vital. Annabelle Ewing talked about ordinary people being in Amsterdam or Paris one day and finding themselves in a concentration camp the next day, and about how utterly disorientating and shocking that was. While she was speaking, I thought about other ordinary people. There were ordinary people in Germany—people like us—who became the perpetrators of horror. We are not absolved of responsibility if we see ourselves only as victims and do not remember that ordinary people sometimes become perpetrators. We must be vigilant about that. I do not know how much longer I have, Presiding Officer.

I do not want to try people’s patience. It is extraordinarily important to remember that there are two sides and that ordinary people find themselves on both sides, as victim and as perpetrator. That is why we must engage with one another and establish dialogue with a range of groups and individuals. Dialogue brings us together, removes the fear of the unknown, helps us to find common ground and build friendships, and challenges stigmatisation, which holds back many individuals and communities. It offers us the chance to embrace the full diversity of life, to have first-hand experience of cultures that we did not grow up with, and to learn that more pulls people together than pulls them apart. The Scottish Government believes in one Scotland of many cultures and faiths. It believes in a nation that values diversity and recognises that a multicultural society is vibrant, successful and energetic. It believes in a nation in which people from all backgrounds can live in peace and in which people of all faiths and ethnic backgrounds can achieve their potential. We should take pride in being the only nation in Europe that has never had official state-sponsored discrimination against the Jews, but we should not allow that to lull us into a false sense of complacency, because none of us here is free from the possibility that, if we are not careful, we could wake up one day and discover that we, too, are perpetrators. We may have simply dodged that, but, in truth, we may have come close to behaving in just as awful a way many times.

It is vital that we remember that. We were not under occupation, and we do not know how people would have reacted if we had been and how many would have been prepared to collaborate in doing precisely the same thing—perhaps to different groups of people or to more groups of people than elsewhere. That is why vigilance can never be relaxed. Every time vigilance is relaxed anywhere in the world, something happens. That reminds us that we as human beings have a capacity for violence that is unmatched elsewhere in the animal kingdom. Holocaust memorial day provides us with an opportunity to develop a fuller understanding of race, equality and tolerance, and the importance of being constantly vigilant so that discrimination and prejudice do not creep into what we do as a society. Meeting closed at 18:01.

The Lord Chancellor wrote to me on 31 October outlining the basis of proposals to transfer the administration of reserved tribunals to Scottish ministers and responsibility for judicial leadership to the Lord President. Discussions are on-going at official level on the detail of the proposals, and we expect the United Kingdom Government to consult in the near future.

The member will have noted from my answer that the current discussions revolve around the devolving of the administration of the tribunals. Fees and the setting of fees will not be devolved—that is a reserved matter and will remain so regardless of any administrative reform, so the Scottish Government will have no influence on that. It may well have taken a different view from that of the UK Government, but it will be unable to do so until after the autumn of 2014. I agree that the sums that are being considered are significant and could have a detrimental effect on the most vulnerable employees but, because the substantive law on employment is currently reserved to the UK Government, we cannot effect any change in that.

I welcome Jim Eadie’s motion and congratulate him on securing the debate. One of the virtues of members’ business debates is their capacity to highlight issues that might not otherwise get the political attention that they deserve, particularly in a Parliament in which powers over international issues are not part and parcel of the powers that we have. Jim Eadie has spoken eloquently, as have all the members who have participated, about the conditions that are experienced by children in the chocolate industry. We have seen the awful stories that the BBC journalist Humphrey Hawksley has recently recounted of the treatment of those children. The passion that we have heard today highlights the issues that lie behind the stories and shows the Scottish Parliament at its best. As has been indicated, the Harkin-Engel protocol is not an agreement between states; it is a framework of ethical practice that the chocolate industry has voluntarily adopted. For that reason, we should welcome the inspiration that lay behind it, the good intentions that brought so many companies together and the self-recognition that those companies have a corporate responsibility to ensure that such exploitation of children is eliminated from their industry. In addition, it is fair that we recognise what the protocol has achieved. Through the actions of industry, states have been spurred into action, and the Governments of Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire now have national agencies that are dedicated to addressing the worst forms of child labour. However, inspiration and good intentions are not enough if they are not made real by action, and the report by Tulane University raises questions that we have an international duty to address. According to that report, more than 1.8 million children are estimated to be working in the cocoa industry in those two countries. How many of those children have the machete scars on their legs that we saw on the BBC reports? How many will be like the Aly whom Christina McKelvie spoke about? We can all appreciate the challenges that are involved in combating child trafficking against the background of civil war and unrest that countries such as Côte d’Ivoire are experiencing but, ultimately, that cannot be an excuse. It is clear that the exploitation of children remains rife in the cocoa industry in those countries. Although I welcome the recent statement from Nestlé that it will work with the Fair Labor Association to examine Nestlé’s practices, like Christina McKelvie I think that we should all be careful about falling into further complacency, locally or internationally. That includes complacency about the notion of the abolition of slavery, on which we can be inclined to congratulate ourselves. The reality of life in many parts of our world today suggests that slavery is still very much with us. It is ironic that we are having this debate at a time of year when our children will be particularly enjoying chocolate, perhaps rather more than we might wish. However, we cannot ignore the children involved in its making. Each of us can go back to our homes and look at what is in the stockings and the selection boxes and consider what it took to get those products to us. The African countries that we are talking about may seem far removed from us. While to some—although not to people here—the issues may seem an oddly distant matter to concern the Scottish people, it is a mark of our approach to engaging with the world that we continue to focus on exactly these concerns. I add a personal note. We as consumers have individual responsibility—it is not just about the companies or countries. David McLetchie is right to acknowledge and remind us about the successes of the fair trade movement and the growth in sales of fair trade chocolate. Ultimately, that growth will hit the unethical companies where it hurts most. Sadly, our ethical arguments with them may in their eyes be far less important than their bottom line. It is important that we continue to support the fair trade movement.

Absolutely, which is why each of us continues to have an individual responsibility. Although our own purchases may seem small, taken against the backdrop of the purchases that are made throughout the country, we have an enormous amount of power to wield to bring about change in industry. At the heart of Scotland’s international development policy is a deeply held, deeply Scottish sense of moral responsibility for tackling global issues. The purpose that the Scottish Government has set for itself is to create a more successful country, with opportunities for all to flourish, through increasing sustainable economic growth. We would not want any less for other countries, nor for the children of those countries. Policies on child trafficking and child poverty are the cornerstone policies that we are pursuing in Scotland. Our work on child trafficking is grounded in our commitment to work together with partners at local and United Kingdom level to eliminate a terrible crime. That commitment should have no boundaries. The Scottish values that define our policies at home define how we work globally. For those reasons, we support the work to end child trafficking and other unacceptable forms of child labour in the cocoa industry—indeed in any industry—in Ghana, in Côte d’Ivoire and in any country where such abuses take place. 13:03 Meeting suspended. 14:15 On resuming—

As we have heard, amendment 1 would narrow the scope of the offensive behaviour offence by removing the reference to “other behaviour that a reasonable person would be likely to consider offensive” and replacing it with a more limited reference to support for terrorism and glorification of loss of life. The Government does not support the amendment, but I nevertheless thank Mr McLetchie for his careful consideration of the bill and the constructive approach that he has adopted in lodging the amendment. Two distinct but related issues are involved, the first of which is the removal of the general so-called catch-all provision in section 1(2)(e). I do not believe that the offence will be effective if it cannot accommodate itself to a range of existing and, crucially, future behaviours. Whenever a list of specific behaviours is captured in law, we risk freezing the law at that point and limiting its applicability. I understand that there are concerns about the catch-all nature of section 1(2)(e), but it is necessary to achieve our stated aims. I am also fully assured that the offence will be enforced proportionately and fairly. I would be extremely concerned that, were section 1(2)(e) to be deleted, the offence would not be flexible enough to capture the continually evolving variety of offensive behaviour that we are aiming to eliminate from Scottish football. Secondly, the explicit reference to support for proscribed organisations is problematic. I have discussed that issue with Mr McLetchie and understand, and to a large extent sympathise with, his intentions in lodging an amendment to highlight such an important issue. We are in full agreement that the bill should criminalise support for terrorist organisations in the context of football. I am therefore happy to give members an assurance that the bill already criminalises support for terrorism in connection with regulated football matches where there is a risk of public disorder. That is made very clear in the Lord Advocate’s guidelines on the bill. As a result of Mr McLetchie’s engagement with us on the issue, we have looked into the issue of placing a reference to terrorism in the bill. I have discussed the matter with the Lord Advocate and carefully considered it. As I have said, I understand the concerns behind the amendment and am sympathetic to the reasoning for lodging it, but all offensive behaviour that is likely to incite public disorder is already covered by the bill, including support for terrorist organisations and the glorifying of tragedies. That behaviour is already covered by section 1(2)(e), which the amendment would remove. The Lord Advocate’s guidelines make it very clear that that is exactly the sort of offensive behaviour that would be covered. The Government’s view is that the Lord Advocate’s guidelines are the most appropriate way to deal with the matter, and therefore we do not support amendment 1.

I really have to deal with the point that James Kelly made first, to knock that nonsense on its head. The fact is that summary cases are dealt with in exactly the way that they have been dealt with since 2001, when the destruction policy was put in place by the member’s own Government. If he is now going to say that that was wrong, I am astonished—

Mr Kelly must know that somewhere in the region of 270,000 cases are reported every year, which makes absolutely clear why the physical destruction policy was put in place in 2001. It is a bit rich for him to come to the chamber now and moan about something that he put in place. Amendment 2, in the name of David McLetchie, is intended to ensure that individuals charged with offensive behaviour motivated by hatred cannot also have a statutory aggravation relating to behaviour motivated by prejudice added to their charge. I sympathise with the intention of the amendment, but it goes beyond what is needed to ensure that an additional aggravation cannot be added to those behaviours that express hatred, because it applies to all the types of behaviour listed in section 1. As paragraphs (a) to (c) of section 1(2) on the offensive behaviour offence cover expression of hatred directed towards individuals based on their membership or perceived membership of groups including those that are defined by religion, colour, race, nationality, ethnic or national origins, sexual orientation, transgender identity and disability, the Government agrees that it would not be appropriate to add an additional aggravation to charges under those paragraphs. However, amendment 2 would also preclude aggravations being added to charges under paragraphs (d) and (e) of section 1(2), which cover behaviour that is threatening or otherwise likely to be offensive to a reasonable person, including support for terrorism. It may be appropriate to add a statutory aggravation to charges under those paragraphs, and that is one of the reasons why the Government will not support the amendment. That was the basis of the conversations that we had with Mr McLetchie. I thank him once again for engaging in that discussion with us. The other reason why the Government will not support the amendment is that the issue is, as Mr McLetchie recognises, already covered in the Lord Advocate’s guidelines on the bill. The guidelines state: “It is not appropriate to add aggravations in terms of prejudice relating to race, religion, sexual orientation, transgender identity or disability to this offence.” I think that that is very clear and leaves no doubt that additional aggravations should not be added to charges relating to hatred under the offensive behaviour at football offence. The Government will not support the amendment.

Amendment 3 is a technical amendment intended to clarify the application of the order-making powers in section 4A. Those powers were added at stage 2. Section 4A allows the Scottish ministers to make an order, subject to affirmative procedure, to modify the behaviours that trigger, and the groups protected by, the offensive behaviour offence. The Government has given a clear commitment that we will consult on any substantive changes to be made using the powers. The amendment is intended to make it clear that where necessary—for example, to ensure compliance with the ECHR, which is required of us in this Parliament—section 1(5)(b) can be disapplied as regards a type of behaviour listed in section 1(2). The effect of such a disapplication would be that persons must be present in sufficient numbers for public disorder to be likely to be incited as a result of a kind of behaviour. I move amendment 3.

When David McLetchie comments about getting it right the first time, I wonder what he thinks stage 2 and stage 3 of our bill procedures are about. This is hardly the first Government to lodge the odd amendment during the progress of a bill. I seem to remember it happening frequently between 1999 and 2007. Taking an order-making power is hardly an unusual procedure either. It is fairly standard and we have made it clear that the order-making powers that we seek to take under the bill will be invoked only with the fullest consultation, which means coming back to the chamber for a vote. I do not understand why Mr McLetchie finds that to be so objectionable.

The problem with amendments 8 and 9 is that they would apply no matter how minor or technical the change. The Subordinate Legislation Committee considered in great detail the order-making powers as set out in the delegated powers memorandum for the bill, and it concluded in its report that the Government’s reasoning for the use of order-making powers was “justifiable” and “appropriate”. The committee said: “The Committee recognises that the order making powers ... are significant and that in some cases orders under this power should be subject to consultation.” We have said that all along. The committee went on to say that it recognised that “some orders ... will be of a technical nature and consultation ... in these instances would be unnecessary.” It concluded: “Imposing a universal requirement for consultation on all orders under this section on the face of the Bill would in the view of the Committee be unnecessary”, and noted that I have assured the Justice Committee that “consultation will be undertaken where it is appropriate” on the substantive issues that were discussed. I am happy to repeat that assurance. I confirm that the Government does not support amendments 8 and 9, for the reasons that I laid out.

Amendments 4 to 6 relate to the extraterritorial extent of the offences in the bill, and amendment 7 is a minor drafting amendment. The extraterritorial scope of the offensive behaviour at football offence extends to matches that are played outside Scotland that involve a Scottish club or the national team. The bill currently covers all British citizens. That was intended to ensure that the offence in relation to matches that are played outside Scotland covered supporters of Scottish teams who are based in England, Wales and Northern Ireland as well as those who are based in Scotland. It would have ensured that any British citizen who participated in sectarian or otherwise offensive behaviour during a match that involved a Scottish football club or the national team that was played outside Scotland was covered by the offence. We have discussed the issue with the United Kingdom Government, which has argued that the extra territorial application of the offensive behaviour offence should be restricted to individuals who are normally resident in Scotland, as other British citizens who take part in behaviours that will be criminalised under the bill would be punished under laws elsewhere in the UK. Amendment 4’s proposals will still mean that individuals normally resident in Scotland travelling to matches involving Scottish teams elsewhere in the world will be covered by the offence. That means that those travelling from their homes in Glasgow, Edinburgh or Dundee to watch their teams play in London, Munich or Napoli can be punished under the offensive behaviour offence. The UK Government has given us assurances that laws elsewhere in the UK can deal with similar behaviour by other British citizens. I have sought its assurance that it will take all reasonable steps to ensure that conduct that our bill will criminalise if carried out in Scotland or abroad by those habitually resident in Scotland will be routinely prosecuted if the conduct is by persons not habitually resident in Scotland and relates to a match involving a Scottish team that is played elsewhere in the UK. Therefore, in the light of the UK Government’s objections to the extent of the offence and, crucially, its assurances that such behaviour will be dealt with elsewhere in the UK for relevant supporters, we have agreed to introduce the amendments in question to restrict the extra territorial extent of the offence to individuals habitually resident in Scotland. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service will also take forward discussions with the Crown Prosecution Service on a protocol between the two organisations in relation to the prosecution of offensive behaviour that takes place elsewhere in the UK at a regulated football match involving a Scottish team. Football clubs also have a part to play in addressing fan behaviour, including that at matches abroad. The joint action group has led to the implementation of a new information-sharing protocol between the police and clubs that will allow the police to pass details of offending fans to clubs for appropriate action to be taken, regardless of whether it relates to matches at home or abroad. I am therefore confident that clubs will take action against any fans behaving in an unacceptable manner when following their team, which includes fans travelling from outside Scotland to any match involving their club. The bill’s provisions, action by clubs and liaison with the UK authorities will therefore ensure that anyone following their club or the national team who behaves in a sectarian or offensive manner that risks inciting public disorder will be subject to the full force of the law and possibly other sanctions, no matter whether the game takes place in Glasgow, Manchester or Milan. Amendments 4, 5, 6 and 7 also provide that the threatening communications offence applies to any threatening communication made outside Scotland by any person where that communication is intended to be seen or heard in Scotland. I move amendment 4.

Alison McInnes must accept that for a considerable amount of time we have been in discussion with the UK Government on that drafting point; it is not something that anybody has suddenly discovered. I stand by amendment 4. Amendment 4 agreed to. Amendments 5 to 7 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to. Section 7A—Report on operation of offences

As Patrick Harvie will be aware, the Government lodged an amendment at stage 2 to respond to the Justice Committee’s recommendation that we should report to the Parliament on the operation of this legislation after an appropriate period. The Government has already made it clear that we will give full consideration to the issues that are involved in preparing our report on the bill and that it will not simply be a statistical report. I regard it as essential that we consult a wide range of partners to assist in the preparation of our report. Consultation with appropriate persons is therefore already our intention. Nevertheless, I thank Mr Harvie for the constructive way in which he has engaged in the process. I confirm that the Government appreciates the intention behind his amendment and that it will, therefore, support it.

I am glad finally to be able to open this stage 3 debate and to set out the decisive actions that the Government has taken to address the problem of sectarian and other offensive behaviour at football. This is an historical issue that has been too long ignored in Scotland. In the previous football season the issue reached a crisis point, with death threats posted on the internet and bullets and bombs sent though the post in connection with football. We need to remember the events that took place earlier this year, because it was a fairly astonishing escalation of activity in Scotland that I would guess pretty much every member in the chamber absolutely abhorred. I do not for one minute accept that sectarianism is confined only to football, and I will say more about the wider agenda in the debate. However, it is abundantly clear that such behaviour manifests itself in the context of football more visibly than elsewhere. Given that that is the case, it was manifestly clear that action was essential. Working with the Lord Advocate, the police and football authorities, we took the decisive action that was demanded by the crisis we faced earlier this year. Following requests from the police to the First Minister, we established the joint action group to ensure, first of all, that football’s own house was in order. There were 41 actions agreed in July, which included the establishment of a new national football policing unit backed by an investment of £1.8 million. We are already seeing the benefits of that constructive partnership approach, which involves football clubs, authorities, fans and the police. I note the continued demand that football should put its own house in order. Of course we accept that, and that is exactly what we have already delivered through the joint action group. On 6 December, along with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and the Minister for the Commonwealth Games and Sport, I attended a joint action group meeting at Hampden. The Scottish Premier League, backed by the Scottish Football League and the Scottish Football Association, has agreed proposals to toughen its approach to tackling unacceptable supporter conduct, demanding higher standards of clubs and introducing a new independent sanctioning regime. We are seeing new focused action from the police, and we will see tougher standards for football clubs applied by the football authorities, but what of the Government? The critical role for Government in this partnership is to ensure that the law is fit for purpose. As part of its work, the joint action group was asked whether the current laws are adequate to ensure that the unacceptable behaviour that we are seeing is stopped. A fundamental change was not required, but the expert advice was clear: the laws could be improved in relation to tackling sectarian and other offensive behaviour at football matches and in relation to communications, in particular on the internet. That simple point seems to have been lost in what I think is a fog of denial and sometimes apparently wilful misunderstanding.

Football clubs know perfectly well that they have to get their house in order. I repeat that the advice from the experts was clear: a change in the law would assist police and prosecutors in stamping out this most visible form of sectarianism. In the face of that expert advice, the Government’s responsibility to act was clear. We have always fully accepted that this was about evolution not revolution in the law—about sharpening the tools available, not creating entirely new tools. Indeed, that is where there has been further confusion on the part of the critics of these measures. It is very difficult to reconcile the view that these new measures add nothing to the existing law and are thus unnecessary with the idea—often expressed in almost the same breath—that they are unworkable and illiberal. The Lord Advocate made it clear that breach of the peace was being narrowed under challenge from the courts. Last year, in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010, we introduced the section 38 “Threatening or abusive behaviour” offence to deal with the narrowing in relation to domestic incidents. There was no great outcry then—indeed that gathered broad support. What we are doing through the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill is much the same, although in this case we are responding to the narrowing of breach of the peace as it relates to football. The narrowing that we are talking about includes setting a very high bar for deciding when there is provably fear or alarm in the noisy and boisterous context of football and, even more seriously, judgments, for instance that those hurling racist abuse did not commit an aggravated offence because the abuse was fleeting and lost in the cauldron of noise. We have carefully considered the legal issues and designed bespoke offences that deal with the limitations, while being fully mindful of our obligations under the European convention on human rights. No longer need police and prosecutors depend on the “fear or alarm” test in the context of football matches; the test now is the more relevant public order test. Those claiming that the law adds nothing fail to mention the application of the new laws outside Scotland. Football is international, but breach of the peace, or section 38, is not. Similarly, Scotland currently has no incitement to religious hatred law to tackle the growing problem of sectarian and other religious threats on the internet and elsewhere. The new laws provide that. To be clear, those are clear and specific improvements on the existing law. The measures in the bill relating to football go beyond sectarianism. We make no apology for that. It cannot be credible in taking action to stamp out overtly sectarian behaviour not to seek to stamp out wider offensive behaviour, which is all too often associated with, or a response to, sectarianism.

We extended the timetable for the bill from the original plan to what we have now. For this bill, there was appropriate consultation. There has been much comment that offensiveness is part and parcel of football—that it is just a fact of life. I simply disagree. When offensive behaviour risks provoking public disorder, that cannot be tolerated, and certainly not in the powder keg atmosphere of high-risk football matches—at which up to 300 police officers and 500 stewards are required to keep the peace. Of course, much of the noisy, even rowdy, behaviour at football is its lifeblood. Often, it is a celebration of identity and culture, but let us not pretend otherwise than that much of what we see at football celebrates nothing more than hate and division and is done to antagonise and provoke old wounds. That is unacceptable; that must stop. We have heard a great deal about this Government’s apparent failure to listen on this issue, but listen we have, time and time again, to the demands of the overwhelming majority of Scots—the 91 per cent who want tougher action. They are decent, law-abiding people who have simply had enough of what they hear on the terraces and read on the internet. We also listened in June, when this Parliament requested more time to consider the legislation. We accepted then that the context for the legislation was not yet clear, and that pause has meant that the context for the legislative action that we are taking is now much clearer. That clarity has been provided by the crucial work of the joint action group to put football’s own house in order and the wider, deeper strategy to tackle sectarianism, now supported by an unprecedented £9 million investment over the spending review period. So we are not where we were in June, when the bill was supported by a sizeable majority of this Parliament. There can now be no doubt that legislating to tackle the issues in football and on the internet—where this hatred is often most visible and therefore most damaging—is not the limit of our aspirations, nor the extent of our ambition. In context, the bill seeks to introduce proportionate and effective measures that are designed to tackle a limited set of specific issues. It is the first necessary step on a longer journey. We have benefited from the constructive contribution of a number of members and have seen the bill amended to respond to issues raised by the Justice Committee and others to make it even more fit for purpose. Even if not all amendments are accepted, they provoke thought and reflection on the part of Government, and many of our amendments were lodged in response to those who engaged in thoughtful and constructive dialogue. I look forward to participating in the debate this afternoon. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. In closing the debate, I thank all those who contributed to the development of the bill, right back to June and, indeed, before then. In particular, I thank all those whom I have met or who have written to me to discuss the bill. I also thank the Justice Committee, the many witnesses and experts who gave their time to engage in the parliamentary process and the Scottish Government officials who have worked tirelessly on the bill over the past six months. Despite this afternoon’s debate, I am confident that we are beginning to see long-needed change in attitudes and behaviours in Scottish football. As I have said many times, football is not the only manifestation of sectarianism but those behaviours at football are often the most visible sign of division in our society. Once the legislation is in place, we can get down to the difficult and long-term work of tackling sectarianism. I want to begin the process of healing the divide and then celebrating this nation’s differences and diversity. Whatever division there is in Parliament over the bill, I hope that once 5 o’clock has been and gone we can rise above that and set our sights on the real, longer-term prize. There were a number of thoughtful contributions to the debate, including some that did not support the bill. Other contributions were somewhat less edifying. I cannot go through every one of the contributions because, despite the generous apportionment of time, I fear that I would run out of it. However, I must take up some of the comments from James Kelly and, by inference, Johann Lamont. James Kelly made much of what was obviously a rather hastily cobbled together announcement at the weekend by the Labour Party on its proposals on sectarianism. I looked at the 11 proposals quite carefully and what struck me as interesting was that every one of them reflected commitments that this Government has already made. There was nothing new there. I am happy to speak to James Kelly and others in his party about the detail of that, if they wish to hear it. I turn to Patrick Harvie’s comments on the importance of tackling hate crimes more generally. I have some sympathy for what he said. The Government has no plans to undertake a wide-ranging consolidation exercise on hate crime, because of the enormous resource-intensive nature of any consolidation exercise—it is not in our plans, and certainly not on the timescale that Patrick Harvie would have wanted—but I can give an undertaking that the Government will explore the possibility of research to evaluate the effectiveness of existing hate crime laws. I will engage with Patrick Harvie as we move forward on that.

I respectfully say to Patrick Harvie that, when he gets a concession, it is generally a good idea to welcome the concession without immediately demanding chapter and verse on every detailed aspect that might arise. I have committed to engaging with Patrick Harvie on that and I will do so. I will speak about some of the other contributions more generally. Sadly, many of them repeated the same stock phrases that have time and again been refuted. We heard the repeated assertion that sectarianism is not confined to football, as if the Government had ever claimed that it was. However, football is the ugliest and most visible manifestation of sectarianism and the bill was designed specifically to deal with that.

Did I not just say that? I sometimes wonder whether selective deafness comes over people when they listen to SNP members. I respectfully point out to Johann Lamont that that particular group of offences does not cover travel to and from football matches, for example, which are encompassed by the bill. Another frequently made point is that somehow the bill represents all that we are doing. On the contrary, we have a wide-ranging set of measures already in hand, as I have said, including the commitment of an unprecedented £9 million to the problem over the next three years. That is more money than the Labour Government put in. It is also said that there is united opposition to the bill. There has certainly been quite a degree of discussion and debate, but it is simply not true to say that there is unanimous opposition to it. We listened to the churches’ request for a freedom of expression provision, and they acknowledged and welcomed the amendment that we lodged at stage 2. That was one of a number of amendments that the Government lodged as a result of the committee’s report. Indeed, a number of members know perfectly well that there is continued support from, for example, Bishop Devine, who speaks for the Catholic church on the issue. The Scottish Human Rights Commission certainly raised specific issues with us that related to a specific provision in the bill, but it has been broadly supportive of the bill, and has said so on a number of occasions. If we add the churches and the SHRC to the police and the prosecutors, we have an interesting group of people who support the bill, and given the decisions that have been made over the past couple of days, we could probably pray in aid UEFA, if it knew about the bill. On 23 November, Chief Rabbi Jonathan Sacks visited the Parliament. I was struck by something that he said: “Great nations are honest nations and it takes confidence to say that you have faults”. Those are wise words, which I commend to members. Scotland is, of course, a great nation with many more virtues than faults—members would expect me to say that—but some of the faults that we have run very deep, and that can make honesty all the more difficult. Therefore, let us be honest here today. Sectarianism has created faultlines in Scottish society over many years, decades and, arguably, centuries. Some of those faultlines may have healed over, but occasionally the faultlines shift and make clear the depth of the problem that remains. That often takes people by surprise, and it can shake our confidence as a nation. Comprehensive and long-term action is required to tackle sectarianism, of course. Deep-set attitudes and behaviours need to be changed through education and engagement. It is important to reiterate that the Government has already announced that it will develop a community-based approach to tackle sectarianism that is focused on meeting the specific needs of communities. In our manifesto, we gave our promise that we are in this for the long run, and we have backed that promise with the unprecedented levels of investment to which I have referred. I have made it clear that I do not believe that sectarianism in Scotland reduces to what we see at football matches. Those who are genuinely disadvantaged and discriminated against may never have set foot inside a football stadium, and phrases such as “90-minute bigot” are an affront to their plight. However, football grips this nation, so what we see at football matches sends a disproportionately powerful signal not just through Scottish society, but throughout the world. It is therefore clear that we cannot address the wider problem of sectarianism without taking action to stamp out its very visible manifestation at football matches. I commend the bill to Parliament and the people of Scotland.

Fire and rescue services are working with local partners to highlight the dangers of fireworks and bonfires. They have a statutory duty to promote fire safety in their areas. Their work is supported by the Scottish Government, which also delivers a national fire safety campaign.

As I said, there is a national fire safety publicity campaign that is informed by the findings of the “Scotland Together” report, which was published in 2008. The campaign focuses on making the public aware of the real risk of fire and the promotion of home fire safety visits by means of the media, fire safety road shows, fire safety leaflets and the www.dontgivefireahome.com website. Statistics show a significant decrease in the number of fire deaths and injuries in Scotland and very good work is being done on the issues that are related to bonfires, which are slightly different to those that are related to fireworks but are wrapped into the same period. We are seeing considerable success, but as the member highlights, one incident is an incident too many.

I welcome the Justice Committee’s contribution in assisting with the scrutiny of the bill. It has prepared a constructive report that was informed by the evidence, particularly the 83 pieces of written evidence that provide a detailed and expert backdrop to the debate. We might not have understood it from Mr Kelly’s comments, but the majority of those submissions supported the bill. On Tuesday, the Scottish Government published its formal response, as did the Lord Advocate, who also laid a copy of his revised draft guidelines in the Scottish Parliament information centre. I thank the committee convener for her opening remarks. I read my stars today—they were quite interesting. They tell me that I should pop down to the basement where they are running a special offer on patience. Apparently it is easy to get, within my means, and just what I need. I cannot think of a more prophetic set of stars for the debate this afternoon, because patience is what I need. It is worth reminding ourselves that the bill gained majority support at stage 1 in June. Parliament agreed the principles of the bill, which means that it accepted that a problem is infecting Scottish football and wider society, and must be tackled. The task for us now is not to question whether action is necessary but to set out what we need to do and how we need to do it to deliver on the commitment that was made to Scotland in June. As evidenced by the survey that was done during the summer, the Scottish people have set the challenge of delivering once and for all a solution to a problem that the overwhelming majority of people are sick to the back teeth of. In company with the First Minister, I am prepared to accept that challenge and I hope that the Parliament is too.

I will let the member in if she will allow me to get a bit further into my speech. I still hope that we can find common purpose. It is premature for members to come out against the bill before a single amendment is lodged. Despite the column inches that have been dedicated to the bill, it is easy to forget that the process is still closer to its beginning that it is to its end. With stages 2 and 3 still to come, there is much to play for, and there is scope for the Parliament to help to shape the bill so that it contributes to making a Scotland that we all want. I actively welcome any and all constructive suggestions.

With respect, the problem does go beyond the two clubs. The difficulty is that those two clubs—along with a third and possibly a fourth and one or two others that sometimes get caught up in the issue—dominate the majority of the publicity around the debate and Scottish football. It is therefore, almost by definition, a problem for Scottish football. The involvement of the Union of European Football Associations also showed us that it will be a continuing problem if we do not address it.

I will let the member in but not yet. The first issue is necessity. I welcome the unanimous recognition by the Justice Committee that there is a serious issue affecting Scottish football that has gone unchallenged for too long, and that action is needed—and 91 per cent of Scots agree. That is reflected in the majority support for the bill at stage 1, and in the preponderance of the evidence that was submitted to the committee. That agreement on the challenge that we face as a nation in relation to the sectarianism and hate infecting our national game remains the basis of a possible consensus. The imperative now is how to make it work.

Sadly, a great deal of James Kelly’s speech undermined the very points that Johann Lamont is trying to make. This is not easy work. If it were, successive Governments and Parliament would have tackled it successfully by now. However, just because it is not easy does not mean that it is not necessary. That work involves challenging the pessimism that pretends that this is just how football is, how it always has been and how it always will be. We must reject the politics of despair and the politics of aye been and offer Scotland the politics of hope. I know that I will run out of time. I understand that I have only nine minutes.

Thank you. I want to run very quickly through some of the more key issues—I dare say that other things will come up in the debate. The idea that there is no problem was mooted during the course of the committee’s evidence taking. I regret that there are people who think that this is not a problem, because it is a problem—that is important. We know that it is a problem. Sheriffs comment on it—even the clubs comment on it. Despite James Kelly’s characterisation of the situation, we have Rangers on the record in June saying that it supported and was encouraged by the Government bill that had been introduced. Only a couple of weeks ago, Peter Lawwell of Celtic made the very points that we are making about some of the chanting that goes on even on the club’s own side; he said that he was inundated by complaints from Celtic fans about what was happening. So, we are talking here over the heads of a very small minority of people who do not want their behaviour challenged to the vast majority of football fans, who are just as fed up with all the behaviour that takes place as are the vast majority of the people of Scotland.

No. I really need to get on. Of course it is not just at football matches that we have to deal with this problem. There is a problem on the internet, which is being dealt with, too, because the poison is not just the words; there are real consequences for those who are threatened and intimidated. I turn to the argument that the existing law is adequate. James Kelly talked about section 38 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010. I do not have time to go into detail, but I will give him five very good reasons why section 38 is not sufficient: it does not cover extraterritorial acts, which this legislation does; it does not include a public order test, which this legislation does; it does not include any reference to incitement to religious hatred, which this legislation does; it does not do the naming and shaming that this legislation does; and it does not provide the democratic leadership that this legislation does. I am afraid that the existing law is not adequate, which is a failure of us all in the past to get it right for the future. Some people may say that no law will ever be perfect. That may very well be true, but it does not mean that we stop trying. There are a great many other issues to cover. James Kelly prayed in aid the Scottish Human Rights Commission to support the position that he was taking on the back of what it had to say. We are in constant dialogue with the commission and one would not have known from what James Kelly said that it actually endorses the aims of the bill. It has one specific concern about one specific subsection. James Kelly may put that look on his face, but I was talking to Allan Miller only this morning, so I can tell him that that is the SHRC’s position. It is important to put that on the record, because the SHRC is the body that this Parliament set up to comment on precisely such issues. We are in constructive dialogue with the SHRC about the single issue about which it has some concerns. It is important that that constructive dialogue take place. I am just sorry that there has not been more constructive dialogue in some other directions. There are many things that I am probably missing out. We talk about clarity, which is improved by the bill. It will make a difference. The police have indicated that the situation is clearer now. They feel that the legislation is more reliable and gives them a better tool to use when they are confronting the behaviour of the fans who are causing the biggest difficulty. On the basis of all the information that we have and given the support of the Crown Office, the Lord Advocate, the police and the SHRC and the on-the-record comments by the key football clubs, the Opposition parties are left in the interesting and curious position of being the parties that like to say no, whatever the question is. We agree that there is an issue. We should agree with the Lord Advocate and the police that the current response is inadequate. As a Parliament, we should focus on creating the best and most effective measures that we can to give our hard-pressed police and prosecutors the tools that they have asked for so that they can help to remove the hate and threats that damage communities. I welcome the chance to participate in this debate. I will seek to respond to whatever comments members make, but my hope is that the debate can take us closer to the Scotland that we want. I remind all members that the bill is in a process that is still open and that they still have an opportunity to be constructive about what they want. I listened patiently to James Kelly for 10 minutes, but I did not hear one constructive comment about what he would do as opposed to what he does not want to do.

Once again, I welcome the contribution by the Justice Committee, and I thank most members for their contributions in the debate and throughout the parliamentary process. I remind members that we agreed to the principles of the bill back in June. In doing so, we accepted that there is a problem infecting Scottish football and wider society that must be tackled. Subsequently, we understand that 91 per cent of Scots agree that there is such a problem and believe that stronger action is needed to tackle it. I feel that I have to repeat myself ad nauseam. We have never for a single moment suggested that the bill is the single answer to all football disorder in general or to sectarianism in particular. I say in response to all the confessional speeches from Labour back benchers that they do not have a monopoly on unfortunate experiences growing up in Scotland, and I urge them not to talk and behave as though they do. They do not necessarily speak for everybody. I want to say a great number of specific things. Virtually nothing constructive has been said by a member of the Opposition, with the exception of Graeme Pearson and possibly Johann Lamont at the very end of her speech. It is interesting that there has been very little discussion about the last part of the amendment. That may be because Labour members know that virtually everything that is mentioned in that part is already being done by the Government. I have addressed the existing deficiencies in legislation. Johann Lamont seems to suggest that, by passing the bill, we will automatically repeal the existing legislation, but we will not. Offences will remain offences. We are ensuring that a choice of charges is available to the police, which will allow us to do the work that we need to do and to identify the offence. Actually, what is and is not football related cannot be identified in a lot of criminal proceedings. A constant theme ran through many of the contributions from the Opposition. It has been suggested that somehow everything is either/or—that we either do what has been proposed or we do other things. That is not true. We can pass the bill and do other things. The Government wants to do as much as it can across the board.

I do not agree with Patrick Harvie on that. If he reads our response to the committee, he will see that we are opening the door for potential future amendments. It is important that we have a full debate on some of the issues that have been raised, but it is a fact that virtually all criminal activity depends on facts, circumstances and context. That applies whether we are talking about the offence in question or any other criminal offence that is charged in Scotland. The facts and circumstances can change everything. My colleague Kenny MacAskill had a wonderful description of Romeo’s speech at Juliet’s balcony. We all think that that is a great example of prose poetry in history, but what happened could equally be a breach of the peace; indeed, it could even be stalking in certain circumstances. The same thing could be a breach of the peace, stalking or welcome. The other thing that everybody—[Interruption.]

Everyone on the Opposition seats has also pretty much ignored the fact that the first offence is not just about offensive behaviour, but about linking that to the likelihood of public disorder. Ruth Davidson attempted to make as constructive a speech as she could in the circumstances, but there was a bit of confusion in what she said because she talked about the need for amendments going forward. However, that is not what she signed up to vote for today. She signed up to vote to kill the bill completely. Either she does not understand the process or she is deliberately being just a little unclear. I could go through speech after speech from Opposition members that did not contain a single constructive contribution. I exempt from that criticism Graeme Pearson, whose contribution provided a singularly different tone, which I welcome. He made many interesting practical suggestions, a number of which are being discussed or taken forward, some of which may be reserved and the rest of which I am perfectly happy to talk to him about. His suggestions were a constructive intervention, which was singularly unusual in the debate. There were some very unfortunate contributions. I want to remind members, particularly Neil Findlay and Michael McMahon, of what Peter Lawwell, chief executive of Celtic Football Club, said: “Chants glorifying the Provisional IRA are totally unacceptable. It is an embarrassment to the club. We don’t want it, we don’t need it ... it is wrong, and it is an embarrassment to the club and embarrassment to the majority of supporters. We were inundated by complaints from our own fans after the game at Tynecastle.” That game was on 2 October.

The truth of the matter is that there is real concern about what is happening. Even at this late stage, I urge Opposition members to think a bit more constructively about the matter and to come on board for some of the discussions that can be had even now. We have stage 2 and stage 3 to do, so let us move forward on that basis.

It has been an interesting afternoon, for reasons that turned out to be not all to do with the subject of the debate. I reiterate the Government’s thanks to the individuals who considered the Supreme Court for us: Lord McCluskey, Sir Gerald Gordon, Charles Stoddart and Professor Neil Walker. They are all figures of considerable experience, expertise and substance and a number of their names are very well known to me—I ought to put it on the record that I am a non-practising member of the Faculty of Advocates, which may be germane to some of what we have been discussing. There is a bigger issue in this debate, although I realise that I have much less time to discuss it than originally I might have had. The question, which Johann Lamont touched on in her closing remarks, is this: does any legal system anywhere in the world ever get everything 100 per cent right? Of course, the answer to that question is no. Some do better than others, but nobody will ever have a legal system that is 100 per cent right 100 per cent of the time. In every single system, there will be appeals mechanisms, reversals and things done or not done that turn out not to be ideal. All of us live with that throughout the workings of the process. The question of how that is handled is important in every jurisdiction and the debate falls within that more general discussion, because that is really all that we are talking about. We in the Government believe that the Scottish legal system should have equal status with others but we fear, rightly, that that equality of status is beginning to be eroded. I pray in aid of that comments that were made in Lord McCluskey’s interim report. He stated: “This widening of jurisdiction ... had surprised everyone and had created real problems”. It is therefore not the case that the issue is just made up. Graeme Pearson asked why we are having the debate and why we are discussing the matter in the first place. The issue is, of course, a live one in the Scotland Bill, which is currently going through Westminster, and concerning which we have a committee in this Parliament. Indeed, I remind everyone that the Lord President’s letter, which has been much quoted during the debate, was actually in connection with the Scotland Bill Committee, which he and his colleagues had been invited to attend. This is a very current and pertinent debate, which is on-going in a number of different venues; it is therefore quite right that we debate the issue in the chamber. It is also important, in regard to other comments that Graeme Pearson made, to point out that, as Kevin Stewart indicated, the Lord Advocate Elish Angiolini herself gave evidence to the Scotland Bill Committee in the previous session of Parliament. It is therefore not true to say that the Lord Advocate has not done that. The new Lord Advocate might not yet have done so, but that is not the same as saying that the Lord Advocate has not done so at all. In its report, the group made it clear that it has considered the issue within the context of the current devolution settlement, so—hold the front page—from our perspective, that is not something that we want to continue very far into the future. Within those limitations—we regard them as limitations—the report is positive. It recognises that the current system is constitutionally problematic, that the role of the UK Supreme Court needs to be more narrowly defined in relation to Scottish criminal cases, that the role of the High Court of Justiciary at the apex of the Scottish criminal justice system must be protected, and that the current Scotland Bill proposals require significant recasting if they are to be acceptable. In Lord McCluskey’s rather trenchant words—those who have interacted with Lord McCluskey will recognise that trenchancy—he basically describes them as being constitutionally inept. That is a pretty serious criticism that we must take seriously and not with the measure of disregard that I heard in the chamber this afternoon. The Advocate General’s proposals would remodel the UK Supreme Court as a court of appeal in the Scottish criminal justice system. That is the case, because the proposals would give the Supreme Court full powers to overrule subordinate courts, which in our view is unacceptable. I would have raised a great many specific points if I had the original amount of time that I was to have.

I must say something about certification, which has been the biggest part of the serious part of the debate. Some members have claimed that certification is not appropriate. I struggle to see how they can take that stand, because it would put Scotland in a completely different set of circumstances to the rest of the UK. How on earth can that be justified? Our High Court would not have authority similar to that of courts elsewhere. We must trust the High Court with that authority, and we must trust it to recognise cases that have points of general public importance—we know that it can do it—and to issue a certificate where appropriate. Annabelle Ewing’s comments on that were absolutely bang on. I want to point out the corollary to the argument that has been made. If no certification is taking place elsewhere in the UK, the implication of a number of the comments from Opposition members is that the poor people in the rest of the UK are lacking in rights, but I do not hear any great regard for that. I therefore suggest that the position of those members is completely political. The situation is clear. The experts whom we have asked to consider the issue have pointed the way forward. I hope that in the future the debate will be as constructive as possible, and that people will stop looking at it purely politically and start looking at it in reality, with the criticisms that have been made.

Up to the end of March 2010, 1,514 people had been convicted of religiously aggravated offences. The figure shows why it is vital that the police and courts have an appropriate range of powers available to them to tackle offensive behaviour. The Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill, which I introduced earlier this year, will send a clear and powerful signal to football fans and the public more generally that such behaviour is simply unacceptable.

The Government has already indicated that it wants to ensure that workers in all areas of employment throughout Scotland, including our own staff in the civil service and parliamentary staff, have recourse to that package, so I very much welcome Mr Bibby’s intervention in that respect. It is vital that we in the Government lead on this matter, and we will do so.

Indeed. Robust legislation must underpin the work that we do to tackle sectarianism in Scotland, which is why we introduced the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill in response to some of the ugly scenes that were witnessed earlier this year. Introducing the bill was the right action to take. Ninety-one per cent of Scottish people believe that we need to take tougher action to tackle sectarianism and offensive behaviour at football, but sectarianism is, of course, not just a football problem. We are looking at a number of actions to tackle sectarianism across Scottish society, which is why we support groups such as Nil by Mouth and the Iona Community in all the work that they are undertaking in that area. The issue is about more than just legislation; it is also about the work that is done in society as a whole.

Since 2007, the Scottish Government has invested almost £14 million of cashback money in sports other than football, including rugby union, basketball, amateur boxing, athletics, hockey and badminton. We are continuing to encourage all sports governing bodies, and indeed individual clubs, to submit appropriate funding proposals for consideration for investment from the cashback for communities programme as and when resources become available.

Cashback funding is about giving all our young people opportunities to take part in a range of sporting activities. We hope that, by stimulating an interest in sport through the scheme, some young people will go on to represent Scotland on the international stage. I expect that the athletes who will represent Scotland in the 2014 Commonwealth games are already in the system and are receiving appropriate support through the relevant sports governing body.

We are receiving a large number of bids in the scheme that we are currently operating, not all of which can be agreed to, of course. However, we are building up a bank of bids, and I expect that a great many bids will be from areas that are already suffering from a number of indicators of deprivation. We chose not to go down the road on disbursing proceeds of crime assets that England went down. We have taken a different approach for very good reasons, and I believe that, because of that, we will see a better benefit than has been seen in England.

No sporting activity is excluded if it falls within the parameters—obviously, it would need to be for young people. We are happy to receive any proposal that seeks cashback funding, whether it is from people involved in sailing, boating or any other water-based sport. Proposals would be considered and supported if they furthered the programme’s aims and, of course, if funding was available. As I said in my previous answer, we are developing a bank of proposals and we will continue to assess the proposals and make decisions as money becomes available.

The cabinet secretary and I have regular meetings with the Fire Brigades Union. We have met it on a number of occasions over the summer to discuss a range of local and national priorities. The member may be interested to note that I also met local FBU representatives in Fife on 23 August, as did my colleagues, during the recent Kirkcaldy Cabinet.

As the member would expect, we are continuing conversations with those fire services where there are currently greater challenges than there are in other places. I met the convener of the relevant committee when I was at those meetings in Fife, so I have already had some conversations on the subject and we are continuing them. I appreciate that, when the member lodged her question, she was unaware that a statement on the issue would be made this afternoon. I hope that she will listen to the statement and that we will then be in a better position to have a continuing conversation about what happens in Fife and some other fire service areas.

The Government’s approach to tackling antisocial behaviour, “Promoting Positive Outcomes”, was published jointly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in March 2009. That approach was most recently debated, and agreed, by the Parliament in December 2010. A number of sanctions are available to local authorities in tackling antisocial behaviour. Specifically, antisocial behaviour notices provide powers for a local authority to act against a private landlord in connection with the antisocial behaviour of the tenant or other occupant.

A joint information campaign would obviously be helpful because it seems that the range of options that are available to local authorities is not particularly well known to the local authorities or those on the other side of the matter. Applications can be made by the local authority to the sheriff court for orders, and if there is a misunderstanding by local authorities about their powers in that regard, it would be helpful if I could have a discussion with the member so that we can try to resolve that misunderstanding.

I, too, congratulate Willie Coffey on securing the debate. We heard him give a passionate defence of his community. That was an example of an elected representative doing exactly what an elected representative should do, so I doubly congratulate him in that regard. The common theme in the debate was the widespread perception of a lack of balance in the programme. I will return to that, but as Willie Coffey and other members know, my ministerial responsibilities do not extend to broadcasting, so I am a little wary of stepping into a minefield by making a critique of broadcasting. It would be hard to defend such views in anything other than an individual sense. I heard the individual responses from members and I am bound to say that as an individual I have great sympathy with what they said. Like Paul Wheelhouse, I saw some but not all of the series, for exactly the same reason that he and Ruth Davidson gave—it really was not something that I particularly wanted to watch. I do not know whether Willie Coffey would regard that as copping out or whether he is grateful that there were people who felt that the programme just was not appropriate and who did not want to put it on their viewing schedule. I will say a few words about the Government’s perspective on the important social issues raised in the programme, to which members have referred. We as a Government recognise the role of strong, cohesive and innovative communities in collectively tackling issues around drugs, alcohol, deprivation and social exclusion. Margaret Burgess and Willie Coffey both gave examples of that happening in Onthank, which the programme makers did not really cover. With our partners, we are supporting safer and stronger communities throughout Scotland. As I said earlier, almost all members talked about balance. There was perhaps one small redeeming feature of the programme: the final episode focused a little more on hope, rather than hopelessness. We saw the beginnings of a sense of recovery from drugs and alcohol and the impact that a few inspired individuals can have when they work together to meet a community need. Both Willie Coffey and Margaret Burgess talked about those people. We know the importance of the early years in offering the very best start in life for all Scotland’s children. Although I did not see the bit of the programme that involved the young girl in one of the families, it obviously hit home very hard for those who did see it. Every Scot has a fundamental right to live in a safe and strong community. We should examine more closely the potential, the strengths and the social innovations that exist in all communities throughout Scotland and not define a community solely by the challenges that it faces. It is the case—Margaret Burgess pointed this out—that the problems focused on could be found in many communities in Scotland. She could have gone much further; she could have pointed out that such problems are manifest in communities not just throughout the whole of the United Kingdom but throughout Europe, too. In one sense, the difficulties, challenges and problems faced within Onthank are faced by many other communities. It was a little unfair to single out a community and to suggest that it was somehow special. That is where the issue of balance comes in. The real issues of drugs, alcohol and deprivation should not be about entertainment, because many of our communities face serious and important challenges in that regard. Progress is being made and it is a pity that more emphasis was not put on recovery from drugs and alcohol abuse. Communities that support sustained recovery from drug and alcohol addiction are flourishing across Scotland. Those communities are of interest. They belong to the individuals who are in recovery, the network of workers, peers and families involved and others who support those individuals more widely. Those communities welcome all those who aspire to recover; they support them to change their lives and become contributing members of the community. I believe that Willie Coffey, Margaret Burgess and other members would have liked to have seen more focus on those individuals, that contribution and that support, rather than what we got from the programme makers. As Ruth Davidson said, the Government is very much part of the whole drug programme, the road to recovery, which is beginning to have an impact, although we face a massive challenge. Big improvements are being made: waiting times for access to treatment are coming down significantly. If Ruth Davidson had been in the Parliament four years ago, she would have known that the issue of waiting times for access to treatment is massive in many parts of Scotland. We have made huge inroads in that regard, just as we have made huge inroads in relation to investment to tackle Scotland’s relationship with alcohol. There is a very great deal to be done, but it is not just about Onthank; challenges are faced right across Scotland and the UK. I warmly congratulate Willie Coffey on his positive contribution about the people he represents. 13:00 Meeting suspended. 14:15 On resuming—

The Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill was introduced in Parliament on 16 June. Rule 9.21 of the Parliament’s standing orders provides that bills may be considered under emergency procedure. I propose that the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill be considered under the emergency procedure, under rule 9.21. The reasons for considering the bill under the emergency procedure were discussed at the Justice Committee when I appeared before it earlier this week, and there has been significant media coverage of the issue, but I hope that it is helpful to Parliament for me to set out the Government’s reasons for proposing that the bill be considered under the emergency procedure. I make it clear that the Government does not make the proposal lightly and we do not propose that the process should be used as a matter of course. However, we believe that the bill is exceptional and justifies the use of the emergency procedure. The bill is a specific response to a particular problem that was brought into sharp focus at football matches and on our televisions earlier this year. I was ashamed to witness such behaviour and I am sure that my views are shared by many in the chamber. The Government reacted quickly to those events by calling a football summit and thereafter establishing the joint action group, which is addressing a wider range of actions and strategies to tackle sectarianism and offensive behaviour over the longer term. The group will report to ministers in July. However, the Government believes that we need to move even faster than that. We believe that it is right that we should give a clear signal to the police, the courts, the football authorities and the clubs, and to the fans and the wider public, that offensive and sectarian behaviour around football matches is simply not acceptable. It is time to end this blight on our national game. We also believe that it is right that we tackle the wider issue of people sending threatening communications. The scenes at the old firm game were bad enough, but when they were followed by hateful and vitriolic posting on the internet and by the sending of bombs and bullets through the mail, it was clear that we had to act, and act quickly. We believe that the bill must be in place for the start of the new season so that the law is clarified, the police are given additional tools to deal with such behaviour and everyone is clear about our intentions and determination to deal with the issue right from the outset of the season.

I am approaching my last paragraph. I welcome the support that we have had for the bill, most notably from the police, who will have to respond to the legislation and deal with offenders. The police are clear that we should have the new powers in place by 23 July. That is why we have brought forward the bill quickly and why we are asking Parliament to respond accordingly. It is a short bill, and it is clear and focused on the particular issues that I have outlined. Of course, it is only the first part of a wider and long-term strategy. I therefore call on the Parliament to support my proposal that the bill be taken under the emergency procedure. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill be treated as an Emergency Bill.

I simply press the motion.

First of all, I thank the Justice Committee for moving so quickly to take evidence on the bill, those who have submitted—and might still be in the process of submitting—written evidence and those who have given or will give oral evidence. I realise that everyone has had to respond quickly to enable us to put the legislation in place before the start of the new football season and I am sure that the whole Parliament will acknowledge the contribution that has been made externally so far. I must start with the reasons for introducing the legislation and our urgency in doing so. A few weeks have passed but we must not forget where we were at the end of the last football season, when we were faced with some of the most shameful behaviour and incidents that have been seen in many years. Those scenes were broadcast and reported on repeatedly and seen throughout the world, and the disorder, the bigotry, the threats and, ultimately, the bullets and bombs through the post have shamed not only Scottish football but Scotland itself. The bill is a direct response to those shameful incidents. It is short, sharp and aimed directly at the most immediate problems we face. We will face other, wider challenges in the longer term but the bill represents a proportionate response to an immediately serious issue. Football is Scotland’s national game; it brings pleasure to millions and can be a very powerful force for good. Unfortunately, as the events of the last season have shown, it can also be where the bigoted attitudes and behaviours that we seek to eradicate are most visible and damaging. During the 2010-11 football season, some of those problems reached an intolerable level with sectarian and other offensive singing and chanting from supporters, misconduct by players and managers, death threats posted on the internet and live ammunition sent to prominent figures both directly and indirectly associated with football. When support for a football club is expressed through violence, when pride becomes bigotry and hatred and when rival supporters chant vile sectarian abuse at one another on the terraces, we cannot simply shake our heads and say, “This is the way it’s always been and the way it always will be”.

There are very good and specific reasons why this legislation is required. If the member had been able to listen to the Lord Advocate’s evidence at yesterday’s meeting of the Justice Committee, he would have heard them. I commend the Official Report of that meeting to him. We do not intend to take the path of hopelessness and acceptance. Instead, we seek a path to a more hopeful and inclusive Scotland where the Government acts decisively to protect people from discrimination and hatred and to make our communities safer. Some have suggested that the Government thinks that the bill on its own will eradicate sectarianism from Scottish football, but the proposed legislation is not a quick fix for the whole problem of sectarianism. It is specifically directed at dealing with some very ugly manifestations of sectarianism and is only one part of what will be a broader strategy of on-going and developing work.

The bill relates not to specific clubs but to behaviour. If such behaviour happens at other club grounds, it will be caught. When the First Minister was re-elected on 18 May, he made it quite clear in his acceptance speech that “We will not tolerate sectarianism, as a parasite in our national game of football or anywhere else in this society.”—[Official Report, 18 May 2011; c 32.]

That is a nonsensical position to take. We are not denying the problem in Scotland; instead, the bill deals very specifically with its manifestation in football. We all realise that there is a bigger, much more deeply rooted problem that manifests itself in much wider parts of society, and the Government will continue to deal with that. Indeed, I have been given that specific task by the First Minister. As I said, the bill is only one part of what will be a broader strategy. It provides for two new criminal offences, the first of which outlaws offensive behaviour that incites public disorder at football matches, when travelling to and from matches and when watching football in public areas and places such as pubs. The second outlaws threatening communications, and I will now say something about each. Our primary intention with regard to offensive behaviour at football matches is to tackle behaviour that is likely to incite public disorder. Three forms of such behaviour are covered: expressing or stirring up hatred based on religious, racial, sexual or other grounds through, for example, sectarian singing or other offensive chanting; threatening behaviour; and any other behaviour that would be offensive to a reasonable person. Some commentators have attempted to divert attention from what the bill is obviously intended to cover by suggesting increasingly fanciful hypothetical situations that appear to bring the provisions into disrepute and I am delighted that the police, the prosecution service, the football authorities and others have welcomed the introduction of the offence, partly because of the clarity that it brings.

I really need to get on. The offence is not about criminalising the singing of national anthems or making the sign of the cross. The bill seeks to criminalise behaviour that is offensive and likely to incite public disorder. National anthems in and of themselves are expressions of national pride; they are not normally sung to stir up racial or ethnic hatred and cannot be considered offensive to a reasonable person. That said, we have to be clear: that does not mean that bigots can misuse innocent songs and gestures for despicable purposes. We are no more listing banned songs than we are listing songs that are always acceptable, however deviously they might be used. As the Bishop of Motherwell, Joseph Devine, said this week: “Any sign, song, picture or whatever can be easily abused ... In themselves, the sign of the cross and the national anthem are noble and honourable expressions, but they can be manipulated for evil intent. Those who intentionally and malevolently exploit and corrupt such eminent symbols should be held to account.“ That point was made equally eloquently by the Lord Advocate yesterday to the Justice Committee, and I cannot agree more. It has been suggested that the offence is not necessary and that existing offences such as breach of the peace are adequate to deal with the kind of behaviour that we are seeking to tackle at football matches. Indeed, I think that Willie Rennie made that very point. I am, of course, aware that people are arrested and prosecuted for offensive and disorderly behaviour at football matches under the existing law. However, we are concerned that neither breach of the peace nor the offence of threatening and abusive behaviour is ideally suited to dealing with disorder at football matches—in particular, the sectarian and bigoted behaviour that can all too often provoke disorder. To prove that breach of the peace has been committed, it is necessary to establish that the accused’s behaviour would be likely to cause genuine alarm to a reasonable person, but proving that offensive sectarian chanting at a football match would cause alarm to a reasonable person will not always be straightforward. Given everything that happened last season, the link to public disorder is more straightforward. There is an impression that the bill was made up in splendid isolation. That is absolutely not the case. We have benefited directly from the experience of prosecutors, police and others with hands-on experience of tackling disorder at football matches. When Chief Superintendent Andy Bates, the match commander at Ibrox, and Chief Superintendent Gill Imery, the match commander at Tynecastle, say that they believe that the bill will benefit them in policing difficult football matches, we can be confident that we are getting it right. Of course, not all the problems with Scottish football last year took place at or around football matches. The live ammunition that was sent to prominent public figures who are connected in some way with Scottish football, the death threats to Celtic manager Neil Lennon that appeared on the internet, and the sectarian bile that was posted on social networks and blogs all go beyond what happens on the terraces. To address that, the bill introduces a new offence of making threatening communications. The offence covers threats of serious violence that are intended to cause fear or alarm and threats that are made with the intent of inciting religious hatred. They include implied threats, such as images that depict serious harm to an individual.

I am afraid that I must advise Mr Harvie that nobody can predict exactly how the courts will interpret any phrase. One difficulty that we are in is that some court judgments have interpreted even breach of the peace in a way that is not recognisable to some of us. I am sure that members who heard that football fans chanting racist abuse at a black player was discovered not to be a breach of the peace, according to the court, would find that surprising, to say the least. When a case is in court, we are in the court’s hands. The threatening communications offence applies to threats that are made through the mail, on the internet and on banners, posters and T-shirts, and to other threats whether they are written, images or sound recordings. However, it does not restrict a person’s legitimate freedom of speech, including the right to criticise or comment on religion or non-religious beliefs, even in harsh terms. The offence is concerned solely with threats.

We have not considered that aspect—

I say with the greatest respect that that is because the bill as drafted excludes speech. That is why the proposal looks as if it would be extra to requirements. The second offence is not restricted to football. The high-profile threats that have been made to prominent figures who are connected with Scottish football have highlighted the issue, but no matter the context in which such threats are made, there is no place in Scotland for people who threaten and intimidate their fellow citizens in such a way. The measures in the bill are a proportionate response to a serious problem. We must act quickly to restore faith in our national game, which matters to millions of Scots. I am reassured that Stewart Regan, the Scottish Football Association’s chief executive, and Neil Doncaster, the Scottish Premier League’s chief executive, agree that measures should be in place before the new football season starts and not come in halfway through it or later. We expect the offences in the bill to be enforced and prosecuted. Through our record investment in the Scottish police service to secure 1,000 extra officers for the front line, the resources are available to ensure that enforcement happens. We are also working with the police service through the joint action group, which was established in March, to assess whether more is needed. We will not hesitate to ensure that resources are available, if gaps are identified. The group will report on 11 July. Significant police resources and other resources are deployed on policing football. We know that more than 1,000 officers are required to police an old firm game and that arrests and prosecutions take place for offences at football. The new offences will make the job of Scotland’s police officers that bit easier. The offences will be not an added burden but further tools in the box. Sectarianism, discrimination and prejudice are all completely unacceptable wherever and whenever they occur. As a society, we must stand united and do what we can to build a proud and confident nation in which everyone—regardless of their background—is welcomed. The measures in the bill are a significant initial step towards that goal. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill.

Does the member not accept that he has just outlined precisely the reasons why one must not go down the road of listing songs or excluding songs? That is exactly our argument.

Does Mr Park accept that those organisations have received significant sums of money from this Government throughout the period and are continuing to receive that money against the backdrop of the cuts from Westminster that we are having to deal with?

A great many points have been raised today. I will deal with as many as I can in this speech and will follow up others as quickly as possible. There is support across the chamber for the aims of the bill. I welcome that, because it is helpful for us all to remember where we are trying to get to, even if we have the occasional disagreement on how we get there. A modern Scotland cannot continue to tolerate behaviour at football matches that stirs up any kind of hatred, or threats that are intended to cause others fear and alarm, on the internet or elsewhere. I believe that support for that aim is echoed across Scotland. People saw the scenes that we all saw and have had enough. Rightly, they expect this Government and this Parliament to do something about the situation. We have taken decisive action from the start because it is our view that we should move quickly on the matter. We simply cannot run the risk of allowing the next football season to kick off in the same way in which the last one finished. That is the fundamental point that has driven us and is the reason why we did not try to extend the legislation much beyond its present scope. I will return to that point. There has been support for taking action before the start of the new season. Support has come not only from the SFA, for the good and practical reasons that Stewart Regan outlined over the past day or two, but from Paul McBride, one of the people who was a victim of what happened at the end of last season. His view is that we are absolutely correct to bring in the legislation as quickly as possible and that there is no reason for delay.

I am not conscious that I ever indicated to anyone that the football clubs had asked us to do that. They certainly support the principle of the legislation, and are on record as saying so, and the SFA is definitely of the view that it needs to be in force before the start of the football season and should not be introduced in the middle of a football season. A number of members have called for us to consider having a sunset clause, which would provide that the legislation would expire after a fixed period unless the Parliament agreed to keep it in force beyond the end of that period. There are significant concerns around attaching a sunset clause to legislation that involves the creation of criminal offences, not least of which is the risk that the sun might set in the period between someone having been convicted and having been sentenced. There are good reasons why, in the main, those clauses do not tend to attach to legislation that deals with criminal offences. However, I understand the concerns that lie behind the request and the Government is actively examining options for reviewing the operation of the legislation over time. We will take into account the concerns that have been expressed and we hope to bring a proposal back to the Parliament before the end of next week. I hope that members will accept that in the spirit in which it is offered.

It will not surprise Margo MacDonald to know that we took that into account in relation to the requests that have been made. There are reasons why the provisions in the 2006 act would not apply in the same way in relation to the issue that we are discussing. I am happy to discuss the issue further with Margo MacDonald if she wishes. There has been a lot of discussion and debate about whether the bill is needed, given the existence of other laws that could be used to prosecute individuals. In committee, the Lord Advocate and I used examples to make the point that there have been real concerns in recent years about the uses of breach of the peace and how they have been narrowed over time. We want the bill to provide further clarity for police and prosecutors by focusing on the core problem of behaviour that incites public disorder. Alison McInnes asked a series of questions, some of which relate to specific figures, and I will make sure that she gets specific answers to those. I say this in the kindest way, but some of her questions suggest that she probably does not know a great deal about current Scots law. She asked what the definition of a reasonable person is in Scots law; everyone who is involved in Scots law has used that terminology endlessly in legislation and it is often integral to the working of the law. It is not defined, precisely because a reasonable person can change in all sorts of circumstances and over time. I undertake to get back to Alison McInnes on the specific issues to which we can easily provide an answer, but some of her questions go way wider than required for discussion of the bill.

I really must get on if I am to deal with points from other members. The second offence addresses threatening communications, including those that incite religious hatred. I believe that it will address a gap in the current law in Scotland when it is compared with legislation elsewhere. A lot of points have been raised. One or two members mentioned freedom of speech. Of course, it was always possible to extend the second offence to include actual speech but, precisely because of the concerns that have been expressed here today—concerns that we share—we did not do so. I hope that members will accept that. John Park made some rather more measured comments about changes in the way in which sectarianism might or might not have been tackled over the years. He must accept that, under the previous Administration, entirely new projects were started. Specific examples are the Iona Community, which worked with prisoners, and the sectarianism in the workplace project, which was funded through Nil by Mouth. For all the anti-sectarianism groups, this year’s financial contribution is more than £0.5 million, and that is working extremely well.

In the two and a half minutes that I have left, I need to deal with what we are talking about today. James Kelly raised a point about the definition of regulated football matches, which is exactly the same as it is in football banning orders. We are deliberately not changing it. After John Lamont’s astonishing diversion into a diatribe against Scottish education, perhaps the Conservatives need to reconsider how they approach sectarianism in Scotland. What he said suggests that they are reckless about whether sectarianism gets stirred up even further. It was a quite astonishing intervention. I hope that I have dealt with John Mason’s freedom-of-speech point. Other members raised the issue of resources. We are in constant discussion with the police about the resources that will be required. Part of that discussion is taking place in the joint action group and announcements will be made on 11 July as a result of that work. I hope that members accept that. I come to Johann Lamont’s perfectly fair point about the extent to which the fallout from such behaviour can extend far beyond football. She is absolutely right and I agree with her. I have not ruled out coming back with further legislation in future if we can identify how best to do that. However, we are using an accelerated timetable to pass the bill and we are trying to keep it as confined and defined as possible. I will have a discussion with Johann Lamont about the future. I must conclude because time is short—I have 20 seconds. I underline the importance of the bill and remind members about the clear and unequivocal support given by Assistant Chief Constable Campbell Corrigan and the on-the-record support for the introduction of the legislation by Celtic Football Club and Rangers Football Club. Members are welcome to look at the record if they want to see the quotes.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that people get the support they need in the civil courts. Members of the public are supported in finding a solicitor by means of telephone and web-based advice services provided by the Scottish Legal Aid Board and the Law Society of Scotland. We are also providing £1.3 million of funding in 2011-12 for a network of civil legal assistance offices in particular areas of Scotland and £1.8 million for both solicitor and lay advice services and a network of in-court advisers. Finally, we legislated in 2010 to give the Scottish Legal Aid Board responsibility for monitoring the availability and accessibility of legal services in Scotland.

If a legal firm representing someone has ceased to operate for whatever reason, the Scottish Legal Aid Board would not terminate an existing grant of civil legal aid—I assume that that has not happened. In such circumstances the person concerned would obviously have to find a new solicitor to represent them but, as I indicated, they would be able to draw on the support of the Scottish Legal Aid Board and the Law Society of Scotland in doing so. I am happy to sit down and discuss with Stuart McMillan how successful or otherwise his attempts thus far have been. I am not sure whether the roll-out of the civil legal assistance offices is a help in this particular case, but we are also targeting funding programmes that could provide assistance to a person lacking representation. I am happy to discuss all that with the member.

I was going to welcome the constructive nature of this afternoon’s debate. It certainly was constructive until Margaret Mitchell’s ugly little rant, to which I will return later. In the main, this is one policy area in which we all tend to agree on the desired outcomes, even if there are occasional differences of opinion on how we should achieve those outcomes. Our arguments tend to be about how we get there rather than where we are trying to get to. I was pleased therefore that many members recognised the significant progress that has already been made. It is not by accident that crime rates are lower than they have been over the past 32 years, that violent crime is at its lowest level for 25 years and that serious assaults, robberies and knife crime are all down substantially. That progress has been achieved only by good government and by the resolute and unwavering commitment of our partners in the police, fire and rescue services, the courts, the prison service, local government and the many organisations that are part of the justice landscape. We need to pay tribute to every one of them. That resolute and unwavering commitment can help to make our country one in which racism, bigotry and sectarianism are not tolerated. I am sure that all members will champion measures, whether legislative or non-legislative, that will help us to create an inclusive society. Much comment has been made about the proposed legislation that will be introduced to Parliament tomorrow and which will be available on the internet first thing on Friday morning. I can reassure members that I have been working hard over the past few weeks, talking to as many external stakeholders as I can reach to ensure that they understand why we are doing what we are doing and what is proposed.

The member is aware that the decision has been made by this Government to press ahead with the legislation for the very good reason that we feel that it is important that it be in place before the start of the new football season. Johann Lamont rose— Johann Lamont seemed to suggest that it was our view that there was some kind of quick fix available. The proposed legislation is not viewed by me or by the rest of the Government as anything of the sort. It is not a quick fix for the problem of sectarianism. It is directed very specifically to deal with some very ugly manifestations of sectarianism that have developed rather alarmingly over the past few months. It is absurd to suggest that we believe that the legislation will solve the problem of sectarianism. Christine Grahame expressed reasonable concerns about the speed with which we are progressing the legislation. Our desire to have the two proposed new offences in place before the start of the new football season is because we want to prevent people from picking up in the new season where they left off in the old one. I can reassure James Kelly that work is being done to ensure that his concerns about preparation are being met. Patrick Harvie raised a number of issues that went considerably further than it is intended that the imminent legislation will ever go. I reassure him in passing that the Gill review deals with the Aarhus convention, so there will be an opportunity to return to that. Quite a few members spoke about reform of the police and fire and rescue services. There is a broad—though perhaps not unanimous—view that maintaining eight police forces and eight fire and rescue services is unsustainable. However, in taking forward reform we must enhance local accountability and ensure that services are more engaged with the diverse communities that they serve. Helen Eadie asked for more detail about the future spend on police. The cabinet secretary would be happy to commit to giving her that detail if the chancellor was prepared to commit to giving us the detail of what his spend for Scotland will be in the next five years. Paul Martin raised a serious issue about disclosure of information to housing providers. That has been examined, but there are ECHR issues. Mr Martin is shaking his head, but that is the advice that we have. Right now, we are experiencing considerable concerns over ECHR issues, and we would not want to court further problems. Many members mentioned victims, including my colleague Roddy Campbell in what was a good maiden speech that I was pleased to hear. There will be legislation on that issue in the current session of Parliament, and the cabinet secretary will be only too happy to hear suggestions that might enhance that legislation. I am sure that many members have to deal with victims’ issues in their constituencies and that some of those give rise to possible aspects that could be considered. That is an important issue. Knife crime remains one of the gravest threats to public safety, but significant progress has been made in getting knives off our streets. Knife crime has fallen by a third, with 3,000 fewer knife crimes per year. However, we need to ensure that further progress is made, which means continuing to focus on the tried and tested methods that have worked and which have brought about that decline. Those methods include the use of stop-and-search powers and raising awareness of the dangers of knife crime among young people. Johann Lamont acknowledged the involvement of the courts in the prosecution of knife crime, but I am slightly puzzled by the way in which Labour Party members continue to use the word “mandatory” and yet seem to allow a discretionary element. I wonder whether there is a misunderstanding about what that all means. I turn to Margaret Mitchell’s woefully misjudged speech. We heard a six-minute rant from her on the issue of knife crime. I listened carefully, but there was not one single positive suggestion from her as to what she or the Tories think should be done. That says it all, really.

I am sure that the cabinet secretary would be pleased to discuss the member’s proposal with her, if it is a serious one, but he certainly will not do so if she delivers it in the tone that she used earlier. Some members, including Mark McDonald, spoke effectively about underlying causes of crime, which include drug and alcohol misuse. Our drugs strategy shifted the emphasis in dealing with drugs abusers from managing addiction to recovery, but far too many lives continue to be damaged by drugs and we will continue to invest in front-line drug treatment services. We have a collective determination to make Scotland safer and stronger, but that will not happen if we do not get to grips with our relationship with alcohol. SNP members made the point that the problems that the police have to deal with on a standard weekend in every town and city in Scotland are almost entirely down to the use of alcohol. The scale of the problem is not in question. There is a broad acceptance throughout the country—and, I hope, in the chamber—that our comprehensive approach is the right way in which to reduce consumption and kick-start the culture change that we need. Nigel Don usefully reminded us that justice and legal affairs are not all about criminal justice. I reassure him that we are well aware of the need to make progress on many of the Scottish Law Commission’s recommendations. I look forward to the Justice Committee convener seeking me out urgently to discuss that. There is no question but that all of us want to make Scotland safer and stronger. As the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said at the start of the debate, we hope that colleagues from across the chamber will engage with us so that we can continue to reduce crime and reoffending and create an inclusive and respectful society. The task ahead is challenging, but we can deliver real improvements if we are innovative and creative and if we work closely with our justice and safer communities partners. I very much hope that today’s debate sets the tone for the work that lies ahead, with the single exception of the tone that we heard in the closing speech from the Tory benches.

I thank Bob Doris for lodging the motion. It comes at an appropriate time and covers issues on which I believe the chamber can and must stand united. I should probably declare an interest—not one that I have had to declare in the register of members’ interests, but an interest as a child of the very mixed Scots-Irish ancestry of which so many of us are children. I, too, have had some of the experiences that others from that background have had to endure. In today’s earlier debate, there was discussion of a number of subjects that are also relevant to the present debate, but I do not want to go back over them. Suffice it to say that there is no doubt that there can be no place for any form of sectarianism, religious prejudice or racism in Scotland. Although sectarianism in Scotland tends to be used as shorthand to refer to the attitude of Catholics to Protestants and vice versa, it can manifest itself in other faith groups as well. Therefore, when we talk about sectarianism we must remember that it is not confined to just those groups. We live in a modern 21st century society in which bigotry, prejudice and discrimination should have no place: all members will be united in their condemnation of sectarian and racist bigotry. Everybody here knows that I have been given the task of driving forward the Scottish Government’s work to tackle sectarianism. I do not underestimate the scale of that task. We are beginning the session with a piece of legislation, but legislation is not the be-all and end-all of this. I know that, as does the Government. Therefore, I ask members to stop pretending that that is somehow our position, because it is not. It is essential that we co-ordinate our activity to make the maximum impact, so taking a holistic and co-ordinated approach will be central to how I drive forward the agenda. Building a society that is based on equality is central to the Administration, which is why we have, against a backdrop of Government cuts, retained funding for equality projects at £20.3 million for 2011-12. Sectarianism and the antisocial behaviour that it inspires have plagued the lives of too many people for too long. Sectarianism is a real and insidious problem that needs to be tackled head on. There is no question but that most of our communities have had enough of it—I would like to say that all our communities have had enough of it, but I fear that some are still too mired in it—and we stand united with them when we say that we will not tolerate such behaviour any more. Furthermore, we should not fall into the trap of believing that the problem is confined to the west of Scotland. It is not, and to think that is too easy a way of pushing it into being a regional issue. The Government has already committed more than £525,000, in the 2011-12 financial year, to support for specific projects that are aimed at tackling sectarianism, and the total amount that we will spend on race, religion and refugee integration projects will be £3.7 million in the same period. In his opening speech, Bob Doris eloquently described what has happened in Scotland in the past few months, specifically surrounding sectarianism in football, which is the reason why the Government wants to move quickly. Tomorrow will see the offensive behaviour at football and threatening communications (Scotland) bill introduced to Parliament. Following a football season that has been marked by some deplorable incidents, we have announced that we seek urgently to clarify and strengthen the law in a couple of crucial areas. The bill will seek to prevent offensive and threatening behaviour that is related to football matches, and to prevent communication of threatening material. We are working to have those provisions in place before the start of the new football season on 23 July. We should be in no doubt that legislation is effective in tackling abusive behaviour that is associated with football. However, because sectarianism is manifest not only in football, as a number of members have commented, my work will only just be starting with that legislation, not ending with it. That is how we intend to go forward. I look forward to continuing to build on the good work that is being delivered through key partners such as sense over sectarianism, the Iona Community, Nil by Mouth and all the schools that are involved in a lot of the work—including Catholic schools, which, in my view, deliver only benefits to Scotland. Patricia Ferguson raised a couple of specific questions relating to schools. The £100,000 for education to which she referred was intended for schools to bid for to fund individual anti-sectarianism projects. We also fully support school-twinning projects. If she wants to talk to me more about aspects of that work, I will be happy to meet her. I now turn to racism. We are committed to addressing the needs of every community in Scottish society, including white communities such as the Irish, English and Polish communities, who are not always perceived as being the victims of racism. We want to ensure that everyone is given an equal opportunity to succeed and achieve in Scotland. The one Scotland campaign continues to deliver that message. We value our engagement with the Irish community, whether it is directly with the Irish diaspora in Scotland or with the diplomatic presence that Ireland has here. Data on Irish ethnicity was collected in the 2011 census and I look forward to the analysis of that information being published in due course. Of course, we need to remember that not all Irish immigrants were Catholic. A significant percentage of the Irish immigration was Protestant, so some care needs to be taken about making assumptions on the basis of ethnicity. In addition, like me, many people will not—despite their family ancestry—describe themselves as being anything but Scottish. We need to keep all of that in our minds when we look at the census information. Scotland suffers from a toxic historical legacy: a combination of anti-Catholicism and anti-immigration sentiment that we are still labouring under the burden of today. We need to get out from under that if we are to ensure that our society is to go ahead. There is a lot more to come and there is a lot more that we are committed to. I look forward to working positively with schools and young people, whom I know have already been among the most eager to positively embrace equalities. We need to be honest about the extent to which society has implicitly, and sometimes explicitly, endorsed and tolerated a level of sectarian sentiment that is quite unacceptable. John Park made that point very eloquently. No one should be in any doubt about the work that we intend to do and I hope that every member of Parliament will work with me as we take matters forward over the coming months and years. Meeting closed at 17:56.

The European Court of Justice has made a judgment that the European Commission’s regulation on the matter imposed excessive requirements on the publication of data for individual beneficiaries—that is, natural persons—which meant that all member states were in breach by publishing payment details of natural persons. It is not technically feasible for many member states, including the United Kingdom, to separate individual beneficiaries from businesses. Following Scottish Government legal advice, the decision was taken temporarily to suspend publication of the payments of all 22,000 beneficiaries on the Government website until a solution can be found that allows us to publish payment details of those beneficiaries that are not deemed to be natural persons. The rural payments and inspections directorate of the Scottish Government will still release information in response to individual freedom of information requests where it is possible to identify that a business is not a natural person.

I thought that I gave a clear, calm explanation of the current position in respect of the legal advice that the Government received. I do not know whether Labour Party members are suggesting that we simply ignore legal advice. I have undertaken and continue to undertake to investigate why there is a disparity between what is happening south of the border and north of the border, although I gently remind Labour Party members that, the last time I looked, we still had an independent legal system in Scotland, and it may well be that the advice is different. I am very sorry that George Foulkes adopted the tone that he did.

I will now confirm to the Parliament the package of proposals and policies that will form the backbone of action to reduce emissions over the next decade. I am grateful to the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee for leading scrutiny of the draft report on proposals and policies, and to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee for its contribution. The publication of the RPP marks the completion of the first period of focused action following the passage of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. We have put in place the annual markers and set the strategic direction required to take us to the interim target of cutting carbon emissions by 42 per cent by 2020 and, ultimately, to our long-term target of cutting them by 80 per cent by 2050. We have shown that it is possible to hit every one of our annual targets to 2022, but it will not be easy. Current policies will get us most of the way, but the RPP shows that we need additional measures. The committees’ calls for evidence asked whether any proposals or policies were not included in the RPP that should have been. After considering evidence for 60 days, the committees did not identify any additional proposals or policies in their reports. I might be the minister with responsibility for climate change, but we need to remember that, as Stewart Stevenson was often heard to remark, every minister is a climate change minister. That shrewd observation is borne out by the spread of policies and proposals in the RPP. As required by the 2009 act, we have also prepared a public engagement strategy, an energy efficiency action plan, and guidance on the duties of public bodies. Our land use strategy will be published shortly. In addition to our statutory duties, we have also prepared a low-carbon economic strategy and a zero waste plan. With the publication of the final RPP earlier this week, we now enter a new period in which we focus on delivering the programme of action that is required to continue to drive down emissions. The amendments that I have made in finalising the RPP respond primarily to the hard issues that the Parliament raised during scrutiny. A written statement was laid alongside the RPP that explains in detail the nature of the representations that were made and the changes that correspond to those representations. If members are interested in specific changes, they should read that written statement; I cannot cover all the issues today. I will, however, cover the two most significant issues that arose: first, the substantive content of the RPP, or the package of proposals and policies; and, secondly, the delivery and monitoring of policies and proposals. The Parliament did not offer any recommendations for additional proposals or policies and the RPP demonstrates that our emissions targets can be met with some room for manoeuvre. However, the committees’ reports recommended that we identify additional proposals or policies if the existing package proves to be insufficient. The Scottish Government will act responsibly and, in that scenario, we will consider whether policies and proposals should be expanded or accelerated, or whether additional ones will be required. I have amended the RPP to further emphasise that point. That applies to all the policies and proposals in the RPP, including the scenario in which the European Union does not tighten its own target to 30 per cent. Scotland is close to the discussions in Europe and we continue to call for a stronger EU target. We will also continue to lobby the United Kingdom Government to match Scotland’s ambition. Before we start considering whether additional measures might be required in future, however, we must not underestimate the challenge of delivering the proposals and policies in the RPP in a time of budget constraints—caused, in large part, by the spending decisions of the UK Government. We will have to be creative but, if we are to maintain the enthusiasm and commitment of the people of Scotland to reduce emissions, we need to ensure that the effort that we expect of them is fair. We published our public engagement strategy in December, but we still have a long way to go in helping people to understand the role that they might have to play in meeting our targets, whether voluntarily or through regulation, as individuals, or collectively in whatever organisation or business they might be. The 2009 act provides for two Ps in the RPP: proposals and policies. The provision for proposals reflects that, in some areas, we are stepping into the unknown and looking 10 or more years into the future. We will keep the viability of proposals under review. Just because something has not yet been committed to does not mean that it will not be implemented in the future. Equally, just because something is there at the moment does not mean that it will be considered to be appropriate in the future. Another question raised in many representations was about what happens after the final RPP is laid and how we will get down to the business of reducing emissions. The RPP is an overview document and is not intended to be a detailed delivery plan for energy, homes and communities, business, transport, rural land use and waste. The delivery of policies and the assessment of proposals will be integrated into the policy process for the relevant sector. That harks back to the comment that I made about every minister having to be a climate change minister. With that in mind, I have not amended the RPP with further detail on how we will take forward individual actions, but I have considerably revised chapter 9 of the report to set out the common issues that will be relevant across all sectors as we implement measures. Full details are in my written statement, but some examples of those issues are the scope to deliver multiple benefits—to health, communities or the economy—alongside reducing emissions; assumptions about the effectiveness of voluntary approaches and the implications of alternative, regulatory approaches; best value, cost-effectiveness and potential sources of funding; and the role of different delivery bodies and sectors. Policy officials in each portfolio will work together with delivery partners, including, importantly, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, to develop an appropriate approach for each policy and proposal over the next few months. We should put in place some early warning signals on softer measures to ensure that we can strengthen or compensate for any that do not achieve the intended outcome, but there is no single approach to determining the point at which a voluntary or incentive-based measure may be insufficient to deliver the required reduction in emissions. The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 sets out a robust framework for monitoring and reporting on annual targets and assessing progress with measures in this and future RPPs—I remind members that work on the next RPP will have to begin before the end of the year. To complement that, we are developing a low-carbon management system, which will be central to our internal monitoring of practical actions to reduce emissions. That has evolved further since it was first mentioned in the draft RPP, and the RPP has been updated to reflect that. This Government’s purpose is to focus public services on creating a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish, by increasing sustainable economic growth. One of the points of agreement to emerge from the Parliament’s scrutiny of the draft RPP was that action to reduce climate change should deliver more than just emissions reductions. I whole-heartedly agree with that. The low-carbon market is already worth £8.8 billion to Scotland and by 2015 the figure could rise to more than £12 billion, which is over 10 per cent of the Scottish economy. By 2020, there could be 130,000 low-carbon jobs in Scotland, which would represent a doubling of jobs to over 5 per cent of the Scottish workforce. Energy efficiency measures will lead to lower levels of fuel poverty and warmer homes, and greater levels of active travel and improved air quality will bring health and lifestyle benefits. In conclusion, the RPP confirms a package of proposals and policies that continues momentum in 2011-12 and shows how annual targets can be met each year to 2022. That package will form the forward work programme for this and successive Governments over the next 10 years. This parliamentary session saw the introduction of the world-leading Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. The next parliamentary session will witness a transition to a low-carbon society. A low-carbon society makes sense for consumers, for business and for public services. It makes sense for Scotland.

Dearie me. I say to Labour members that their constant negativity and carping does them absolutely no favours whatsoever. In all that, I did not hear a single positive comment from Sarah Boyack that suggested anything that would, in practical terms, be delivered by Labour. Sarah Boyack mentioned the EU. Let me be clear about this. Where the EU is going with its targets continues to be a contentious issue. The RPP makes it clear that we will consider whether existing policies and proposals may be accelerated or expanded and whether additional policies and proposals may be required if the EU does not get to 30 per cent. Can we please not give away the argument before we get there? At this week’s meeting of European environment ministers, an expanded group of seven countries, led by the UK, signalled its support for the EU to increase its greenhouse gas emissions reduction target to 30 per cent. Greece, Sweden and Portugal are now on side for the first time, alongside the UK, Spain, Denmark and Germany. Let us not give away the argument and make it easy for those who want to gainsay the 30 per cent target to turn around and say that we do not need to set it. If we want the EU to set it, we must keep up the pressure. It is pretty obvious that Labour has nothing positive to contribute to the debate.

That is a fair point to raise. Public engagement is at an early stage, but we are going about it in a concrete and determined way. The point that Jackson Carlaw has raised in respect of where we need to be with that is precisely why the Government has continued the climate challenge fund, which we have found to be a very good mechanism for getting money right down into the grass roots to do the things that we need to do. Just the other day, I attended a public engagement stakeholder meeting that I had specifically asked to be set up. It involved people who are doing things at the level of that interface right down at the grass roots. Rather than sit around the same tables with the usual suspects who already know the script and what needs to be said, we need to ask what obstacles and challenges require to be addressed when we are getting the message across. That was a useful meeting in identifying where some of the specific obstacles and challenges lie. We will now take that information away and work out how we can overcome those obstacles and challenges. I will be honest: a lot of work needs to be done. Although the Government wants to stick, as far as possible, to a voluntary approach, there is some regulation built in and we may have to come back to other regulation in the future. Nevertheless, we want to win hearts and minds first, if possible.

I do not think that the stance is dismissive at all; I think that it is pragmatic. The debate is on-going at the EU level and we must be engaged at that level to press for the 30 per cent target. If the EU falls short—I know that there is a specific point of disagreement between two EU commissioners, which shows that the EU is not as joined-up on these issues as we would wish—we will need to readdress the issue. I remind members that the work on the next RPP must begin by the end of the year. We would be looking for proposals and suggestions from everybody. I do not for a minute expect the committee or anyone else—ourselves included—to be the sole repository of wisdom on this matter. However, it is a bit much for some parties to criticise the lack of proposals and policies without generating any ideas of their own.

We ought to be clear that the climate change duties of public bodies are statutory and arise from climate change legislation. As a rule, statutory obligations are not repeated in single outcome agreements. I appreciate that single outcome agreements are at a relatively early stage in terms of people’s understanding of what they might expect in that regard. Single outcome agreements focus on local actions to deliver local outcomes. Acting on climate change involves a partnership between the Scottish Government and local authorities and we are working closely with local authorities to develop guidance that will assist them to comply with the statutory duties that were placed on them by this Parliament.

COSLA has been particularly helpful to me in the months since I took over this portfolio. Although there was some suggestion that COSLA would come out in opposition to the targets that the Parliament set, that is not in fact the position that it is taking, and it is being clear about that. I ought to clarify to the chamber that the draft public bodies guidance was published by the end of December, although the final version was not able to be published until later. Those are deadlines that were included in the legislation. At the moment, we meet regularly with the public sector as a whole, which includes COSLA, to discuss issues that affect all parts of the public sector. The member might be interested to know that those meetings are co-chaired by me and the appropriate COSLA representative. We are operating on the basis of an equal partnership. It is for local authorities to decide how best to meet the duties that this Parliament placed directly on them.

The member might be aware that there has been no agreement on the inclusion of those figures in international reporting. We are currently working hard to decide how to incorporate them into our own methodology, and we hope that a decision will be made—which I am sure the member will want to see—at Durban this year. Funding has been made available to SNH and the RSPB to carry out the necessary research to establish how practical restoration will be in areas in Scotland where it might need to take place. However, members must be aware that there are difficulties with reconciling different research, which shows that the possibilities are not agreed across the board. The Scottish Agricultural College has come out with figures that are very different from those of the International Union for Conservation of Nature, so we need to resolve some of the issues that that raises. Money is also available through the Scotland rural development programme. The RSPB has, in addition to the £150,000 that we gave it for the peatland projects, received another £370,000 in SRDP funding for such projects. When that research is done, we will be in a better place to make decisions about taking forward more widespread projects with regard to restoration.

A considerable amount of that is in the hands of the Parliament itself. One of the difficulties that we encountered with the first round was the timing, because of the deadlines that were put in place for the legislation on delivery and the way that that worked in relation to the budget process. If there is a better way to do it—which I think is probably the case—it would be helpful if we could sit down and talk about those things across the board, because the Parliamentary Bureau will need to make a decision on how that might be managed. I remind members that we will very quickly enter the next round of the RPP. It is difficult to see how one can always keep the budget process totally separate from processes such as that, given the way in which the Parliament works on an annual basis.

This Government has done a great deal in respect of insulation over the piece. Since 2009 we have enabled 380,000 homes throughout Scotland to be offered energy efficiency advice, discounted or free insulation measures—which includes the insulation that Marlyn Glen mentioned—and interest-free loans, together with referrals to other schemes. That was complemented by an extra £10 million in 2010-11 in respect of the universal home insulation scheme. There is money, and it is being rolled out. In fact, insulation measures have arguably been one of the biggest successes in terms of alerting people and getting them to understand the advantages of doing such things and how important they are. Of course, against a background of rising energy costs, I guess that there will be even greater interest in the provisions; moves down those roads are even more likely. The issue that the member raises is an interesting example of where we can put forward a policy that will achieve the climate change objectives that we are trying to achieve and demonstrably save people money at the same time. We will therefore have a much bigger win in public engagement terms than might otherwise have been the case.

Once again, we are dealing with nothing but negativity. An enormous amount of work is being done. Can more be done? Of course it can. Over the coming years, the work will undoubtedly be done, especially if this Government is returned. I make an absolute guarantee of that. Much has been delivered, including substantial funding in the 2011-12 budget. I would have expected Patrick Harvie to have welcomed that, but instead he attacks the Government on the matter. We have delivered a great many programmes, including active travel and the freight facilities grant that was requested. We have looked at a number of different things and made huge amounts of investment. I appreciate that the point of view of the Green party is that nothing that any other party says or does about transport is satisfactory, but the truth of the matter is that we are making substantial changes. We are beginning to shift people’s perceptions, which is the first and most important part of getting them to change their behaviour.

The point is an interesting one. It brings into play the much bigger question of the powers that are available to the Scottish Parliament to effect some of the changes that it might wish to make. The issue that the member raises is the subject of current and on-going dialogue. That is the most polite way I can put it.

I think that no new estimate has been developed, but the figure is being kept under review for reasons that the member will understand. The issue is bedevilling the European Union scenario, where the figure is seen as a cost, and benefits tend not to be balanced off against costs. This Government wants to see the benefits that arise. Although we do not have an update on the £8 billion, we are very conscious of the matter.

On 25 February 2011, Scottish Government officials issued a draft lease to the Gob Sgurabhal wind turbine project co-ordinator for consideration. I apologise for any mispronunciation of the Gaelic.

I commend the crofters on their initiative, but I advise members that having wind turbines on croft land is a relatively new approach to the use of such land, which meant that there was no off-the-peg lease to use and that some thought had to be given to the initiative. The initiative deals with issues of high energy costs and fits in with the Government’s overall policy on renewables. Sales or leases by the Scottish Government are normally required to be advertised. We took time to consider that but, because of the potential for the community group, we deemed it acceptable under the public finance manual to proceed under private provisions, which is now happening. We will negotiate a fair and equitable rental value to allow this exciting project to provide financial benefits to the community, as well as to meet the Government’s requirements as landlord.

I think that I have already said that. I add that I expect that there will be many more similar applications, once people see the success of the project and the enormous benefits that the approach can bring to very rural and peripheral areas.

Members should be aware that the catching up of game birds in the close season is currently illegal. However, it happens, and in effect a blind eye is turned to the practice. Our view was that that is not a sensible way to proceed. I commend the stakeholders who raised the issue at stages 1 and 2 for taking a constructive approach and coming to reasonable agreement on the appropriate time periods for catching up in the close season. I hope that the inclusion of grey partridge in the 28-day period will, in a practical way, support and encourage an increase in grey partridge numbers. Therefore, I am happy to support amendments 39 to 41 and 46 to 50 inclusive. The Government does not see a difficulty with amendment 46. I turn briefly to amendment 42. Licences could be granted for the purpose of preventing the spread of disease. However, the approach in the amendment seems practical and appropriately limited. The animal health and welfare considerations that currently apply to such treatment, whether in open season or under licence, would equally apply under the amendment. The same is the case for ensuring the appropriate withdrawal periods before treated birds can enter the food chain. Those issues do not specifically relate to medicating in the close season. I am content to support John Scott’s amendment 42, together with the rest of the amendments in the group.

As I said at stage 2, I have not issued any licences to do what Peter Peacock’s amendments seek to prevent, but I acknowledge that the issue is difficult. I will not repeat the entire debate that we had in the committee, but we must note that we are talking about a balancing issue. On the one hand, we must note the economic benefits and the benefits relating to biodiversity that shooting often brings to rural Scotland; on the other hand, as Peter Peacock has pointed out, it is difficult to reconcile the licensed control of native species such as buzzards and sparrowhawks with protecting non-native species such as pheasants and partridges. It is already the case that a variety of other options must be fully exhausted before licences are considered, including the relocation of pens or the use of deterrent devices and diversionary feeding. I cannot ignore the backdrop to the debate, which is wildlife crime. It is clear that the actions of a few are adversely affecting the majority, but the amendments would provide a relatively inflexible basis for moving forward. Amendment 61 would essentially prevent any such licences for the protection of game birds from being issued, given the requirement for “secure housing”, as people will know if they are aware of what the actual practice is in rural Scotland. Amendments 52, 54 and 55 would send a strong message about the birds that Parliament deems untouchable for the purposes of preventing serious damage to livestock. That would stymie any further balanced discussion of the issue. I accept that amendment 54 refers to the “power to vary Schedules”, but would that ever be used in practice, save perhaps to add the birds that Peter Peacock may have erroneously omitted? The brief discussion that we have had today again confirms to me that the right decision has been taken to date. Given that, I wonder why members cannot continue to leave the matter to the discretion of ministers. For those reasons, I do not support the amendments in the group.

I appreciate that Peter Peacock has taken on board some of my comments about his stage 2 amendment. However, the result is amendments that are twice as long. I am not being flippant; I believe that it was almost inevitable because he is attempting to untangle very complex land management and ownership arrangements. However, what we have been left with is a set of byzantine procedures; I am certain that even if the ministers of the day were inclined to use them, they would be unable to. Perhaps in an attempt to deal with the concerns that I raised about the proposal for a sus law at stage 2, the trigger for the process relates to a link between recurring land management practices and unfavourable conservation status. However, that is just as problematic. Aside from the process being triggered by “reasonable cause to consider”—which is a lower standard of proof than even the civil standard of proof—the conservation status of a species is necessarily monitored on a large scale, either nationally or according to defined natural heritage zones, of which there are 21 in Scotland. In practice, a link between recurring land management practices on an estate that limited the presence of the birds that are listed by Peter Peacock—which, I note, do not include the goshawk, although that is one of the five raptors that are currently UK and Scottish wildlife crime priority species for persecution—and unfavourable conservation status would be unworkable, as John Scott has said. I do not know how the issue could be resolved. Let us consider the western Southern Uplands and inner Solway natural heritage zone, which includes areas in Karen Gillon’s, Elaine Murray’s and the Presiding Officer’s constituencies—you may be interested to know that, Presiding Officer. Would all land managers in that zone have to be notified? I am sure that that was not Peter Peacock’s intention. However, if we cannot get over the first hurdle, amendments 44 and 45, which rely on the process, are equally unworkable.

I was going to come on to the naming and shaming aspect of the debate. It is important that we are very careful when we move into that territory. Anyone is free to draw conclusions as they please, but the presence of a poisoned carcase is not irrefutable proof that those who are responsible for managing the land on which it is found were also responsible for the death of the bird. The investigation of crimes is the responsibility of the police and determining guilt is the responsibility of the courts. Under vicarious liability, the bill would allow the courts to determine the guilt of a land manager if his employee had committed an offence. I take the intention of Peter Peacock’s amendment 43 in the broadest sense and fully appreciate the intention of those who have put forward proposals for additional measures to vicarious liability, whether as a safeguard or a threat. Indeed, as others, including Liam McArthur, have mentioned, the penalties associated with vicarious liability may not prove a sufficient deterrent. The bill does not deal with the existing penalties in the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981; however, PAW Scotland would have my total support for a review of the penalties relating to wildlife crime. Those penalties must be considered in the wider criminal justice context, however, and that should be borne in mind.

I am well aware that snaring evokes strong feeling among the public and members of the Parliament. Most of us do not like to contemplate predator control, but it is a reality and a necessary element of responsible countryside management.

With respect, it might be advisable if the member waited until I said a little more before she tries to intervene. Irene Oldfather does not go as far as saying that we should not control predators.

I am sorry if I picked up the wrong person who was trying to intervene. I ask Irene Oldfather to consider the consequences of amendment 5. Crofters, gamekeepers and farmers throughout Scotland need to be able to protect their crops and livestock. If amendment 5 is agreed to, they will still have to do that, but Irene Oldfather would leave them with no other option but lamping and shooting. Unfortunately, that would have one of two effects: either it would force crofters, gamekeepers and farmers to shoot in what might be less than ideal situations; or it would force them to stand by and watch the damage to, or destruction or death of, their crops and livestock. For some, the damage might cost them the viability of their business and their livelihood.

We are persuaded by the evidence that we get from the vast majority of estate managers that snaring has to happen. It is not just estates, of course—there is a requirement to use snaring more widely. I am not prepared to put people in the position of having a much more difficult process for controlling predators to protect their livelihoods, so I do not support amendment 5. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee unanimously recognised the stark reality as part of its detailed consideration of the arguments in evidence. Therefore, we must shift our focus to ensuring high standards of snaring practice, with animal welfare at the forefront. Animal welfare should be central to accredited training. Ministers would seek the input of Government vets and the constructive input of the SSPCA in considering accredited training. In addition, I emphasise that, as new technology becomes available and workable, all operators will have to be trained in its use. Liam McArthur’s amendments 14, 23 and 24, which provide for record keeping, are reasonable. There are obvious benefits to ensuring that unforeseen circumstances, such as those that he described, do not result in harm to animal welfare because of a lack of information about where snares are set. I therefore support amendments 14, 23 and 24. I cannot support Elaine Murray’s amendments 15 and 18, as they would have the presumably unintentional effect of creating a thought crime. The amendments would not limit the consideration of alternative methods to only legal methods. Similarly, I do not support amendments 17, 21 and 51, which relate to the revocation of snare numbers following conviction, as they would amount to a de facto licensing scheme. A licensing scheme was not consulted on by Government, not subject to evidence taking at stage 1 and not proposed at stage 2. It is an entirely new and significant issue for us to be first considering at stage 3 of the bill, given the scrutiny that has already been given to the snaring provisions. Amendments 17, 21 and 51 are not supported by any detail that gives clarity and assurance on how the scheme might operate, which means that it is all left to orders.

As I said, the amendments are not supported by any detail that gives clarity and assurance on how the scheme might operate, which means that it is all left to orders. What Karen Gillon and her colleagues propose would create a worse mess than we have at present. From the way in which the amendments are currently drafted, the only thing of which we can be sure is that they would cut across the courts’ sentencing powers. We have courts to do the type of things that members are talking about. The amendments would provide an additional layer of penalty, irrespective of the courts’ view of appropriate sentencing. I do not support amendments 17, 21 and 51.

If members on the Labour side of the chamber do not think that the courts are the right place to make decisions about guilt or innocence, I am sorry to hear that.

Elaine Murray might wish to know that I support her amendments 16 and 20, because they leave to accredited training something that it was proposed at stage 2 should be in the hands of the police. That is entirely reasonable. All the amendments on snaring reviews go much further than the committee’s recommendation, on which the Government has already acted by lodging an amendment at stage 2. Elaine Murray’s amendments 1A, 1B and 1C would provide, on the basis of the suggested timescales for training provided by the committee, a maximum of a year before a review. I consider that to be far too short a timescale in which to gather the relevant data, research and information for such a review. We should also note, given recent discussions, that we cannot be certain about future lifetimes of the Parliament. In contrast, I am pleased to support Bill Wilson’s amendments 1, 2 3 and 4 to provide for future reviews of snaring beyond 2016. That is in keeping with what the committee recommended and with the amendment that I lodged in accordance with that recommendation, and it repeats the period of review. It is a sensible approach, bearing in mind the technological developments that will undoubtedly continue to emerge and the need to gather proper data and research. I should also note that amendment 22 in my name is a technical renumbering amendment. I urge the chamber to act in accordance with the lead committee’s conclusions on the issue, to ensure that those crofters, gamekeepers and farmers for whom snaring is the only option to protect their livestock and crops are not stripped of their ability to do so by this Parliament, and to leave it to the courts to make the right determinations about guilt and innocence.

Given the commendable brevity of John Scott’s remarks, it would ill behove me to speak for longer. We support the amendments in the group. Amendment 6 agreed to. Section 18—Licences under the 1981 Act Amendment 52 moved—[Peter Peacock].

Peter Peacock’s amendment 53 deals with two distinct issues, so I will address it in two parts, both of which relate to animals only. The first part seeks to replace the new licensable purposes in the bill with the wording of the habitats directive. At stage 2, I asked for practical examples of how the new licensable purpose would fall short to justify such a change. I have received no practical examples. Therefore, the problem that the first part of amendment 53 seeks to address is, as far as I can tell, totally theoretical. I can understand that it might appear appealing to some people to have the same construction in European and domestic legislation, but the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 does not transpose the habitats directive; that is done elsewhere. Therefore, it would be unwise to accept an amendment that suggests that that is what the 1981 act does. Peter Peacock is correct in that the policy objectives behind the new licensable purpose in the bill are the same as those that are contained in the directive. I hope that he will take some comfort from that. The second part of amendment 53 seeks to change our licensing system in relation to animals, and its significance as part of the amendment should not be overlooked. No justification for the change has been given that is based on actual problems with the current system and I do not accept that it would not impose an unnecessary burden. Any change to the current and well-established legal position of species licensing on animals that was not consulted upon is bound to introduce a new burden. In addition, it would require considerable work by SNH to establish favourable conservation status for all the animals that are covered. The second part of amendment 53 would affect every animal licence issued and may even, in the short term, bring current systems to a grinding halt. We have heard no justification for it as part of the Parliament’s scrutiny of the bill. I do not support the amendment.

Elaine Murray is correct in saying that we would consider the delegation of licensing functions to local authorities only where they relate to planning, so I have no issue with supporting amendments 25 and 36. Any delegation would follow consultation with all interested parties. However, I am a little nonplussed by those local authorities that say that they do not have the expertise to deal with species licences. Where a development affects European protected species, they are bound to consider whether any disturbance to the species will be authorised by a licence granted by the Scottish ministers for the purposes of the derogation in article 16 of the habitats directive. I hope that the local authorities that are in that position will have a look at their processes. I support both amendments in the group.

Members will have noticed the commendable restraint with which the Government has approached stage 3. Amendment 26 is the first major Government amendment that we are considering this afternoon. Members are well aware that, during consideration of the bill in the Parliament, there was much discussion about and frank exchanges of views on wildlife crime. It seems that members would value a regular account of wildlife crime, and amendment 26 will deliver that in a flexible and appropriate way. There are two points to make about amendment 26. First, it will allow ministers to provide an annual account of the scale of wildlife crime, to relate that to the UK wildlife crime priorities in Scotland, and to explore other issues of concern at the time. There is flexibility to ensure that the key issues of the day can be addressed in the annual report. We need to remember that, in 10 or 20 years, the landscape of wildlife crime could be very different. Indeed, given the on-going work to address priority issues, I hope that the same issues will not continue to blot Scotland’s landscape. Secondly, the report could be much more than a short set of statistics. I think that we all agree that we would want to see crime figures from the police and an account of prosecutions, but the report could and should go further. Relevant and timely research that provides context and advice that provides direction to all those who are involved in the prevention, investigation and prosecution of wildlife crime would be welcome inclusions in the report. I move amendment 26.

I appreciate the impetus for Liam McArthur’s amendment 7, so although I believe it to be of limited value in widening the scope for prosecutions under the 1981 act, I am content to support it. I also appreciate that there may be a desire to tinker with the Government’s vicarious liability provisions to see whether they could somehow be stretched further. However, the vicarious liability provisions have been carefully constructed to target only those offences that are relevant to raptor persecution, which means that extending them to offences under section 1(2) of the 1981 act is problematic. That would not provide the right fit with the other underlying offences that the vicarious liability provisions cover. Section 1(2) is more likely to apply to those who take birds or eggs from the wild for breeding purposes than to those who kill or take wild birds. There is not the same link to persecution on which the vicarious liability provisions are predicated. Extending the scope of the provisions in the way that Liam McArthur has proposed would go beyond those people and scenarios that vicarious liability is aimed at. I can understand that he may have been advised that extending the provisions to offences under section 1(2) of the 1981 act would provide an important addition to the fight against bird persecution, but that was not the conclusion that we reached with the police and the Crown Office during the development of the vicarious liability provisions. Apart from anything else, the complexity involved in developing due diligence guidance for a much wider group of people would be hugely increased. The trade-off between the very small chance of an extra charge being brought under section 1(2) of the 1981 act, in addition to the offences that are covered by vicarious liability, and the possibility of unintended consequences arising from that change is not a good one, and I am not willing to take that risk. However, I agree to the proposal that PAWS should in future review vicarious liability and look at art and part. We are conscious that the issue will have to be constantly monitored.

I have concerns about including a provision in the bill that could extend police powers without there having been any consultation. The significance of such a step should not be underestimated. At stage 2, I outlined issues of accountability, impartiality and independence that would require serious and considered deliberation. However, anything that might aid the enforcement of wildlife crime legislation is worthy of proper consultation so, in response to amendment 56, I give this Government’s commitment to consult on the issue in the future. I therefore ask Peter Peacock to withdraw amendment 56 and to allow for further consideration and proper consultation on this important issue.

Amendment 28 provides a vision for the Deer (Scotland) Act 1996. As admirable as that vision might be, it nevertheless neglects the other issues that the 1996 act covers. The amendment has the benefit of not engaging European convention on human rights issues, but that is because—with the best of intentions—it is meaningless. However, it is not benignly meaningless. It has the potential to create disputes between deer managers in the belief that they should take certain actions, and such disputes could ultimately end up in court. Amendment 28 would not add any clarity to the current deer management structure. I re-emphasise what I said at stage 2, which still applies despite Robin Harper’s attempts at refinement: the code cannot be a one-size-fits-all code; it will apply in different ways to different people in different circumstances. Amendment 28 should be resisted and I do not support it. I turn to the amendments in the name of Liam McArthur on the code of practice. I am aware that there is some anxiety about what the code might cover. Since August 2010, SNH has been developing the code of practice with input from a wide range of stakeholders. The views that have been expressed in Parliament and among the different interests support the need to move forward on the code so that it can provide the clarity that we all seek. I have, therefore, asked SNH to provide ministers with a code of practice no later than six months from today. That will give Parliament the opportunity to consider the code and proceeds toward approval in autumn 2011. I hope that that satisfies Liam McArthur. It is with that in mind that I do not support amendments 30 to 33. The bill currently provides a good steer as to what is expected of the code and those who are currently involved in its development. I do not think that making that compulsory, as amendment 30 would do, or setting out further areas for inclusion, as amendments 31, 32 and 33 would do, would add anything to the process. The code will include recommended practice for sustainable deer management. That clearly includes collaboration, which is mentioned in amendment 33, as well as consideration of whether culling is needed and, if so, the need for an agreed cull plan, which is dealt with by amendment 32. The code should also address other management measures such as deer fencing. I am happy to support amendment 8, which provides for review of the code of practice by SNH from time to time. However, I do not agree with the premise behind amendment 34, which would fundamentally change the intervention processes and shift the focus from outcomes and impacts to process. Either the process has not worked and an adverse impact is likely or has occurred, in which case section 7 will be engaged anyway, or no adverse impact is likely or has occurred, in which case a failure in process alone should not be a ground for intervention. If there is no adverse impact, why would a failure in process be used as justification to intervene? I do not support amendment 34. I understand that there are concerns that the newly refined intervention powers in sections 7 and 8 of the 1996 act are limited to application on SSSIs, but that is not the case. SNH can consider using the intervention powers that are contained in sections 7 and 8 on any land, as defined in the 1996 act. In the past, the Deer Commission was hampered in its use of intervention powers by clunky procedures without clear timelines. The bill improves those powers and I expect that they will allow SNH to take action as and when required. I mentioned at stage 2 that the merger of the Deer Commission with SNH made me optimistic about the future of deer management. That feeling has been bolstered by a positive reaction from deer management groups on the approach that has been taken in the bill. They are fully seized of what is expected of them in the coming years. I support amendment 8 but not the other amendments in the group. I hope that Liam McArthur is satisfied with what he has heard in respect of the issues that he is concerned about.

Sika deer, which were introduced to this country in the mid-1800s, can, as Jamie McGrigor has identified, interbreed with our native red deer to produce hybrids, which poses a significant threat to the native red deer. In addition, where populations are high, they can have a serious impact on woodlands and can cause accidents on roads. The risk that they pose to our native red deer has resulted in the Scottish ministers establishing refugia islands for red deer on the islands off the west coast. I understand that the current structure of the Deer (Scotland) Act 1996 has not presented SNH and its predecessors with any obstacles in dealing with sika where they are causing adverse impacts. That said, amendment 58 is sensible and reflects the current practical situation on the ground. Furthermore, it does not change the species that are relevant to the remainder of the 1996 act. For that reason, and noting the consistency with the approach in the bill on invasive non-native species, I support amendments 57 and 58. Amendment 57 agreed to. Amendment 58 moved—[Jamie McGrigor]—and agreed to. Amendment 29 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to. Section 23—Deer management code of practice Amendments 30 to 33 not moved. Amendment 8 moved—[Liam McArthur]—and agreed to. Amendments 9 to 12 moved—[John Scott]—and agreed to. Section 24—Control agreements and control schemes etc Amendment 34 not moved. Section 25—Deer: close seasons etc Amendment 35 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to. Section 26—Register of persons competent to shoot deer etc

The decision on whether a compulsory competence system should be introduced, and on what form it should take, is ultimately one for ministers rather than anyone else. However, it is important that there is industry input into the process. Therefore, I support amendment 13. Whether ministers ever get to the point of considering compulsory competence is very much in the hands of those organisations that wrote to me, offering to further competence on a voluntary basis. I understand that they have conducted discussions with organisations such as Lantra, which is a positive step. I am happy to endorse Mike Rumbles’s comments regarding stakeholder involvement and the work that they have done. Any compulsory system should be based on existing qualifications and should include a practical element. There should be a system of recognition for equivalent foreign qualifications. I see no point in reinventing the wheel. Uptake is the key issue. I very much look forward to seeing the industry make good progress.

I share Jamie McGrigor’s concern about the increase in road accidents involving deer, particularly as deer come down from the hills and are more in and about urban areas. We have touched on the issue in the bill, which requires SNH to take account of public safety in exercising its deer functions, and that includes the issue that Jamie McGrigor raises. I reassure him that there is SNH best practice on the humane dispatch of deer, including following a vehicle collision. In most cases, the advice is to call the police. Irrespective of whether people are aware of the advice, I hope that any motorist or their passenger who is faced with such a situation would do just that. It is difficult to see what else one could expect the average motorist or their passenger to do, given that most people do not have veterinary experience, which is really the only other thing that might be helpful. Therefore, although I share Jamie McGrigor’s sentiment, I do not think that amendment 59 would further the issue in any practical way, so I do not support it. However, I recognise the concern that is being expressed and share it.

The biodiversity strategy could no doubt be improved but, as I pointed out in the stage 2 discussions, the strategy in its current form already touches on the issues that Robin Harper’s amendment proposes to list in statute. Listing specific policy areas that the strategy must cover risks compartmentalising biodiversity to those areas. The UN Convention on Biological Diversity was revised in Nagoya in October last year and now emphasises the need to mainstream biodiversity across Government policy. We should all support mainstreaming, but I doubt that amendment 37 is the way to achieve it. Setting out such requirements in the strategy will be a bureaucratic process. It will find itself quickly out of date, and it is not where we can best focus our efforts. To mainstream biodiversity successfully, different areas across the public sector must actively consider how biodiversity impacts on their policy and how they impact on biodiversity. Effort spent aligning policy documents in a perpetual cycle will be of limited benefit at best and a bureaucratic exercise at worst. For those reasons, I do not support amendment 37. I turn to amendment 60, in the name of Peter Peacock. I note his acknowledgement of the Government’s generosity in this entire process. I recognise that Audit Scotland and others have rightly identified the lack of a reporting requirement in the biodiversity duty as a significant weakness. Of course, the benefit of introducing a reporting requirement to the duty has to be balanced against the negative impact of adding bureaucratic burdens such as that proposed in amendment 37, particularly in the current financial climate. By allowing public bodies to use existing reporting structures, I am pleased that amendment 60 strikes the right balance and will encourage public bodies to mainstream actions for biodiversity within their activities, which really ought to satisfy what Robin Harper is trying to achieve. For that reason, I am able to support amendment 60, which might not come as an enormous surprise to anybody.

I am pleased to open the debate on the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill. I thank the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for its close scrutiny of the bill and its excavation of complex issues, in which it navigated what was often conflicting evidence. At the end of the legislative process, a great many people must be thanked. They include the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee, which contributed to the lead committee’s scrutiny. Stakeholders’ significant contribution to the bill should also be noted. A wide range of people have invested much time. We should acknowledge that we in the Parliament demand that of people throughout civic Scotland. The key word in the debate is balance. The Government has tried to produce a bill that maintains a fair and reasonable balance between the sometimes conflicting demands of a wide range of interests, some of which diametrically oppose one another. In the course of the bill process, I feared that some suggestions and amendments would upset that balance. However, I am happy to say that the Parliament took a constructive approach to the issues and conflicts that were before us. I hope that we can all agree that, although the bill will not satisfy all the interests all the time, it will nevertheless satisfy most interests most of the time. That is an achievement in itself. From the outset of the original consultation to the lobbying e-mails, letters, persuasive press releases and briefings that have been received in the past few days, views have been expressed strongly. However, some subjects in the bill had barely a mention in the stage 3 proceedings, because consensus was reached much earlier. I will mention one or two of those issues for completeness. The bill will deliver a framework for dealing with invasive non-native species that leads the way in implementing the internationally recognised approach. Invasive non-native species are identified by the millennium ecosystem assessment as one of the most important direct drivers of biodiversity loss and ecosystem service changes. That damage can also be measured by the significant negative impacts on economic interests of invasive non-native species, which cost Scotland an estimated £245 million every year. I am aware of how important the Parliament considers the code on invasive non-native species to be. The early draft that was provided to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee has benefited from informal comment and I will issue a public consultation on the code in the next few weeks. Wildlife crime has loomed over many debates. The scrutiny of the bill sends the message that we are not prepared to tolerate continued persecution of our magnificent birds of prey. I say to those who question whether the problem persists that they should look at the facts. Despite sensationalist pronouncements on one side and almost denialist pronouncements on the other, we know that we continue to find birds poisoned in our countryside. As I have said before, that is a wholly unacceptable state of affairs. It should now be clear to those who might have doubted us or to those who thought that they could call our bluff that the Government is prepared to act to introduce new measures to combat wildlife crime. If the motion to pass the bill is agreed to, we will press ahead to work with land managers to produce guidance on the new vicarious liability offences, to ensure that everyone has the advice that they need before the planned commencement of provisions this autumn. In looking to the future, we should all hope for an end to the behaviour of the unscrupulous minority who repeatedly tarnish the reputation of the majority of responsible estates in Scotland. I will touch on an issue that emerged too late to be considered in relation to the bill. Some members will be aware that amendments were sought to protect the Scottish wildcat but could not be developed without proper consideration and consultation. Those who know me will know that I have a great attachment to and fondness for our wildcats, so I am pleased to advise members that the Cairngorms wildcat project will continue to work with estates to benefit wildcats and will work to reduce hybridisation in the coming year. Scottish Natural Heritage has confirmed £30,000 of funding for that under the species action framework. I hope that people who are as concerned as I am about the future of that iconic species will be glad of that. I look forward to the debate. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I thank members for their contributions and I want to cover as many as possible of the points that members have raised during this short debate. However, I want to start by making a slightly more general statement, which is that this Government does not believe that we can sit in an office in Edinburgh and micromanage land management practices throughout Scotland. That is why we will always argue for retention of flexibility in legislation. That needs to be said from the outset, because some of what has been said today suggests that others think that it is possible to sit in an office in Edinburgh and micromanage a situation elsewhere. As we anticipated, there has been great focus on snaring. Statements have been made on both sides of the argument, and we well understand what the argument is about. However, to those who are opposed to snaring on the ground that it is a cruel practice, I gently say that they need to think carefully about the language that they use. In some of what has been said this afternoon, the cruel practice that is under discussion has been the harming and death of the animal. However, banning snaring would not, of course, change the likelihood of an animal’s being harmed or killed; it would merely change the method that is used. If snaring were banned, the only methods that would be left to people would be shooting and lamping. I have absolutely no doubt that, if the ban on snaring were to go through, it would shortly be followed by a campaign to ban shooting and lamping as well, because that is the direction from which the approach comes. Before making some of the suggestions that have been made, people need to have a long, hard look at the rural economy. Some of the evidence that has been referred to—today and previously—has been about illegal snaring. However, illegal snaring is illegal, and it is illegal because it is wrong. Talking about illegal snaring and the cruelties that it involves does not address the issues around the sensible approach to snaring that we are trying to bring in. I should say that many of the estates that snare are managed for different purposes than those that are managed for economic reasons and profit-based reasons.

Liam McArthur’s comments are justified. The issue was never raised or pushed for at an earlier stage.

This leads me to think that committee members representing the Labour Party—

I do think that—

The member knows that she is not a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, and she was not involved in all the evidence taking that led up to stage 2. Perhaps somebody has discovered at some point—fairly lately—what Labour Party policy is, and members are now having to pull themselves into line on it. The review period, which was discussed by Sarah Boyack, was a committee recommendation. I did not come up with it out of thin air—it was what the committee, on which Labour Party members sit, recommended. The bill is not an animal welfare bill, but it nevertheless includes many aspects that relate directly to animal welfare, and I have said that animal welfare will be at the forefront of snaring training. The way in which some of the issues have been raised suggests to me that, if its members are not very careful, the Labour Party as a whole will be in grave danger of being seen as being completely out of touch with rural Scotland. Perhaps that is not a matter of concern to Labour members, but it ought to be. I will move on, as I have a very short time and an awful lot of points to make. On vicarious liability, I appreciate that not everybody will agree with the policy. I am sorry that the Conservatives could not see their way to supporting it. They asked for more time—I have to ask them how much more time before we bring in measures to change the position. The code of practice will be on ministers’ desks by 2 September, and it will be before Parliament later in the autumn, so members need not be worried about people going on holiday. That matter will be dealt with pretty quickly. I join Peter Peacock in paying tribute to the exceptional input that was provided by the late Jeff Watson. The point about his research into golden eagles was well made in the debate. However, some of Peter Peacock’s other comments suggested to me that he is somewhat impatient with the boring reality that proof has to be established before a crime and guilt are established. However tough it is, that is fundamental to our criminal justice system and must surely remain so. I am not able to address other points that were raised in the debate, so in closing I commend the motion that the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill be passed by Parliament.

The Scottish Government prefers biomass to be deployed in heat-only or combined heat and power schemes, particularly off gas grid, at a scale that is appropriate to make best use of both the available heat and local supply. With the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism and my officials, I have regularly met representatives of the forestry and wood processing industries to discuss their concerns. Officials held a series of meetings with those industries and biomass operators as part of the consultation on the renewables obligation Scotland at the end of last year. We received a formal response to that consultation from the Wood Panel Industries Federation as well as from some individual businesses. I have also had representations from colleagues on behalf of their constituents, to which I have responded.

The member will know that I cannot make reference to specific plants, although I did speak to some of the campaigners who arrived outside the Parliament at lunchtime. I answered in part the question in my initial response when I said how the Scottish Government prefers biomass to be deployed. Over the coming year, our review of incentives for biomass will ensure that support is aligned with Scottish Government policy. As I said, I cannot comment on individual planning applications. However, the biomass scoping guidance that we published in February last year for large-scale proposals states: “Applicants should consider the finite domestic supply of wood fibre ... and ... produce a Sustainability Statement”.

Such a study would not come directly from my department. It is likely that it would be undertaken by a body such as the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. The Government has been clear that it sees biomass as more appropriate to small and medium-sized plants. As I have indicated, we prefer biomass to be deployed in heat-only or combined heat and power schemes. We are not in a situation in which we can rely on only one renewable source. We are also conscious of supply issues and the longer-term issues that the member raised. He can rest assured that we are taking all those matters into consideration. However, as I have indicated, I cannot comment on specific potential planning applications.

Some particularly valuable sites that form parts of urban wildlife networks will be designated as sites of special scientific interest, while other sites of local importance will be designated as local nature reserves. A few sites might be covered by a range of other designations. Most of the protection for sites of local nature importance will come through the planning system, with local nature reserves receiving a high degree of protection in the development planning system. The planning system is governed by a range of legislation, including the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006, which put the national planning framework on a statutory footing. In 2009, the Scottish Government published the second national planning framework, which identifies the central Scotland green network as a national development. The aim is to have a strategic network of woodland and other habitats, active travel routes, green-space links, watercourses and waterways that will provide an enhanced setting for development and other land uses and improved opportunities for outdoor recreation and cultural activity.

Sandra White may be interested to know that I spoke at a conference on urban biodiversity in Glasgow at the end of October, at which many related issues were raised. Although planning policy now gives stronger support for the promotion and protection of green networks, planning decisions must reflect the full range of considerations that are relevant to an individual decision. I hope that planning authorities will look to develop effective green networks across their area as a whole. In 2010, the Scottish Government published the consolidated Scottish planning policy, which states: “Development plans should identify and promote green networks”. I know that that will be part of any discussion, debate and consideration in any local authority planning department in Scotland.

Jamie McGrigor should rest assured that waterways are an integral part of providing wildlife corridors, especially in urban areas. He is correct to raise the issue and to say that, for a long time, they may have been rather overlooked. As the Forth and Clyde canal is cleaned up between Edinburgh and Glasgow, we are beginning to see its entire length develop as an enormous source of increasing biodiversity. The canal is an integral part of the central Scotland green network, as are other waterways. The member may rest assured that the issue is on our radar.

I was hoping that we could get through and deal with the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill before considering some of the other things that we need to take on from it. I recall the interesting conversations that took place on the question of ecological coherence. A number of issues are tied up with that. Clearly, many interests are concerned. It is not always the case that development is completely contradictory to providing corridors for biodiversity and so on. I do not want to be in the position of saying that massive areas will be newly designated as not suitable for development. However, with that in mind, all planning authorities need to look carefully at the development proposals that are brought forward. Where possible, national Government ought, if not to dictate, at least to guide, how the issue is addressed.

Flood protection is a matter for individual local authorities, as the member knows. Since 2007, support from this Government has enabled Moray Council to take forward flood protection schemes at Rothes, the Burn of Mosset in Forres and, most recently, Elgin.

A number of discussions have been held with Moray Council about funding. A special meeting was called to discuss the issues. The fact that it has been provided with assurances has allowed it to sign off on the Elgin scheme, which will proceed accordingly. As regards the other aspect that the member raises, the flooding situation in Scotland has never been better provided for than since 2007. Prior to then, only £5.5 million per annum was allocated to dealing with flooding in Scotland. Subsequently, spending on the issue has been of a hugely higher order—£42 million has been allocated to it in each year between 2008 and 2012. The member should compare that with what happened before.

Sadly not, as the member is well aware. [Laughter.]

I think that all members will agree that the debate has been interesting and valuable, even if it sounded at times as if it might turn into a science-fiction convention—I hate to advise Jackson Carlaw and Patrick Harvie that I, too, am a fan. How best to manage waste never fails to stimulate discussion. Notwithstanding Ross Finnie’s open invitation to me to compromise myself and my colleagues, members must know that I cannot comment on specific proposals. I will give a waste policy overview, because that is part and parcel of the debate. All members agree that we need to change how we view and manage the waste that we produce, because the days of straightforward landfill are over. Members are right to point out that a key objective of the zero waste plan is to increase significantly the quality and quantity of recyclable material that is captured—the emphasis is on recyclable material. Indeed, the Scottish Government has set a target of recycling 70 per cent of all waste by 2025. Of course, delivering zero waste policy and meeting future waste targets will require changes and improvements to our infrastructure. However, since one objective of the zero waste plan is to increase significantly recycling performance, much of the infrastructure that is needed will be associated more with enhanced collection and recycling services than waste plants. That does not mean that energy-from-waste plants or other types of residual treatment facilities will not be needed—they will—but that the policy direction that is set out in the plan will reduce the volume of available material to feed those types of facility. In a sense, that is the point that Elaine Murray turned on its head. Although it is important, the role of residual treatment facilities will be a restricted one. Indeed, the Scottish Government is currently consulting on proposed legislation that includes measures to restrict the materials that can be processed in energy-from-waste plants. Those measures are necessary as we need to ensure that materials that are capable of being recycled do not end up in such plants. That is the best way in which to ensure that energy from waste is genuinely sustainable and does not crowd out recycling. Elaine Murray made that point. It is important that that is the context in which we keep the future role of energy from waste. I turn to planning policy. Members will be well aware that waste management installations require planning permission and a range of other consents as necessary. The Government has made significant progress in modernising the planning system, streamlining processes, opening up the transparency around major developments and clarifying the relationship between planning and waste. Scottish planning policy is clear about the challenges that the Government zero waste goals set and the significant increase in waste management infrastructure that will be needed to meet our targets. In order to support planning authorities in making soundly based decisions on applications for waste infrastructure, we recently provided the evidence base on the infrastructure capacity that will be required across Scotland. We published that online in a revision to annex B of the zero waste plan. If members have not had a chance to look at annex B as yet, they might find it useful to do so. The guidance will assist planning authorities in preparing development plans and determining applications for new waste infrastructure across Scotland. The new data provide a robust context for the consideration of the scale of new proposals alongside remaining matters that need to be addressed. Scottish planning policy is very clear that decisions on energy-from-waste infrastructure must also take account of SEPA’s thermal treatment of waste guidelines. Among other things, the guidelines require high levels of efficiency and set out that all proposals of this kind need to comply with the strict requirements of the waste incineration directive. From experience, I know that proposals for waste management infrastructure frequently arouse strong emotions. Like other members, I understand the passion with which Jackson Carlaw speaks. Those strong emotions extend to recycling centres, too. The sentiment does not single out only energy-from-waste plants and landfills, a point that Patrick Harvie recognised. There is considerable controversy around all of this. Some people reject the idea that waste that is generated outside their area should be treated in their area. In a small country such as Scotland, this is an issue that we have to tackle carefully. It will always be likely that waste will cross local authority boundaries, as it does already. Do people seriously imagine that we can have an array of this kind of infrastructure in every local authority area in Scotland? We need to rise to the challenge of meeting Scotland’s waste and resource management needs. If we view waste as a resource, there is an opportunity to create jobs and for the energy that is created to heat and power local homes and businesses. This will form part of the efficiency process in infrastructure projects, an approach that is set out in annex B to the zero waste plan, which states that need and proximity for waste management facilities should be considered strategically. We need to recognise that the achievement of a sustainable strategy might involve waste crossing planning boundaries within Scotland. The Lifetime Recycling village proposal—this is where I have to tread carefully—that is the focus of our debate is presented as a single project. However, given the dual functions of the proposal, it will require separate consents under two planning regimes. As the biomass plant element of the Lifetime Recycling village is proposed to be an electricity-generating station of more than 50MW, that part of the application will be determined by the Scottish ministers under section 36 of the Electricity Act 1989. The recycling and sorting facilities on site, which the applicant also proposes, will be considered under the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 by East Renfrewshire Council. If and when the application is formally submitted, members of the public will have an initial 28-day period to submit representations to the Scottish ministers, followed by another 28-day consultation once ministers have received and published their first statutory consultee response. The statutory consultees are the local planning authority, SEPA and Scottish Natural Heritage. Public representations are of course a material planning consideration and they will be considered alongside all consultation responses and planning and legal obligations before ministers come to a decision. I understand that the application has already been through the pre-application scoping process and the formal Scottish Government scoping opinion has been issued. The developer for the Lifetime Recycling village proposal is currently working on the draft environmental statement, which I understand that it plans to have ready for checking in the summer. As the application for the biomass plant element of the Lifetime Recycling village will ultimately be determined by the Scottish ministers, as indicated, it would be inappropriate for me to comment any further on the merits or otherwise of the application. I hope, however, that members are reassured that there is a rigorous process in place to ensure that the application is considered objectively, having regard to all relevant Scottish Government policies. Meeting closed at 18:46.

I am sure that all colleagues in the chamber share my dismay at the continuing persecution of our birds of prey. Because of that continuing persecution, I have lodged an amendment to the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill to introduce criminal vicarious liability for employers or managers who are responsible for those who carry out offences related to bird persecution. That move is a necessary but proportionate response to the continuing blight of bird persecution in otherwise beautiful parts of rural Scotland.

I am aware of the SRPBA’s letter that was recently circulated. We had a look at the figures in the information that it has given us. It used a mixture of confirmed and unconfirmed statistics, which does not reflect the true picture. In the first half of 2010, 17 birds were illegally poisoned in Scotland. That cannot continue. Landowners who abide by the law will have absolutely nothing to fear from vicarious liability.

Failure to comply with the habitats directive requirement to designate special areas of conservation can result in the European Commission commencing infraction proceedings. That can lead to a European Court of Justice ruling for failing to comply with the obligations. Not complying with such a ruling can result in a significant fine.

I am more than aware of the member’s concerns about the designations. We are under a legal obligation to designate special areas of conservation, and that designation must be based on the scientific evidence alone. There is little prospect of a change in EU law on the matter. Nevertheless, we are committed to working with local stakeholders to minimise any impacts of designation, should it go ahead. It is at that point, when one is working out the management measures, that socioeconomic factors can be brought into play. I am conscious of the fact that the announcement of the designation of special areas of conservation such as the one that the member mentions creates a great deal of concern, especially in rural peripheral communities.

Those actions will be carried out throughout the year, many of them as a continuous process and others via specific events. A number are already under way. The delivery plan will be subject to annual evaluation and updating.

The member expresses her concern but then quotes other people. I would be interested to know whether the member has actually read the public engagement strategy. The strategy is extremely important, as it is something on which we will base our delivery plans as we work through the process. I look forward to a dynamic discussion about how we can engage the public; I am very concerned about that, because some messages seem to get over more easily than others. It would be helpful if members with bright ideas were to communicate them to us instead of carping on the sidelines.

The strategy contains strong links with the private sector, which will be vital in helping us to achieve our targets both through its direct actions and through its adaptations. It is extremely important that we keep the private sector on board. Engagement with the business community is a key part of wider public engagement. It is important because that community will be critical in developing and promoting Scotland’s transition to a low-carbon economy—as will every single one of us.

I hope that Elaine Smith will communicate further with me with regard to the specific issue that she has raised. Engagement with the public means that we will often have to deal with issues that might, on the surface, appear contradictory but from which we cannot run away. The issue that the member mentions might be one of those issues. I look forward to Elaine Smith contacting me directly on her specific concerns.

Yes. Salmon aquaculture is a success story for Scotland and continues to play a key role in our economic recovery, providing high-quality and secure jobs in many rural and coastal communities in Scotland’s Highlands and Islands. The farmed salmon industry in Scotland was estimated to have a farm-gate value of £412 million in 2009—a 23 per cent increase on the previous year. It also produced about 144,000 tonnes—that figure is up 12 per cent on the previous year. That is a huge success story, in any language.

It would be fair to say that we were disappointed with Richard Benyon’s comments, particularly because they were based on some factual mistakes. As we know, the reputation of farmed Scottish salmon is that it is a high-quality healthy product, and that the industry is fully regulated. I suspect that Mr Benyon’s comments were born of a lesser understanding of the issues of aquaculture than we might be accustomed to in Scotland, given that it is an extremely small part of the English economic make-up. We need to address the issue. I am writing to Richard Benyon to remind him of the importance of the salmon industry in Scotland, and I understand that the Scottish farmed salmon industry intends to invite him to visit Scottish farms and see them for himself.

Aquaculture, in the broadest sense, includes far more than simply farmed salmon. We have a healthy and growing shellfish sector, which is important with regard to the areas that Jamie McGrigor is talking about. There are also interesting moves in terms of halibut, which have been successful in the areas in which they have been undertaken. We are keen that the industry should grow into other areas. However, there is no doubt that farmed salmon is by far the largest component of aquaculture in Scotland, which is why it gets such a great amount of publicity.

Scottish Water advises me that it has not received any complaints about odours at the sewage treatment works at Bothwell Road in Hamilton and that no odour nuisance was present when the waste water treatment team leader visited earlier this week. I have asked Scottish Water to contact Mr McCabe directly to discuss the situation in more detail and to arrange any further investigations. I understand that that might already have happened.

I fully appreciate the difficulty—I experienced the same difficulty with a particular area in my constituency and I suspect that similar issues are known to other members. I am pursuing the history of complaints in respect of the matter. Scottish Water has through its programmes made improvements to the waste water treatment works at Hamilton. Between 2006 and 2010, it invested about £580,000 in the plant and it expects, between 2010 and 2015, to invest a further £3.3 million, so there might still be hope for the member in that.

The Scottish Government engages on an on-going basis with retailers on a host of issues relating to Scotland’s food and drink supply chain through the Scottish grocery retailers forum. Retailers have also signed up to the retailers charter, which commits them to working in partnership with Scotland’s food and drink industry. That is reaping dividends, with major retailers stocking many more Scottish products in their stores and working closely with local suppliers. In fact, this evening, Asda will launch its supplier development programme, which involves Asda working with 10 local suppliers to better understand the supply chain and grow their businesses.

The member will know that the Scottish Government has actively pursued the issue. It is part of what we have tried to do through the national food and drink policy. It is important for niche suppliers to get the kind of designation that the member talks about, but that is not always as easy as it might seem on paper and a lot of work has to be done. A lot of work has already been done. We work closely with the retail industry through the retail forum and the retail charter, and with the wider food industry, to ensure that appropriate information is provided for consumers to help them identify the origin of products. We will continue with that engagement, because I suppose that it is one of those issues on which we will never have a full stop and be able to say that it is sorted.

There continue to be procurement issues, of which the member will be well aware. We continue to pursue that aspect because, from the perspective of the food and drink industry and the consumer, it is of great benefit if the big institutional providers can use local produce wherever possible. However, as the member knows, that is not as easy as simply saying it, and we must continue to work hard to try to achieve it.

It is a little unfair to talk about hiding behind procurement rules. Every local authority will be considering the issue. Those local authorities that provide exemplars ought to be lauded, and I do not want not to do that. East Ayrshire Council and East Lothian Council—which I have visited, so I know about the work that it has been doing—must be congratulated and the rest of the local authorities in Scotland need to follow their good example. Pressure can be brought to bear on local authorities from many different angles, not just from the top down; pressure from the bottom up is very important, too.

The situation was different from local authority to local authority but, in general, those local authorities most affected by the severe weather conditions focused on dealing with the backlog of residual waste collections and advised householders to store recyclate or to take it to recycling centres when it was practical and safe to do so. The Scottish Government issued similar advice through a press release on 27 December. In a number of cases, local authorities put in place contingency arrangements and set up temporary collection points. In all cases, local authorities worked very hard to cope with the unprecedented conditions that they faced and have caught up with the backlogs that were created over December.

I am sure that the member will bring forward proposals during the budget process to identify the money that he thinks is required to support such arrangements and to indicate where it will come from. The fact is that local authorities are responsible for dealing with the issues in their areas and, in my view, they have done their best in extremely difficult circumstances. Some authorities’ collection crews worked over weekends, while some authorities relaxed the rules on households presenting excess bags of rubbish and provided large skips into which householders could place waste. In general, as the member well knows, it is not the function of the Scottish Government to oversee the work of local authorities, but there are mechanisms for addressing local authority performance. I hope that if the member is making complaints, he has, in the first instance, made them through his local authority’s complaints procedure.

I have discussed in correspondence with forestry ministers in England and Wales the provisions for forestry in the Public Bodies (Reform) Bill at Westminster, and I will continue to monitor the passage of the bill to ensure that the interests of Scottish forestry are protected.

I am in constant discussion with forestry officials in Scotland, as the member will no doubt be aware. It is the case that the English proposals—I say “English” because that is what they must be—would have an impact on UK forestry as a whole simply as a result of the fact that jobs would be likely to be threatened. It is a matter of some regret to us that the biggest threat hangs over jobs in Scotland—those in Corstorphine—as the member said. In my view, however, the initial enthusiasm of the UK minister, Jim Paice, seems to be becoming somewhat moderated as he realises just how difficult a process he has set in motion, and how hard it will be to do what he thinks he wants to do. As yet, I suspect, he has just begun to touch on the likely backlash that there will be when the general public in England begin to realise what he is up to.

The draft RPP is our first attempt to quantify in detail the effect of the action that we are taking across the board. Members' comments during the debate have reflected the breadth and complexity of the issues that face us as we seek to cut greenhouse gas emissions. I cannot hope to address every specific question that has been raised, so I will pick up on a number of the key themes that have been touched on by more than one member. There has been some discussion about the publication of the draft RPP at the same time as the draft budget. This has been the first such process, and we were driven by the timescales that have been laid down by the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. I remind members that the delays in finalising the emissions targets meant that our initial intended publication date of September had to be considerably delayed. It was really not within our gift. When we discuss things in the chamber, it is worth remembering to consider the consequences of the decisions that are made. Future RPPs will be for periods many years in the future. The next RPP, in autumn 2011, will be for 2023 to 2027, which is far beyond the periods that are covered by parallel budgets or spending reviews. I will speak about other aspects relating to funding later. There has been a considerable amount of comment about the adoption of a voluntary approach, as opposed to regulation. I was trying to be polite when I said earlier that there was a philosophical difference on this. There is a view in some sections of the chamber that regulation is  the automatic first response, rather than proceeding in a voluntary way. It is that qualitatively slightly different approach to things that I was trying to be as polite as possible about. I appreciate that each of us will bring our different attitudes towards that, but it is strongly the Government's view that we have to be able to bring people with us as much as we can, only reverting to regulation when we can clearly no longer do that.

I appreciate what Elaine Murray is saying and I understand her point, but I was speaking at the committee this morning with the knowledge and hindsight of the failure of the voluntary approach. It would have been extraordinary for me to have sat in a committee room two years ago and said that, in that timescale, I would be introducing that particular legislative change because of the failure of the voluntary approach.

In fairness, let us all acknowledge that we are developing a framework for monitoring progress. It is not as if we are unaware of the problem that will arise if the voluntary approach clearly fails. The public engagement strategy is equally important. It has also just been published, and there will no doubt be some discussion about it. A number of actions are contained in that strategy that involve engaging directly with the public, which will have an impact on the extent to which the voluntary approach is successful or otherwise. There has been much discussion about how not all the measures in the draft RPP are financed in the draft budget. Much can be said about that. If the Parliament considers provision in an area to be insufficient, we will welcome the Parliament's  views on where further provision might be found from elsewhere in the budget. We have a finite sum of money and decisions that are taken in one area will have an impact on decisions elsewhere. I think that Alison McInnes said that we should not be overreliant on the UK and must fully fund all the proposals ourselves. Whether she likes it or not, we rely on the UK for funding. That is the reality of the devolved settlement. There is something that we can do about that, and I am always happy to welcome new recruits to the Scottish National Party's cause, if Alison McInnes is beginning to think about the issue. I think that Iain Smith asked what we will do while we wait for the green deal. That is precisely what the various domestic energy efficiency measures are about. We are running them until 2012, when the green deal will come on board. That is important. Iain Smith and, I think, Charlie Gordon said that they were disappointed with the £48 million for energy assistance and home insulation, but the point about the programmes is that they are designed to draw in UK CERT investment worth £100 million per year. They do not stand completely on their own. I have made a number of comments on funding. I did not do so glibly. There is little point in our debating matters in the absence of the reality against which all Government expenditure is set. It behoves us all to consider that carefully. A number of members commented on the need for alignment between the RPP and the budget. I agree, which is why we brought the RPP forward in the timescale in which we did so. However, the same members also suggested that they would want to scrutinise the RPP in advance of the budget. There perhaps needs to be a little refinement of how we progress the matter in future. That is a debate that the whole Parliament must have, because we will need to resolve the issue. There is only a single year in which we must produce an RPP and a budget, so we need to think about how to time publication for best effect. I appreciate that the timing did not work out as well as might have been hoped for this year.

No, I am sorry. I am running out of time. I am happy to talk to any members who have additional policy proposals to put forward in the event that the EU fails to agree a 30 per cent target. We have said that we will look at alternative proposals, from wherever and whomever they come.  The 60-day scrutiny period for the draft RPP continues until 16 January—that is a Sunday, so in practice it will be 17 January if members want to do something at the last minute. For reasons that are connected to the requirement in the 2009 act for ministers to have regard to representations during the whole of the 60-day period, the Government will abstain from voting on the motion at decision time. Making the transition to a low-carbon economy during the next decade will be a huge challenge for every one of us. We must ensure that we act in a transparent and accountable manner. What we do must be set against the backdrop of the reality of the circumstances in which we find ourselves. There is little point in constructing a fantastic, wonderful model that is utterly unachievable. The achievableness of what we do must be tested carefully. I am proud of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 and I am proud of how members of the Scottish Parliament worked together to make it such strong legislation. I hope that the political consensus on the issue is not over and that we can continue to deal with matters on the consensual basis that there has been up to now.

I appreciate what the member is saying, but members should accept that the first publication created difficulties. Publication was delayed for reasons that were completely outwith the Government's control, and some of the timescales are laid down in the 2009 act. I am happy to speak to people about how we can do things better in the future.

I thank Patrick Harvie for his comments. I hope that  we will have a constructive debate and that we will be able to build on the unanimous support that the Parliament gave to the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. I am grateful to the two committees for their scrutiny of the draft report on proposals and policies. I thank committee members, who had to work hard to absorb all the information, and the committee clerks, who worked hard to support the committees' work. This is my first opportunity to speak to members about climate change since it became part of my portfolio. I acknowledge the great work that my predecessor, Stewart Stevenson, did in developing the RPP—I will use the acronym for the rest of the debate. I am also grateful to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth for his attendance at the committee sessions during the handover period—I cannot begin to tell members how grateful I was for that help. In our draft RPP we set out our vision for a low-carbon Scotland. A low-carbon society will make the most of our energy and resources, consuming less and using cleaner and renewable energy sources. Building a low-carbon, sustainable future will benefit Scotland economically, through our natural advantage in renewable energy sources and through cost savings from using energy efficiently. Of course, it will also benefit us socially, improving our health, welfare and natural environment. Our energy efficiency action plan and our low-carbon economic strategy showed how we can harness those benefits. The draft RPP shows how our actions will affect Scotland's emissions. Current policies can achieve a 42 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020, compared with the 1990 baseline. The policies would allow us to meet some of the annual targets between now and 2022, but not all of them. Therefore, we have considered additional proposals which, taken together, would allow us to exceed the annual targets in all years. That provides some flexibility to decide which proposals should be adopted in future. We need such flexibility for several reasons. First, a number of the proposals come from work that was undertaken by third parties such as the Committee on Climate Change or research commissioned by ministers. It would not be appropriate to introduce those as policies without discussing them further with stakeholders. Secondly, several of the committee's recommendations call for extra funding for various proposals. I would love to have more money to spend—I look appealingly to the Conservative members for them to ask the chancellor whether we could please have some more money to  spend—but the reality is that Scotland's budget has been cut. That limits the funds that are available for expanding programmes or launching new initiatives. Thirdly, we are constrained in what we can deliver by the limited powers that are at our disposal. The United Kingdom's comprehensive spending review has thrown into sharp relief the limitations of the existing constitutional arrangements, particularly with continuing uncertainties around the green investment bank and the fossil fuels levy. Furthermore, reducing emissions relies on everyone—Government, business and individuals—playing their part. We cannot predict the extent to which people will get on board with the agenda, so we need to have new policies ready to introduce if more action is needed. Both committees have made recommendations about the timing of the draft report and how it aligns with funding in the draft budget. Indeed, Patrick Harvie mentioned that point in his opening remarks. The final outcome of the budget will determine which proposals can be implemented as policies in 2011-12 while leaving flexibility as to which proposals are adopted in future years. That is why it makes sense for consideration of the draft report to run in parallel with consideration of the draft budget. I am happy to consider any suggestions from members for alternative or additional proposals. However, if members want additional measures to be supported in the budget, they must also be clear how they would fund them. It is important that the progress that we have already made on climate change is not overlooked. For instance, last month, new statistics showed that, in 2009, Scotland met 27 per cent of its gross electricity consumption from renewable sources. The amount of electricity that is generated by renewables in Scotland has more than doubled since 2000, so we are well on track to meet our target of 80 per cent of Scottish electricity consumption coming from renewables by 2020. We are continuing our flagship energy assistance package and home insulation scheme in 2011-12. They are designed to tackle our emissions and fuel poverty and are supported by a budget of £48 million. The committee is right to flag up the risk that our fuel poverty target—to end fuel poverty, so far as is reasonably practicable, by 2016—will not be achieved. I will not run away from that. Given escalating energy prices and the impact on income of increased unemployment and lower benefit levels, the target is very challenging, but we have not given up on it. We are doing, and will  continue to do, everything in our power to achieve it. Our focus is on improving house conditions and providing energy, benefits and tariff advice. The most recent data show that early phases of our area-based insulation programmes have already provided nearly 87,000 home energy checks, with more than 13,000 households receiving insulation measures and many thousands more being offered further assistance. Those numbers will only go up. We also continue to access carbon emissions reduction target investment worth around £100 million per year in Scotland, focused on low-income households. Patrick Harvie mentioned the issue with the EU move to a 30 per cent target, and the committee report calls on the Government to make clear its intentions should the EU not strengthen its 2020 target to 30 per cent. We have always been clear that, as part of achieving our 42 per cent target in 2020, we require the EU to strengthen its target. We will continue to lobby the UK and the EU on that but, if it becomes clear that there is no prospect of the EU moving, we will obviously have to consider other options. Achieving the 42 per cent target is already a big challenge. Trying to achieve it without the EU compelling the heavy emitters in the emissions trading system to do more would make it even more difficult and costly for ordinary people. If we are to maintain the enthusiasm and commitment of the people of Scotland to reduce emissions, we need to ensure that the effort that we expect of them is fair. We believe that a move to a global low-carbon economy is inevitable. Last month, the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism attended the Cancún conference as part of the United Kingdom delegation. That conference laid the groundwork for a long-term binding global agreement on emissions. A lot more work will be needed to secure that, but the Cancún result is a clear sign that the vast majority of countries want the United Nations multilateral process to succeed. The committee report asks whether the voluntary approach that we have favoured in our draft report will deliver the necessary emissions reductions. I understand that there is a bit of a philosophical debate about the voluntary approach as opposed to the regulatory approach and when one or the other is most appropriate. We strongly believe that the public and businesses want to reduce their emissions, and we want to support and help them to do that, but we recognise the need to use every tool available to achieve emissions reductions, including regulation where voluntary approaches do not prove successful. In  the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, we introduced enabling powers in many areas, including in relation to domestic and non-domestic buildings, microgeneration and waste. We will use those powers if and when we need to. The committee asked how we would determine the success of voluntary measures. To help us to make those decisions, we are putting in place a low-carbon monitoring and management framework that will indicate whether we are making progress with our policies before emissions data for each year become available. It is not, of course, for Government alone to take action on climate change. Meeting our targets depends critically on actions that ordinary members of the public take to reduce their emissions and energy use. Our public engagement strategy, which was published on 30 December, sets out our approach to encouraging that contribution and recognises that the most effective engagement comes not from the centre, but from more local routes—whether local communities, employers or local authorities. The committee asked us how we would engage with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities on the proposals and policies that we expect them to deliver. We believe that central Government should not dictate to local authorities what they should be doing—we established that principle in the concordat. We will continue to work with COSLA and other public bodies to help them to identify the most cost-effective way to reduce emissions and to help them to meet their climate change duties as established in the 2009 act. In conclusion, the draft report on proposals and policies sets out a clear path for meeting our climate change targets and gives us flexibility to respond to future events. I believe that that flexibility will become incredibly important as the years go by.

The Scottish Government works closely with the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society and other key partners in the industry to address issues across the supply chain. We hope that we can continue to build and strengthen our relationship with the SAOS to provide support to allow businesses throughout the agri-food sector to collaborate to gain economies of scale, reduce costs and, we hope, improve profitability.

My colleague Richard Lochhead and I are, of course, happy to meet people, and I look forward to a request for a meeting from the organisation concerned. The member represents a Glasgow constituency, and he may or may not be aware of the support and help that is given via the SAOS to farmers markets, one of which may take place in his constituency—I am not certain about that. Farmers markets are an example of co-operatives that perhaps people do not really think about as co-operatives. There are many other examples of very good co-operative endeavour in rural Scotland. The turnover of the top 10 SAOS members is £1.9 million, and there are machinery rings throughout Scotland that turn over £55 million annually. The co-operative idea is strong, alive and thriving in rural Scotland, and I appreciate the member’s concern about the much smaller co-operative ventures that we also support.

I fear that I might disappoint the member in saying that I personally have had no discussions on progressing that matter with officials from DEFRA. However, the member will be aware that there has been active co-operation between the wider movement and the Government, and that serious funding has been provided when that has been required. Co-operative ventures in Scotland have improved throughout the period of the Government’s administration, and I expect that to continue, but I will take on board the member’s specific request and try to establish exactly where we are with the legislation, which has, as he said, not gone anywhere down south. Of course, I hope that he is also pressing his own party in government in Westminster to consider the matter.

I wonder whether, in those circumstances, the smaller co-operatives are in a different position from that of any small business. Currently, there is a significant issue about access to investment capital. If the member has specific cases in mind, I would be keen for her to give us information on them, because it would be helpful for us to try to ascertain whether there are specific obstacles that relate particularly to co-operatives. It would be useful to investigate that.

Progress continues to be made in helping Scotland to become a zero waste nation that makes the most of its resources. Scotland has already met the 2013 European Union landfill diversion target, with 17 local authorities now recycling more than 40 per cent of the waste that they collect. In addition, the Scottish Government has launched a consultation paper that looks at separate collections, restricting inputs to energy from waste facilities and banning certain materials from being landfilled. The Government, with zero waste Scotland, will continue to work closely with all the partners, who will be vital to the successful delivery of the zero waste plan, including the achievement of future targets.

The member is right that we must treat food waste as a valuable resource. That is why we are currently consulting on draft legislation for separate food waste collections and stopping waste food from being landfilled, which generates climate-damaging methane emissions. The Scottish Government is also driving the development of anaerobic digestion capacity, which is currently at 38,000 tonnes, with capacity of 231,000 tonnes under construction or approved. That will deliver valuable sustainable energy and soil conditioner. We are also developing support mechanisms and committing an additional £2 million in the draft budget to help local authorities to make progress on separate food waste collections.

The member is right. The Government continues to support the love food, hate waste campaign, which is a key driver on the issue. We are working constantly with retailers on several issues, including that one. However, it is a little difficult for retailers to drive down food waste if people continue to buy far more food than they can possibly eat. I suspect that many of us are guilty of that from time to time, and I do not exempt myself from that. There are a number of conversations and developments, and they will continue. All of us, including retailers and individual consumers, have to play our part.

Financial assistance to help farmers to deliver environmental improvements generally is available via the Scotland rural development programme. That includes measures to improve water quality and biodiversity and to mitigate flooding, all of which could include the issues that Robin Harper raises.

I am not sure that I take such a pessimistic view as Robin Harper takes. We are doing a number of things to help. The Forestry Commission has launched a pilot scheme under which it will lease land from farmers to create woodland and return it to them. The commission hopes for around 400 hectares under the pilot. Obviously, if the pilot is successful, we can roll it out. There are several measures in the rural priorities part of the SRDP under which land managers can be funded for peatland work. We have spent some £2 million on measures that relate directly to peatlands. That includes money that has gone to RSPB Scotland for peatland restoration under the current SRDP. Obviously, many of the things that require to be done require  money, and finding money in the current financial circumstances is not always easy. However, this Government is always prepared to do what is considered necessary if the applications that are received are substantial and can be substantiated.

The pilot project that is taking place in the west of Scotland will be assessed at its close—any and all of the information will be looked at—and, at that point, it will be considered whether the species is capable of being reintroduced into Scotland and whether it is desirable to do so. I am not aware that, in the current scenario, beavers are chopping down trees across the board in the way that the member suggests. Beavers are, of course, woodland engineers. In the areas where we are looking to reintroduce them, the surrounding wetland badly needs thinning out. The beavers are doing an important job.

For the rural priorities assessment round in October, there were 20 applications in the Clyde region. Sixteen were approved—that is 80 per cent of applications—which is worth around £1.3 million for the Clyde area.

I congratulate the local bodies in the member’s constituency that have worked together to improve the volume and quality of applications for rural development support. There was a much-improved success rate in both the August and October rounds. The rate is now in line with the national average.  I understand the disappointment of those behind any unsuccessful application bid. I expect that the rejection of the Coalburn Miners Welfare Charitable Society one-stop shop application was tough for those involved to accept. Of course, bidding for rural development funding is competitive, which can mean that good applications are ultimately unsuccessful. That does not mean that they were not good applications; it means that there were better applications. The group can get feedback to try to establish what it could have done that would have changed the outcome. I understand that the application did not demonstrate sufficiently that it would deliver key regional and national outcomes. Perhaps the group needs to have another look at how it can make the bid work in that respect.

Scotland’s first national food and drink policy sets out how the Scottish Government, its agencies and industry partners are helping Scottish food and drink businesses to succeed and enhance Scotland’s reputation as a land of food and drink.

The primary purpose of allotments is to create a community amenity that provides food for owners and their families, rather than property from which to conduct commercial businesses, so we need to be a little careful about that. However, the hospitality industry is free to make arrangements to purchase allotment produce in small quantities, if it is surplus to the owner’s needs. Obviously, that must be done on a case-by-case basis, but the sale of surplus produce is consistent with the Allotments (Scotland) Act 1922 and Convention of Scottish Local Authorities guidance on allotments in Scotland. In individual cases, consideration may need to be given to other issues such as tax, insurance, health and safety, and traceability, but there is no reason in principle why the sale of surplus produce should not happen. As the member said, byelaws are made by local authorities, which have the power to allow that to happen at local level and are best placed to conduct a full assessment of what is required locally.

The Scottish Government provides support to the agriculture and food processing sectors for marketing and development through the food processing, marketing and co-operation grant scheme and the market development grant scheme.

I regret to advise the member that I forgot to bring my crystal ball with me to the chamber. It is not really possible for me to say what the future will hold, but I can tell the member that the Government intends to be able to support such ventures in Scotland and will argue for that, if it can. However, we are not certain how things will work out in the future. As I am sure the member knows, good things are already happening in respect of beef labelling for rare breeds and through the Scottish venison working group. Good projects are on-going under the national food and drink policy, which remains a first in the whole United Kingdom. I hope that the member will take that as an indication of the Government’s intent at every level to produce a situation in Scotland that allows big and small producers, local and national, to access the benefits of the policy.

Our farmers strive constantly to meet the highest possible production standards. The Scottish Government provides support to improve food production standards through the Scotland rural development programme, which offers farmers assistance to participate in food quality assurance schemes and to improve animal welfare under land managers options.

In all that the Government does, we are asking consumers, whether they be individual, retail or company consumers, to look closely at the provenance of our food. We have a number of schemes in place. The provenance on a plate toolkit allows local restaurants and retailers to put local food on menus. If we were to mandate individuals to buy certain kinds of produce rather than others, we would be stepping a little beyond our remit, however much we would like to encourage and personally to provide examples of such behaviour, where possible.

There is no specific exclusion for projects that involve temporary or short-term leases in the application criteria for the climate challenge fund. If a community applies for funding, it is important that it demonstrates how it will achieve both significant carbon emissions reductions and a positive legacy for the community.

I am not certain that there was a question there, Presiding Officer.

I can reassure members that the climate challenge fund is not based on length of lease; it is based on outcomes. If people can demonstrate that the outcomes fit with those that are required under the climate challenge fund, their project will be worthy of as much consideration as any other project.

There is broad agreement on the general principles of the bill, for which I am extremely grateful. I thank the members who have contributed to the debate, as well as the members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, who have been involved in the process of getting the bill this far. As is patently obvious, there are positions on some sections of the bill that will never be reconciled because one group of stakeholders wants more control in one direction, which is resisted by others. In some of those areas, there is no easy compromise that will satisfy everyone. There is a tension between the idea of more centralised control of aspects of rural management and the continuing desire for things to be worked out voluntarily. It is clear that the Government has tended towards the voluntary approach, unless there has been compelling evidence that we should act to the contrary. I accept that we are dealing with a broad continuum, and that the tension that exists on those issues will not go away. I will try in the time that is available to address as many as possible of the points that have been made, but it is inevitable that I will not be able to deal with all of them. Matters that I cannot deal with now will be picked up directly with the appropriate member or in the Government's response to the committee's report. Maureen Watt and others mentioned consolidation. I do not believe that there can be any principled objection to the idea of consolidation, but the difficulty arises when one begins to consider the practicalities of it, because it is a highly resource-intensive exercise and there may be other pressing cases for consolidation that would take priority when it comes to parliamentary time. I know, for example, that the committee has already raised the prospect of consolidation of  crofting legislation. It is difficult to see how one could pursue too many bits of consolidation. I see that one member of the committee is shaking his head—I suspect that he is pleading, "No, no." Carrying out too much consolidation can be problematic. Many members mentioned snaring. I understand what an emotive issue it is, but we must remember that not snaring would not mean that animals would not die. The control would still have to happen. Among the questions that members raised is whether we should hold a review in five years—which I point out is the committee's recommendation; it is not a timescale that I plucked from the air—in two years or at some intermediate point, as appropriate. We have to allow sufficient time for the new rules to come into play. We already have the capacity to deal with snaring as we go along. We do not need any reserved powers; we have the powers already. Those powers could extend to a severe restriction on snaring that would respond to every concern that has been expressed: the powers already exist in the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. The power to move to the final step of an absolute ban should require very serious consultation because the implications for rural Scotland of doing so would be pretty serious. Deer have been mentioned by a number of members. Again, in that area, we are sticking with the voluntary principle, and I make no apology for that. A number of questions have been asked about what will happen when the code fails. The bill will sharpen SNH's powers of intervention, including by bringing in clear time limits. We do not think that any additional powers are required to protect the public interest. The costs of the Government's proposals would pale into insignificance when compared to the cost of statutory deer management. I understood the committee to be content with the deer proposals. In this time of financial stringency, we want to consider carefully whether we should move into an area that would add cost. The deer code will apply to all landowners, not just to private landowners, and it will set out examples of sustainable management. If landowners are not taking note, that will prompt SNH's intervention powers—[ Interruption .]

People rarely have difficulty hearing me, Presiding Officer. On the more general issue of wildlife crime, I was rather disappointed by John Scott's remarks. The statistics that we have are about verifiable  poisonings, not about disappeared birds. We know that many disappeared birds will have died natural deaths, but that does not mean that we can ignore the poisonings and the appalling publicity that they generate. I also remind people who talk about the licensing of shooting estates about the importance of shooting estates to the economy. The information that I have suggests that they are worth £240 million to the Scottish economy. It is estimated that 58,000 workers are paid by shooting, which amounts to the equivalent of 11,000 full-time jobs. That is an enormous contribution to our economy and we have to be careful that we do not damage it.

I do not have enough time. We would move towards licensing shooting estates very carefully and gingerly. Lots of issues have been raised, not so much about vicarious liability, which is generally welcomed, but about other potential changes that might be made, including single-witness evidence. We have looked at all those issues. Some people wanted single-witness evidence to be wiped out altogether, and some wanted it to be extended. We came to the ultimate view that, since there was no particular balance of opinion one way or the other, we would be as well sticking with the status quo. I accept that some people might feel differently, but I remind people that the broader justice review—the Carloway review—is considering corroboration in Scots law in a wider context, so it might be worth focusing on that. Issues around invasive non-native species seem to be uncontroversial, and I welcome that. Other, smaller points have been raised and I will go back to individual members on them, if they will allow me to. I am not a particular adherent of littering legislation with multiple reserved powers, as has been suggested for the bill. Some of the powers are absolutely appropriate, but others are not. I believe that the bill will make a fundamental and good change for the future of wildlife management in Scotland. That is extremely important: the natural environment is enormously important in Scotland. I am very glad that there is unanimous agreement on the bill, and I look forward to its subsequent stages.

I thank the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for its careful consideration of the bill and for its extremely helpful report. The committee has been assisted by the evidence and insight of a great many people from a variety of sectors and walks of life. The range of people and organisations that have been involved shows just how far reaching the impact of the bill is. The committee's report highlights two watchwords for the bill: balance and compromise. Those are absolutely right. The bill is about balancing competing demands on the Scottish countryside, whether we are talking about land managers running a business, conservationists seeking to protect species and habitats, deer stalkers and grouse shooters, or walkers and birdwatchers. All those people make legitimate calls on the resources of the countryside. The bill seeks to ensure that the law in relation to the countryside acknowledges those competing demands and applies compromise and balance in dealing with them. I am pleased that the committee has recognised that practical approach. We certainly share the more visionary aspirations that have been articulated by others, but the bill is intended to be about the nuts and bolts. It will create a number of criminal offences. We need to be careful about the language that we use when people might be prosecuted. There are no general statements and duties in the bill, in part because the possibility of unintended consequences looms large, particularly regarding the legal and judicial interpretation of such statements. The committee has recognised that but, rightly, it has questions on how we are addressing the wider issues. I am happy to write to the committee in more detail about that work. There is not enough time today to do real justice to the committee's report, so I will limit my comments to some key areas—wildlife crime, snaring, invasive non-native species and deer. The Government's full written response to the committee will be published next week. I turn first to wildlife crime. When we set out to draft the bill, we regarded the legislative framework as being robust and we believed that  what was needed was effective enforcement of the law. I remain of the view that enforcement is key and I agree with the committee that wildlife crime should be vigorously pursued by the police and the Crown. However, as members know, I cannot direct the police or the prosecution service as regards their operational decision-making processes. The committee recognised the strength of feeling that wildlife crime generates, in particular the poisoning of Scotland's striking birds of prey. A year ago, I wanted to be able to stand here now telling Parliament that the persecution of birds of prey had become a rarity and that poisoning statistics showed a marked decline. Sadly, I cannot do that, because 2010 is set to be one of the worst years on record for poisoning of birds. The committee has recognised that something more must be done, and I agree. I looked long and hard at a range of options, including all those that were put to the committee and those that were raised in the report "Natural Justice: A Joint Thematic Inspection of the Arrangements in Scotland for Preventing, Investigating and Prosecuting Wildlife Crime" and through the partnership for action against wildlife crime—PAW—Scotland. There are many interesting ideas about how best to tackle the problem. It is my view that any further measures must be carefully thought out and, crucially, must be specifically targeted so that the whole of the rural sector is not penalised because of the criminal actions of a minority. I have therefore indicated to the committee that I intend to lodge an amendment that will introduce vicarious liability, which was one of the options that were mentioned in the "Natural Justice" report. It will target criminality and ensure that employers whose employees are involved in persecution of wild birds will be forced to shoulder responsibility for the actions of those employees. There will, of course, be a defence of due diligence, as there must be, but turning a blind eye will no longer be an option. There is a proposal in the report that we take a power to introduce a licensing scheme for shooting businesses. Such a move would undoubtedly be a severe disincentive for people who contemplate committing offences, but the fact that it would be such a significant step suggests to me that it is not appropriate for an enabling power. If it looks to be preferable that we go down that road, I would very much prefer that we carry out a proper consultation and legislate in the normal way. With that in mind, I should add that I have no plans to try to take over the newly launched wildlife estates initiative and to make it part of a compulsory scheme. I recognise that that scheme  is a genuine attempt by the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association, the Scottish Estates Business Group and others to embed sustainable management in sporting estates, and that any attempt by Government to hijack it would kill it stone dead. I am interested in ideas on how to improve enforcement against wildlife crime. The proposal that we provide the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals with additional powers is worthy of consultation, but I am concerned about including enabling powers in a bill before even initial discussions have taken place. Consultation should come first. I turn to snaring, which has long been a controversial and emotive issue. This Government recognises that pest and predator control is necessary to protect livestock and crops and that, in some circumstances, snaring is the least bad option. I thank the committee for agreeing that snaring is "a vital part of land management". Our intention in introducing further regulation in this area is to ensure that snaring is carried out by trained operators, working to the best standards of animal welfare. I draw the chamber's attention to the comments of Dr Hal Thompson, the eminent wildlife pathologist of the British Veterinary Association, who told the committee: "What is in the bill is excellent. If the bill is adopted and its provisions put in place, that will provide for very effective use of snares." He went on to say that the bill would introduce sensible and reasonable controls that "present a balance between the people who require snares and the people who are interested in the protection of animals and animal welfare. I do not have any problems with what the bill contains in that regard. It is a commendable piece of proposed legislation."—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 6 October 2010; c 3234.] However, I recognise that we cannot rest on our laurels, so I am content to agree to the committee's recommendation that a further review of snaring be carried out in five years to assess the effect of our proposals. At this stage, I am not clear on what the committee's proposal for individual identification numbers for each snare would deliver. It seems that it would lead to a burdensome system of record keeping for the police, which would only add considerably to the cost of administering the scheme. I agree with the committee that we need to keep abreast of technological developments, especially those that protect animal welfare, and I advise the  chamber that the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 contains an order-making power that will allow us to update regulations as required. I welcome the committee's support for the Government's approach to invasive non-native species. Members will be acutely aware of the problems that they cause. As we know, red squirrels face a threat from their grey invasive non-native cousins, but there are also less well-known species that pose a threat, such as piri-piri burr, which is a plant that has caused considerable problems on Lindisfarne. If members are wondering what on earth it is, it is a New Zealand plant with small seed-heads that are covered in hooks that attach themselves to walkers and dogs. It outcompetes native species. Alarmingly, it has already spread to Harris and is also, unfortunately, appearing in my constituency. Although much of the bill relates to rural Scotland, we know that invasive non-native species are no strangers to urban areas. Last week, we heard that American signal crayfish had been found in the River Kelvin in Glasgow. The cost of invasive non-native species to the Scottish economy is upwards of £200 million. The bill will allow us to be better prepared in the future for invasive non-native species, and it will ensure that action can be taken when it is the best thing to do. The committee recommended that there should be a lead body for invasive non-native species and, in its evidence to the committee, Scottish Natural Heritage indicated its willingness to take on that role. I agree with the committee's analysis, and confirm that a lead body will be identified to co-ordinate responses to invasive non-native species. I will ensure that that is publicised and included in the code of practice. The code of practice will be an important document and I am happy to accept the recommendation of the Subordinate Legislation Committee and the lead committee to make the code subject to parliamentary procedure. The best way to proceed is to propose that the code be subject to affirmative procedure when it is first introduced, and that any future revisions be subject to negative procedure. That will strike the right balance and allow flexibility for future changes in what can be a fast-moving area. I turn briefly to deer. As with some other matters, the committee had to navigate through some conflicting evidence on the state of deer management in Scotland. I am pleased that the value of retaining the voluntary and privately delivered approach to deer management has been recognised. However, improvements can be made and the bill will do that. It will give SNH a better framework within which to work when the voluntary approach fails to deliver for the greater public interest. The Subordinate Legislation  Committee and lead committee also recommended that the code of practice on sustainable deer management be subject to parliamentary procedure. Again, I accept that recommendation, and am considering the most appropriate way to do it. I will write to the committees with further detail. I thank the committee for recognising that the Government listened and acted in response to the consultation on deer and that, as a result, the deer provisions in the bill are acceptable to the Committee. I look forward to hearing members' contributions in the course of this afternoon's debate. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill.

I am a little puzzled by the tone taken by the proponents of the bill. They seem to be arguing vociferously against the lobbying of the churches when those who are opposed to the bill are articulating their views from an individual perspective.  The first line of my notes for the debate stated that the title of the bill is profoundly misleading. While members are apparently attacking others for making misleading arguments, in my view the very title of the bill is misleading. What is proposed is not, by any stretch of the imagination, about assistance at the end of life. Being helped to kill oneself is the very antithesis of end of life assistance. Margo MacDonald would have been a bit more honest if she had simply called the bill what it is: an assisted dying bill. I want the end of my life, whenever that might be, to be assisted, but I want to be assisted to be as comfortable as possible. I want to be well looked after and to be supported in all the ways—medical and non-medical—that are necessary and available. This bill provides for the polar opposite.

With the greatest respect to Margo MacDonald, she spent her entire opening speech not assessing or discussing the bill at all. It is not for me to go through her bill nitpicking, although there are some practical points that I want to make. The fact is that the unintended consequences and negative impacts of the bill are as Michael McMahon indicated. I endorse everything that he said in respect of the potential impact on palliative care. None of us has a great deal of time in which to speak. I will pick up a few practical points before going back to the bigger issues. If the bill were approved by the Parliament, it would make a huge number of people passively or actively complicit in every act of assisted suicide unless they opted out. That is not just about the medical practitioners; it is about everybody who is involved in processing the entire thing. Will they all be able to opt out of the process? The committee commented on the bill's references to medical practitioners' involvement, but the questions go far beyond that and I believe that they are being dodged by the bill's proponents. Will every medical practice be required to have someone who is prepared to do this?

If so, does that not make them all complicit? If not every practice, will every health board have to make someone available, with the same consequences? What happens if a health board or a practice cannot come up with enough willing practitioners? Will individuals then be pressured into it? Will anyone  in any capacity be able to opt out of activity that would enable this activity to take place? Will I have a right to know who the willing practitioners are? Will my right to refuse treatment from any such practitioner be protected? Will doctors, nurses and others be required to proactively raise with patients the possibility and availability of assisted suicide even if they are adamantly opposed to the practice and do not wish to be involved in it?

I hear Margo MacDonald say no, but that is not what the BMA thinks. The BMA thinks that that would have to happen.

Many other such questions could be asked. I, for one, would not under any circumstances wish to be treated by any medical practitioner who was prepared to help someone to kill themselves, however supposedly pure their motives. There are far bigger questions than that. There have been some thoughtful comments about the balance between an individual's right to autonomy and the interests of society. The bill is about the social sanctioning of suicide. We are individuals, yes, but we live as individuals in society. We do not have the absolute right to elevate our individual desires above the good of society. Not even the most utilitarian of utilitarians would have argued that case. Like the committee, I have found the use of the word "intolerable" a huge problem. Of course it is subjective and could never be anything else. Enshrining such a subjective concept in legislation is very worrying; after all, by definition, it could be argued that there would be no suicide or attempted suicide unless an individual already felt that life was intolerable. Yet we spend significant amounts of money on anti-suicide strategies. Why? Because we instinctively know that, although suicide may no longer be a crime, it is still wrong.

We, society, have failed if an individual wants to commit suicide. Margo MacDonald's comments out of right field indicate an unfair and prejudiced attitude towards those who argue strongly against the bill. That attitude is based on an assumption that everybody who argues against the bill is doing so from a faith perspective. That is not the case, and it is a wrong assessment to make of the arguments. Margo MacDonald may argue that the requirements in her bill go beyond someone  simply finding life intolerable, as they include reference to physical incapacity and/or terminal illness. Ian McKee spent a great deal of time concentrating on the difficult issues of extreme pain. Nevertheless, the bill does not confine itself to that. I fear that, if we open the door now, sooner or later someone with a severe mental disability or mental illness will try to argue that it is discrimination not to include that form of incapacity—and that would just be for starters. The views of Inclusion Scotland must be taken on board by the Parliament. We would be normalising a view of incapacity that, in my view, no civilised society should accept. I am horrified at the thought that I could live in a society in which the deliberate taking of life became a public good to be publicly supported and publicly provided. No—we cannot do this.

Evidence?

My officials have regular and frequent contact with equine welfare organisations. The head of the Scottish Government animal welfare branch attended the annual conference of World Horse Welfare on 11  November 2010, and on 6 November the deputy chief veterinary officer and I spoke at the Scottish equine welfare conference, which was organised by the British Horse Society Scotland.

I can respond very positively to that question. Members may wish to know that horses are not transported from the United Kingdom in that fashion, but there is considerable concern about horses imported to the continent with journeys of up to 100 hours, which is absolutely unacceptable. The European Union says that it is unacceptable and we strongly support the campaign to ensure that the regulations are fully complied with.

We are helping to protect communities across Scotland from flooding by working with our partners to implement the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009 and providing funding through the local government settlement for local authorities to continue to invest  in flood prevention schemes. As the member knows, that includes the City of Edinburgh Council.

I am always happy to meet members who have particular concerns. The member need only ask and we will arrange a meeting. The question allows me to remind the chamber that, from 1999 to 2007, spending on flooding in Scotland was only £5.5 million per annum. In 2007-08, it went to £32.5 million and from 2008 to 2010, £42 million per year was included in the local government settlement for flood funding. I am always astonished when Labour members ask questions about flood funding, given that history. I have only just opened the Braid Burn flood prevention scheme in Edinburgh. As the member knows, the Water of Leith scheme is progressing—[ Interruption .]

It has already received money and will continue to receive support. That support will be wrapped up in the global local government settlement, the details of which will be announced shortly.

The SSPCA's work in tackling cruelty to animals often leads it into certain types of wildlife crime cases. I am grateful for the support that the SSPCA provides in that respect. It works closely and successfully with the police in joint investigations and plays a leading role in the partnership for action against wildlife crime.

At present, there are no concrete plans to consult on an extension of the SSPCA's powers. However, that discussion is active in the context of the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill. I am aware of the offer that the SSPCA has made. It is worthy of careful consideration, but members need to be aware that extending the SSPCA's powers would make a substantial change to criminal justice in Scotland. One or two issues and concerns have been raised in various quarters that would require to be gone into carefully before we proceeded any further. In my view, it is not appropriate to extend the SSPCA's powers through the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill. However, I do not rule that out for the future, and I certainly look forward to reading the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's conclusions in that regard.

The role of the police in investigating any crime remains central. Even supposing that there were extensions to the SSPCA's powers in future, that would not remove from the police their primary role. Currently, all eight police forces have a wildlife crime co-ordinator, although not all have full-time posts. All forces also have a full or part-time wildlife crime officer, although I am aware that, in some police forces, there may be a question mark over some of those posts. Operational policing matters are not my responsibility and I cannot direct police forces to do or say anything or act in certain ways. However, the Government expects all Scotland's police forces to investigate all crime to the best of their ability and resources, which I anticipate will continue to happen in future.

I recently wrote to all MSPs, setting out the extensive programme of work that the Government and its partners have in hand to make sure that Scotland is as prepared as possible to deal with flood risks. We have invested significantly in improving Scotland's flood warning systems and increased support to communities through our additional funding for the Scottish flood forum. Current levels of expenditure on flooding-related activity are at an historic high. Local authority flood prevention schemes were granted £9 million in 2006-07, when we were not in government, but the amount included for flood prevention schemes in the local government settlement for 2010-11 is £42 million.

There were quite a lot of questions wrapped into one there. The Government constantly reviews the arrangements for flood prevention and flood warnings. That is why we have put in the amounts of money that we have provided up until now—amounts of money that were simply not available in the years before 2007. The member should accept that the Government has put huge amounts of money into flood prevention. We are beginning to see some of the benefits of that, but of course it cannot within three or four years make up for the previous eight years, during which, frankly, not enough was done. Interestingly, last year's floods were precisely the reason for the letter that was sent around, and the timing of the letter. We needed to make everybody aware and remind everybody of the threat of flooding in Scotland and the increased threat that is brought about by some of the changes in our weather patterns that are beginning to be obvious. We wanted to remind people that it is important that there is preparedness at every single level, from the domestic household all the way through to local authorities and the responders, and indeed in relation to what the Government has done. On Stonehaven, I am aware that residents have experienced considerable difficulties because of and after last year's floods. We are trying to learn lessons. Every time there is a flooding incident, there are lessons to be learned. Nowhere—in no Government—is there ever a perfect response all the time. I would not pretend to be in the position of claiming that there was such a response. Each time there is such an event, we must learn the lessons for the future. I reassure the member that that is happening in respect of Stonehaven, just as it is happening in respect of all the other flooding incidents that we have experienced in Scotland over the last years.

Everybody—that is each one of us as an individual householder as well as our various local authorities and all the other relevant bodies—has a responsibility to do what we can. Obviously, what we can do at a domestic level is quite limited, but that does not absolve us of the responsibility to do it. Aberdeenshire Council has indeed carried out a lot of work in response to the Stonehaven and Huntly floods. It has been clearing river banks and watercourses and ensuring that the existing flood alleviation infrastructure is as efficient as possible. SEPA has been installing a new gauge on the Carron, which, although it is unable to provide flood warnings, can provide and has provided good flood monitoring, allowing the council, police and fire and rescue services to make decisions in real time during flooding events. When the agreement between SEPA and the Met Office bears fruit, we will have a rolling five-day forecast that is made available to all those who are involved in responding to floods so that they are as prepared as they can possibly be in the circumstances for what may or may not happen in the days ahead. That is probably about as much as can be expected at present, given that we have no certainty about when or precisely where a flood will hit.

The Government is working in partnership with land managers to protect our peatlands. In particular, we have provided funding through the Scotland rural development programme for a number of peatland management options. Regulations that prevent inappropriate land use also serve to promote better management of peatlands.

We understand the desire for more extensive restoration of damaged peatlands. The call for that is coming from a number of different areas. We have also noted the call for more research, particularly into the greenhouse gas effects of peatland restoration.  The calculation is not straightforward and simple. We are looking at supporting further research. The member may be interested to know that the Government will publish a policy statement on carbon-rich soils next month. That will set out what we are doing to support carbon-rich soils and will inform discussions about further opportunities to promote peatland restoration. All planners will have regard to these issues when it comes to decisions that are made on specific planning applications. Some of our peatlands already lie in designated sites, but most, of course, do not. When proposals for significant land use change come forward, there are issues that Scottish Natural Heritage and SEPA need to be conscious and aware of, and they must advise the relevant authority of the likely impacts and any mitigation or compensation measures that would be required if the development were to go ahead. The calculation is not always easy to make. We still have a lot of work to do to try to ensure that we understand those impacts far more clearly than we do at the moment. We support the RSPB financially through the rural priorities mechanism, and we will continue to do so.

Presiding Officer, I welcome today's debate and thank Rob Gibson for securing it. I shall treasure for ever the image of Bill Wilson sinking slowly into a bog. The debate gives us the opportunity to reflect on the importance of Scotland's soils. Often unrecognised by the public, they support outcomes that affect our daily life, economically, socially and environmentally. The debate is also useful because it allows me to make clear the Government's position and activity in respect of soils in general and peatlands in particular. The Scottish soils framework, which was published in 2009, recognised the benefits of our soils for agriculture and forestry, biodiversity and minimising greenhouse gas emissions. It set out a broad range of actions and we are progressing that work with stakeholders. We are preparing a position paper on peatlands and other carbon-rich soils. I hope that Rob Gibson and those others who have mentioned it will welcome that. The paper will include the actions that we have in hand for conservation and restoration, and the next steps. I plan to release that paper next month. I refer to carbon-rich soils, because maximising the benefits means we need to look widely and consider all opportunities. The position paper will  recognise the protection for peatlands that is provided by regulations such as the planning regime and environmental legislation. Funding is currently available for restoration, and the paper will set out the support that can be provided through the Scottish rural development programme. A number of members have raised the issue, and I will say something about it later. The paper will also outline our current knowledge, and its limits. Scotland is home to a sizeable proportion of Europe's peatlands, as members have said, and it is also the home for excellent scientific expertise. I will say a word about research, because we still have gaps in our knowledge. Many members will be aware that we are finalising the next rural and environment research programme. Peatlands will feature as a significant component of that. That is essential, as decisions must be informed by the best science. In that context, I welcome the IUCN's initiative. I reassure members that the Government, our agencies, and main research providers are active partners in the IUCN's deliberations. Officials are on the IUCN advisory group. The Government was also represented at yesterday's event, and SEPA gave evidence on other actions that support peatland conservation. Officials have regularly met Clifton Bain to discuss the IUCN's report since the inquiry started in March and, through SEPA and SNH, we have given financial support to the inquiry's events, including the September conference in Durham. I hope that members will feel that the Government has been engaged in the IUCN's work. I trust that the statement that will come out next month will be seen as a useful contribution. Equally, I look forward to the commission's outcomes and hope that they will contribute to developing a consensus. There are gaps in our understanding of the greenhouse gas effects of different land management practices, and our research programme will help to address those gaps. Of course, work is already being done. A considerable programme has been carried out over a number of years using the estimating carbon in organic soils sequestration and emissions model—ECOSSE—in 2007 and ECOSSE 2 in 2009, and the peatlands expert workshop. We have already funded quite a significant amount of research, and the new five-year programme of research funding will have, as a part of it, a high priority of improving our understanding of the extent, condition and role of peatlands. During the summer, Stewart Stevenson chaired the short-life group to review our emissions targets. It concluded that there are likely to be benefits from healthy peatlands for carbon  sequestration. However, we must recognise that there is still work to be done to assess the long-term benefits of carbon sequestration more precisely, particularly those that might be possible from restorative management. There will soon be an opportunity to improve the carbon accounting methodology. I assure Jamie McGrigor that we have an eye to that. We hope that the United Nations conference in Cancún next month will agree a method for wetland management. We will review the scope to develop our greenhouse gas inventory when that deal has been reached. Such discussions on the facts are essential. Budgets are tight, so we need to be clear that we are getting value for money and addressing the right priorities.

I am grateful for the intervention, and I am always reassured when I hear Conservative members, in any chamber, wanting to talk about the public good in that constructive way. I promise Jamie McGrigor that we will have a look at that if it is not already being done—I would be very surprised if it is not already in people's minds. I recognise that we need to engage widely with land managers, public bodies and non-governmental organisations. I know that organisations such as the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association and NFU Scotland recognise the importance of public benefits, but we must remember that such benefits can come at a cost to individuals—and that is one issue that we have to address. I will come back to the funding issue. Yesterday, the Government received Brian Pack's report on the future of farm support. It makes some helpful and valuable recommendations on how public benefits might be better achieved in future farm support structures. A number of the recommendations will, of course, need to be considered at the EU level. Members have mentioned the land use strategy, but I am afraid that I will run out of time if I deal with it directly. However, I can reassure members that management of our peatlands will be part of the objective of sustainable land use in the Government's land use strategy. It will be addressed overtly, and I hope that members will take that reassurance in the spirit in which it is given.  To conclude, we recognise the potential contribution of carbon-rich soils. We will continue to play our part through all the mechanisms that are available, such as regulation, research, and informed actions, and we remain committed to working with everybody. We welcome the IUCN's initiative and look forward to its conclusions, and I hope that we will be able to agree a strategy for peatlands that will be of benefit in Scotland and beyond.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

Through the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009, the Scottish Government has introduced a more sustainable and modern approach to flood risk management, suited to the needs of the 21st century and to the impact of climate change. The act provides the framework within which Inverclyde Council, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Water, working together, have duties to assess, map and act to reduce flood risk in Inverclyde. I am sure that no council would wish to be in breach of that duty.

Duncan McNeil will be well aware that the arrangements for ensuring that flood protection money was made available to councils changed after 2007. I am surprised that he wants to go into this area because, from 1999 to 2007, an average of only £5.5 million a year  was spent on flooding, but in 2007-08, that sum rose to £32.4 million and, in 2008-10, the figure was £42 million. Each of the local authorities was given an allocation that was in line with what they considered to be appropriate to pitch for at the time. It might well be that the Inverclyde proportion of that has now had to be reassessed. That reassessment will, of course, be taken into account in any future budget discussions.

I am well aware of Stuart McMillan's long-standing interest in the matter and, at his invitation, I visited the area last year to see the difficult problems that were beginning to be experienced. I hope that all local authorities will carefully examine the new duties that they must now comply with. It might be that many local authorities must bring themselves up to speed with regard to their understanding of the implications of the new legislation. It is difficult to see how much more any Government can do. The hammer of legislation is now in place and councils' duties are clear. I hope that no council—Inverclyde included—will wilfully ignore what it is now required to do.

I congratulate John Scott on his good try. In fairness to him and to other members, I say that there is increasing awareness that pluvial flooding, as well as fluvial flooding, can bring major difficulties. Scottish Water is aware that it has to address many of its  responsibilities in respect of the sewerage system, which can cause problems—it has done so in many constituencies, including mine—that might not otherwise exist. We are actively addressing the issue and I hope that John Scott will not be disappointed in the future.

We are working with other organisations in a range of policy areas to encourage changes to our cities to make them greener places. Examples include the sustainable Glasgow project, which proposes a range of initiatives to reduce the city's carbon emissions and includes the creation of urban woodland on vacant land. Another is the central Scotland green network, which aims to achieve a step change in environmental quality in and around the cities and towns of the central belt. It is one of the largest green network initiatives, if not the largest, in Europe.

I am happy to visit any such project anywhere, including in Glasgow. In the near future, I will be in Drumchapel in Glasgow to look at some similar initiatives. I am aware of the project that the member mentioned. There are a great many such opportunities in cities, including Glasgow. They are extraordinarily important in bringing people to an understanding that green issues are not confined to rural Scotland but are part and parcel of urban Scotland, too. The people who run the project that Sandra White mentioned should get in touch with the CSGN, as they might find an open door and a willing ear to listen to what is happening in the inner city in Glasgow.

Scottish Natural Heritage has advised that it intends to await the outcome of the application by Ayrshire Power Ltd at Hunterston before it considers the renotification of the Portencross coast site of special scientific interest. However, SNH will review the position if the application is withdrawn or delayed significantly.

I would be in a slightly difficult position if I got into too open a discussion about what might be a commercial conversation—especially about just one half of the conversation that is being referred to. There is an existing SSSI, and the renotification does not change the duty to protect it. I take on board Ross Finnie's point about the currently available information on the existing boundaries. I cannot answer the question whether those boundaries would change under renotification, but I will have a conversation with Mr Finnie to discuss the issue  further, because there might be a way in which I can help to get that information.

Officials have regular discussions with their counterparts in the Environment Agency concerning the management of the border river Esk.

I am happy to give John Lamont that assurance. Ministers in Scotland currently have no role in relation to rod licences for salmon and freshwater fisheries in the border river Esk. John Lamont might know that the management of rivers on the border is subject to agreements with the UK Environment Agency, so that although English law applies on the Esk north of the border, Scottish law applies on the Tweed south of the border. There is a reciprocal arrangement, which needs to be taken into consideration.

I am happy to do that. I will have to look at the detail of Sheriff Drummond's remarks. It is the case that the legislation that governs much of the matter goes back to the mid-1970s, and it might be time to reassess whether it is working for where we are now. I am happy to agree with Christine Grahame and John Lamont that we should take matters forward in conversation.

Protection for Scotland's wild birds of prey is delivered through robust legislation and through the designation and appropriate management of protected areas, in accordance with the requirements of European law. We are tackling wildlife crime according to the recommendations of the 2008 review of wildlife crime arrangements that was carried out by Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland and the Inspectorate of Prosecution in Scotland. We are providing funding for the national wildlife crime unit and for several projects that are targeted at reducing wildlife crime, including a fund that the Scottish police are to deploy in specialised wildlife investigations.

I am sure that Elaine Murray would not want me to pre-empt decisions that might be made. We are looking actively at a range of potential measures for which the bill's progress through the Parliament affords the opportunity. I have read with interest the evidence to the committee, which has heard from a wide range of people. Several different routes can be taken, as the member knows. We are actively considering all those potential routes. That is important because, every time such a report is publicised, it does Scotland no good in the international community. Most people are appalled when they see raptors destroyed in such a manner.

I am grateful to members for their speeches and will respond to some of their comments. We agree on much. I sincerely hope that at decision time members will take the opportunity to usher in a new era for crofting, in which crofting again becomes the backbone of our remote, rural communities. Crofting tenure requires both occupation and the land to be worked. In return, it provides security of tenure for tenants, the right of succession, the right to the value of improvements that are made to the land and the right to fair rent. Let no one ever forget those fundamental rights that crofters  fought for and won 125 years ago. Equally, let no one forget the responsibilities that derive from those rights. I am certain that the men and women who struggled for those rights in the 19th century would echo that sentiment, because they did not undertake that struggle so that their communities would be half empty and the land neglected so many years later. Crofting also opens the door to agricultural and housing grants that are available only to people who agree to live by the conditions of crofting tenure, whether they are tenants or owner-occupiers. That is right, because crofters deserve reward for the benefits to society that crofting delivers. We have taken steps today that at last recognise the changes that were made in 1976, and which equalise the responsibilities and the rewards that are open to tenant and owner-occupier crofters. I turn to issues that were raised in the course of this short debate. Sarah Boyack and Karen Gillon are understandably exercised by the gender imbalance in crofting tenure. I do not disagree with them that there is a clear imbalance; I disagree with them only about whether the franchise is the place to fix it. I do not think that it is. I invite both members to talk to me, to ascertain whether we can come up with proposals that might have a practical impact in changing the gender imbalance. A number of members, including Sarah Boyack and Liam McArthur, mentioned the crofting register, which was a key area of dissent. I remind members that the register triggers will not come in until 2013 at the earliest and that we have agreed that the date will be pushed back to 2014 if the community mapping proposals are successful. There is a considerable amount of time for crofters to prepare for registration. I also need to point out that the minute that a crofter decrofts, as many do, he or she must immediately register their title with the land register of Scotland. Why not before? That is, in effect, what we are saying. I should say, too, that the land register, which was brought in all those years ago, is still by no means complete throughout the country. Title registers take time to implement. John Scott was right to point out that the bill will allow us to tackle abuses more effectively and that democratic accountability will be introduced in relation to the commission. On his more general point about conservation, the bill allows crofters to refrain from using the croft if that is for the purpose of conservation, so we see no conflict between crofting policy and conservation policy. I mentioned Liam McArthur's comments on the crofting register. I cannot allow his other  comments to go by. I have never been accused of having difficulty saying no. I am worried that Liam McArthur might turn out to be one of those men who do not hear women who say no. His colleague Jamie Stone had no difficulty. On Alasdair Allan's comments, we can now take forward the review of the croft house grant scheme in the context of the bill. That will include equalising access to the scheme. Peter Peacock raised a number of issues, many of which are related to the challenges facing crofting. Of course there are challenges to be faced and we have said right from the outset that no single piece of legislation made by Government would ever be able to tackle every single one of those challenges. Among all that Peter Peacock said, he will know that the existing absentee initiative is already bearing fruit. It needed to be strengthened and it has been in the context of the bill. He talks about resources but, if he had succeeded in getting most of what he wanted, it would have meant piling on more duties, so his position is rather inconsistent. He raised the issue of the market in crofting tenancies; a look at any estate agent in the crofting counties will reveal that they have crofting tenancies as well as owner-occupied crofts on the books. It is denying reality to think that crofting tenancies are not subject to the free market. There is no point in flying in the face of what we know is already happening. The bill represents the culmination of almost 10 years of consultation on the future of crofting, especially if we include the legislation introduced by the previous Government. In all the consultation responses that we got, I did see some from individual crofters who were in favour of the map-based register. To pretend that there is unanimous opposition to any part of the bill is not to accept reality. I also agree with a number of other members when I say that I am not sure how soon the Parliament will want to return to the subject of crofting. We must vote the bill through and begin the work on the ground to reverse the decline in crofting. It will require a monumental effort by a lot of people, but I am confident that we can achieve it because we can now put the right structures in place. We have clear duties for crofters, whether they are tenants or owner-occupiers, a democratically accountable commission, a proper legal register, and a way forward to take crofting through the 21st century and into the 22nd.

I note that the excitement of this morning was not sufficient to encourage everybody to come flooding back into the chamber this afternoon to see what more excitement we could offer. It has been a long and sometimes difficult journey to get to this point. The bill will not solve every single one of the challenges that crofting faces, because no piece of legislation could ever do that. Market forces and support mechanisms have a big impact on crofting, and we must continue to do what we can to ensure that crofting continues to provide opportunities for those who live in our remote and rural communities. What the legislation will do is ensure that we have a governance structure for the crofting commission that reflects and responds to the people whom it regulates. It will ensure that we have a proper and comprehensive register of land held in crofting tenure, which will remove doubt over the boundaries of croft land and the interests in that land. It will require decisive action to be taken to address the blight of widespread absenteeism, neglect and misuse, and it will curb the speculation that threatens the very sustainability of crofting. The combination of those provisions sets a framework for crofting to prosper and to provide a model for sustainable rural development. I pay tribute to some of those who have helped us to get to this point. First, I thank the committee of inquiry on crofting, which took on the challenge of developing a vision for the future of crofting following the passage of the Crofting Reform etc Act 2007. I also thank the crofters who have engaged with the process all the way along, even if there was rarely a point at which their views were unanimous. The Crofters Commission, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, the Registers of Scotland and local authorities have also contributed to the development of the legislation, as have officials in the Parliament and the Government, who have worked tirelessly to give us a bill that reflects our aspirations. Finally, I thank the members of various committees, particularly the members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, for their consideration.  I have been fortunate enough to see for myself the benefits that crofting delivers. Those include strong communities that are bound together by a collective effort to work the land and contribute to one another's welfare; the innovation of crofters and the contribution that they make to the economic vitality of the Highlands and Islands; the remarkable landscape, environment and hospitality in those parts of our nation that we can all enjoy as a consequence of their work; and the vibrant Gaelic culture in the west and the strong Nordic culture in the north that add to the cultural diversity of this great country. Those are all consistent with the Government's purpose, and reflect the national outcomes that we seek to deliver. However, crofting has been under threat from those whose concern is not the welfare of those communities, and whose motives are sometimes driven purely by personal gain. That is why we must act now to address speculation, to tackle absenteeism, neglect and misuse, and to ensure that crofts once again provide people with the opportunity to live on and work the land. There has been much debate on the issue of a crofting register, but I firmly believe that a clear, map-based and legal register of land held in crofting tenure is a must in order to safeguard crofting. Otherwise, the disputes that cause anguish to crofting communities will continue and possibly increase as knowledge of croft boundaries is lost. I will go so far as to say that in a few years' time, when the crofting register is up and running, people will look back and wonder what all the fuss was about. I will take up some of the issues that were raised this morning. John Scott asked whether consideration had been given to removing whins and rushes, as well as iris, from the list of things to which the commission should have regard when it considers whether the crofter is keeping the land in a fit state for cultivation. Although I bow to his much greater knowledge of managing agricultural land, our view is that failure to manage whins and rushes in a balanced way will lead to their getting out of control and land becoming unfit for cultivation and positive species management. With regard to whins, a monoculture is not acceptable in relation to eligibility for the single farm payment.

We do not see any conflict with those. I indicated that we are talking about things getting out of control and said that there is an issue with the SFP as well. The matter may be more complicated than a minute or two in the chamber allows us to explore. If John Scott  has continuing concerns, we can continue to have dialogue on them. Elaine Murray asked this morning whether the Crofters Commission had ever invoked Crown immunity. We have no evidence that it has ever done so, and I am still not clear exactly what she thinks the commission might be seeking Crown immunity from.

I want to press on. On the extension of the franchise to partners, it is notable that two of the three quotations that I read out this morning were from women, one of whom is a registered crofter. The Crofters Commission faces a new dawn and a new opportunity as the crofting commission. I have started the process of setting its sights firmly on the business of regulation and on ensuring that crofts are occupied and used. The Crofters Commission has received much criticism over the years, but the truth is that, in some cases, it simply has not had the right tools. It has never been required to hold maps of crofts and has never had a duty to tackle absenteeism and neglect. Today, we can change that. We can have a democratically accountable commission that has a duty, and the powers that it needs, to tackle speculation, absenteeism and neglect. We can establish a new and meaningful crofting register. Through that, we can grow crofting and make it the future and not the past. I commend the bill to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill be passed.

On 2 June, at a conference on forestry in the low-carbon economy, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment highlighted the contribution that biomass can make to renewable energy targets and recognised the particularly important role of relatively small-scale biomass plants that produce heat or combined heat and power. The full text of the speech is available on the Scottish Government's website. Currently more than 90 per cent of renewable heat is generated from woody biomass. Wood fuel use is rising substantially year on year and will be a key element in meeting our 11 per cent renewable heat target in 2020. Of course, wood supplies from existing forests are finite, so we are keen for Scotland-produced biomass to be utilised mainly for relatively small-scale, heat-only or CHP plants. The Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism and I met representatives of the wood processing industries on 9 June and released a statement in which we acknowledged the important role that Scotland's forests can make to a low-carbon economy.

All members of the Scottish Government are aware of the challenges that we face with respect to wood supply and we are aware of a variety of pieces of research on the matter. We are actively involved in the development of United Kingdom sustainability criteria for biomass for heat and electricity. The working group, which includes stakeholders from the Scottish Government, other Administrations in the UK, industry and non-governmental organisations, is considering mandatory criteria for large-scale biomass plants, including a minimum greenhouse gas emissions savings threshold. The member will not, of course, expect me to comment on individual planning applications.

I will not be drawn, even by a member of my party, into discussing individual projects and planning applications. I have made it clear that we are aware of the problems in respect of sustainability—we are aware on a joint ministerial basis. I assure members that we understand and fully accept the concerns of the wood fuel industry and the questions that have arisen about it.

The concern that the member describes has been widely expressed by the industry. We have met industry members to listen to their concerns and discuss how we might move forward. As I said, at a recent meeting we recognised the important contribution of the industries in the context of carbon and employment. We also welcome the increasing contribution that wood is making to the production of renewable energy. A recent study for the forest industries on supply and demand argued that displacement is a potentially serious issue. Officials are highlighting the supply issues with the Department for Energy and Climate Change. The Scottish Government is particularly keen to see biomass used mainly for heat-only or CHP plants in areas that are off the gas grid and of any appropriate scale. We will consult on proposed changes to the renewables obligations Scotland later in the summer, and we will welcome contributions from the timber and energy sectors.

A very successful biomass scheme is currently in operation; I am sure that Jamie McGrigor is aware of that. Companies in my constituency have benefited from the scheme and I would be surprised if many members do not have companies in their constituencies that have benefited equally from it.

Scottish ministers have no powers to intervene once an authority has granted  planning permission. All enforcement powers relating to existing planning consents lie with local authorities. Scottish ministers have a general power to instruct authorities to notify a planning application to them, but that must be invoked before the decision to grant or refuse planning permission has been issued by the local authority.

Those matters might well have been relevant considerations for the planning authority. However, I must reiterate that it is for the planning authority to take such matters into account when determining the planning application, and I have no locus to intervene.

Amendment 136 removes the seven-year time limit for former crofters and cottars who have acquired the site of their dwelling-house to apply for grant assistance under section 45(1) of the 1993 act towards the erection, improvement or rebuilding of dwelling-houses, so that they are treated equally to tenant crofters. Paragraph 3(17A) of schedule 2 will also allow owner-occupier crofters to apply for similar grant assistance, so crofting grants will apply equally to all applicants. I move amendment 136.  Amendment 136 agreed to.  Amendments 137 and 138 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.  Amendments 218 to 220, 228, 139 and 221 not moved.  Amendment 140 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.  Amendment 222 not moved.  Amendment 141 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.  Amendment 223 not moved.  Amendment 142 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.

The arguments that I made at stage 2 when we debated a amendment that was similar to amendment 100 apply again in this case. The Government's view remains that crofters should contribute to costs that the general taxpayer currently meets if the commission is processing a regulatory application that is primarily for the crofter's own individual financial gain. It is for the Government to determine that level of contribution, with wider economic considerations in mind. That is only fair, and I urge members to reject amendment 100. As for the suggestion that those regulations should be subject to affirmative procedure, neither the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee nor  the Subordinate Legislation Committee considered that level of Parliament scrutiny to be necessary. Parliamentary time should not be taken up with debating which functions should be chargeable and the reasonable level of charge that should be set for the carrying out of the commission's regulatory functions. That applies to other agencies across the board, and I therefore strongly urge members to reject amendment 139.

Amendment 101 effectively allows ministers to undelegate—I am not sure whether that is a word—the power to select a person to chair the commission to the members of the commission. The Government accepted at stage 2 Peter Peacock's amendment that enables ministers to delegate that function, on the understanding that it was agreed that provision would need to be made at stage 3 to cover the scenario in which the board of the commission was unable to agree on a convener and ministers would therefore need to exercise that power. Amendment 102 seems to be rather confused. The Scottish ministers cannot set out their reasons for not delegating their power of appointment in the annual report to which the amendment refers, because the report is not produced by the Scottish ministers. It is to be produced by the commission under section 2B of the 1993 act. The Scottish ministers are required to lay a copy of the commission's annual report before Parliament along with any comments that they consider to be appropriate, but it is not their report. Leaving aside those obvious problems with amendment 102, I tell Liam McArthur right now what reasons Scottish ministers might have for not delegating the power to appoint the convener. If the election was to produce members of the commission whom Scottish ministers felt did not have the necessary skills or experience to chair a multimillion-pound NDPB, or if it produced a person with whom ministers did not think that they could form a good working relationship, which might threaten the chain of accountability that ministers have to Parliament over the performance  of Executive NDPBs, they may choose not to delegate the power to appoint the convener. As I have just given Liam McArthur the reasons why that might happen, and given that ministers cannot write the commission's report for it, I ask him not to move amendment 102. I move amendment 101.

Amendments 103 and 104 are necessary to fulfil our commitment to John Scott at stage 2 to lodge amendments that would provide for the Scottish ministers to ensure that at least one member of the crofting commission represents landlords' interests. The amendments provide for that where a landlord is not elected to the commission. I move amendment 103.

At stage 1, the view of stakeholders on the franchise for crofting elections was crystal clear. Marina Dennis of the Scottish Crofting Federation stated: "Only crofters who are registered with the commission should be entitled to vote." Jonathan Hall of NFU Scotland said: "We agree with that." Jean Balfour of the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association said: "I agree with what Marina Dennis and Jonathan Hall have said."—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 10 February 2010; c 2374-5.] The issue is the entitlement to vote being confined to those who are registered crofters. What happened at stage 2 is unfortunate, which is why we lodged amendment 107 to undo Karen Gillon's amendment. There has been some misunderstanding about what the effect of her original amendment would be and what her revised amendments would do. They would not provide for a crofter to give their vote to someone else in the household; rather, they provide that crofters with partners may get two votes, whereas the single crofter would get one vote. That is unfair. I believe that the crofting regulator should simply be elected by those whom it regulates. I sympathise with Karen Gillon's motivation in addressing the gender balance in crofting, but I do not believe that what she has proposed is the solution to the gender imbalance, which needs to be tackled elsewhere. Moreover, the proposal to afford votes to crofters' cohabitants would be extremely difficult and resource intensive to implement. How on earth is the commission to establish whether persons of the opposite sex are living together as if husband and wife, or whether persons of the same sex are living as if civil partners? Therefore, I urge members to support my amendments in the group and to reject amendments 202 and 203. Amendment 105 responds to the oversight that the Subordinate Legislation Committee brought to our attention, and provides the maximum penalty for any offences that are made under the power to make regulations in connection with elections to the crofting commission. The maximum penalty provided for is consistent and fair. Amendments 106 and 108 tidy up drafting deficiencies in Karen Gillon's and Liam McArthur's amendments from stage 2. We accepted those amendments in principle, but stated at the time that we would need to tidy up the drafting. I urge members to reject amendments 202 and 203 and to support amendments 105 to 108.

Moved en bloc!

Amendment 99 is a slightly bizarre follow-up to amendment 51 at stage 2, with which Elaine Murray sought to remove the clarification that the commission is not a Crown body and is not to be regarded as having any status, privilege or immunity of the Crown. That is, in fact, the normal position for an executive non-departmental public body such as the commission. Most modern legislation relating to executive NDPBs is explicit on that and includes these provisions. The overwhelming majority of executive NDPBs do not have Crown status or immunity. The intention behind amendment 99 is unclear. The member proposes that this executive NDPB is not a Crown body but somehow enjoys Crown immunity, which is illogical. Let me make it clear: the commission makes decisions as a body corporate; commissioners do not make decisions individually. Furthermore, as a regulatory body, the commission exercises administrative, not judicial, functions. Crown immunity would offer no protection in the highly unlikely case that someone tried to sue the commission, as Crown immunity does not apply to the exercise of administrative functions. I therefore urge members to reject this confusing amendment.

I still do not think that the proposed report is necessary. The crofting commission will already be required to produce annual reports, to which ministers will be able to add any comments that they consider appropriate. Before producing its annual report, the commission will be required to consult HIE and relevant local authorities, which is very widely indeed. In my view, amendment 199 will add an additional, unnecessary bit of bureaucracy.  However, I see that it is quite clear that I will be defeated on amendment 199, so we will not resist amendment 199.

Sorry, we said no to amendment 93.

I appreciate that you did not hear me say no, Presiding Officer, but the clerk did and so did members here. I really must ask that the vote be taken on amendment 93.

Amendments 190 and 191 seek to require the commission to consult the crofter if it proposes to refuse an application to assign a croft to a member of the crofter's family and to allow the crofter 28 days to submit further representations on the proposed decision. Of course, such a decision would be made because the commission was not satisfied that the absenteeism issue would be dealt with. In effect, the amendments seek to create an additional procedural step for the commission in dealing with family assignation at a time when Peter Peacock has also been arguing about commission resources. They also seek to ensure that crofting legislation continues to contain the kind of inequalities among crofters that this Government is attempting to remove. This Government believes that all regulatory applications to the commission—assignation or  otherwise—should be treated equally, fairly and reasonably, whether they are family or non-family transfers. The amendments would not add much to the existing commission policy, which is to allow assignations to be made to either family or non-family members, even if they are unable to comply with the duties immediately, so long as they undertake to comply within a reasonable timeframe and put interim arrangements in place to ensure that the croft is worked. I therefore urge Parliament to reject amendments 190 and 191.

As I said to the committee at stage 2 in relation to a similar amendment that Liam McArthur lodged, primary legislation should not direct the detail of the policy. I fully recognise the value of protecting inby land in order to preserve crofting and I agree that development plans need to reflect that, but there might be occasions on which some development on inby land is in the interests of the whole crofting community. The example that I gave at stage 2 still applies: in some cases, for practical, environmental, financial and other sound planning reasons, hill and rough grazing land might be unsuitably remote for a new village hall or primary school. As some members will know, both Shetland Islands Council and Comhairle nan Eilean Siar have raised the issue of protecting crofting areas—particularly their most productive land—and the Government's planning officials have  already offered to work with those councils and others to develop plans to protect the best croft land from inappropriate development. At stage 2, I gave an undertaking that we would draw on those experiences to inform the next review of Scottish planning policy. It is vital that the commission, Government planners and local authorities work in partnership to achieve what is best for local circumstances. I therefore ask Liam McArthur to withdraw amendment 198 in favour of my assurance that the partnership approach that I suggested at stage 2, and which I reiterate today, will address the issues.

I congratulate the three members on their wise and well-drafted amendments, with which I agree totally. Each member has explained the intent and purpose of their amendments clearly. I take on board Liam McArthur's comments, and I urge Parliament to support all the amendments in the group.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

I am afraid that, despite the revisions that Elaine Murray has made since stage 2, I still cannot support amendments 76 and 77. They are unnecessary. If a crofter can demonstrate that they are doing something or refraining from doing something in a planned and managed manner for the purposes of nature conservation, that is already enough to prevent the commission from taking action against them for misuse or neglect of the croft. In reaching its decisions as to whether or not crofters are complying with the duty, the commission is already free to consult whoever it wants, including SNH, about the activity that crofters are or are not undertaking. However, the effect of amendments 76 and 77 would be to fetter the discretion of the commission to take action on misuse or neglect. SNH, or any other conservation body, would need to state only that the planned and managed activity or inactivity was contributing to a nature conservation purpose—to any extent—and the commission would be unable to conclude that the duty not to misuse or neglect the croft was being breached. There would be no test of material or significant contribution. Furthermore, there would be no link between the conservation purpose of the crofter's activity or inactivity and the contribution to a conservation purpose that is perceived by SNH. Therefore, if the crofter stated that they were protecting corncrakes, and SNH stated that butterfly habitats were being protected, the commission would be unable to act. Even if SNH concluded that corncrake habitats were being damaged by the crofter, but also concluded that butterflies were thriving instead, the commission could not act. Amendments 78 to 80 and 82 ensure that enforcement action by the commission to terminate a crofter's tenancy or to require letting proposals from an owner-occupier crofter cannot be taken against crofters and owner-occupier crofters for being absent from the croft where they have received consent from the commission to be absent. Amendment 81 clarifies that new section 26A(1B) of the 1993 act applies only to short leases of tenants of owner-occupier crofters under new section 29A of the 1993 act. Amendment 84 provides that the commission cannot take enforcement action to require an owner-occupier crofter who is in breach of their duties to let their croft where the owner-occupier crofter has applied for consent to let the croft whether on a short lease or to a tenant crofter.  Amendment 135 provides that where a crofter has sublet the croft under section 27 of the 1993 act, the crofter is deemed to comply with their duties if the sub-tenant complies with them. The exception is, of course, the duty not to misuse the croft. Also, where the commission has consented to the crofter being absent, the crofter is deemed to comply with the residency duty in new section 5AA of the 1993 act. The landlord will then be unable to apply to the Scottish Land Court to seek removal of the crofter on the grounds of breach of duty.

This group of amendments tidies up the provisions on the registration of common grazings. Amendment 53 mirrors the section that the bill inserts into the 1993 act that makes provision about the effect of registration in the crofting register. Amendment 56 makes consequential changes to avoid duplication in new section 51B of the 1993 act. Amendment 116 restricts the information that is to be included in the registration schedule of a common grazing to avoid duplication of information in the register. Amendments 117 and 118 are consequential to it. Amendment 119 removes the requirement for information about a landlord or landowner of a croft to be entered into the common grazing registration schedule. Amendment 120 mirrors the drafting changes that amendment 32 made to section 11. Now that everybody is absolutely clear on that, I move amendment 53.  Amendment 53 agreed to.  Amendment 54 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.  Amendment 166 not moved.

Amendments 175 and 178 propose that the Scottish ministers be able to specify by order islands for which the duty of tenant and owner-occupier crofters to reside on the croft or within 32km of it should be replaced by a reference to being ordinarily resident on the island. The Government fully recognises the unique position of islands, and I fully expect the commission to take island situations into account when considering cases where crofters live more than 32km from their crofts. For example, if a crofter lives more than 50km away from the croft as the crow flies and 30km of that is across the sea, but he regularly goes by boat to work his croft, that would be something for the commission to take into account in considering whether to grant consent for the crofter to be absent. However, Liam McArthur's amendments do not address that. They would simply allow ministers to exempt certain islands from the residency requirement. Therefore, I am not convinced that they would achieve what he might have intended; instead, the door might be opened to permitting absenteeism on large islands, where it should be tackled. The 32km residency requirement is a trigger for the commission to consider whether there are any issues relating to the absence that need to be addressed. The commission will retain the flexibility to consider each situation in which a person is outwith the residency distance. I hope that that reassurance is sufficient for Liam McArthur to withdraw amendment 175.

Amendments 65 and 68 respond to an issue that Peter Peacock raised at stage 2. They replace the requirement for tenant and owner-occupier crofters to cultivate or put to another purposeful use every part of the croft with a requirement that every part of the croft that is capable of being cultivated or put to another purposeful use is put to such use. That means that areas that obviously cannot be put to such use—for example, there may be a large rock in the middle of the croft—may reasonably be excluded. Of course, any use that the croft is put to is always subject to any overriding statutory protections. I am happy to add my name to the list of supporters of amendments 176 and 177, as I recognise that the intention is to safeguard suitable environments for corncrakes. I have no difficulties with that. I move amendment 65.

I do not think that there is anything that I can usefully add at this point. I will come back to John Scott and Liam McArthur on the specific issues that they have raised.  Amendment 65 agreed to.  Amendment 176 moved—[John Scott]—and agreed to.  Amendments 66 and 67 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.

These amendments relate to owner-occupied crofts. Amendment 69 replaces the reference to the sale of an owner-occupied croft with a reference to a "transfer (whether or not for valuable consideration)". It will require an owner-occupier crofter to apply to the commission to divide a croft before transferring title to any part of it, either through a sale or a transfer for no value. There will be no more ending up with umpteen owners of different parts of an owner-occupied croft, making accountability for that croft extremely difficult. Amendments 70, 71, 72 and 73 are consequential to amendment 69. Amendments 88  and 89 insert references to new subsections 4A and 4B inserted by amendment 90, and amendment 90 disapplies subsections 1A and 1B of section 29A, which relate to the registration of short leases, as short leases do not need to be registered under section 5, and do not trigger first registration under section 4. Amendment 91 applies the rights and regulations of the common grazings that would normally apply to the owner-occupier crofter where a right in a common grazing is let to a tenant on a short lease of the croft under section 29A. That mirrors the present position for tenant crofters and their sub-tenants. I move amendment 69.  Amendment 69 agreed to.  Amendment 70 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.  Amendment 179 not moved.  Amendments 71 to 73 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.

Now that we have agreed that the register is here to stay, we can move on to group 5, which contains procedural amendments arising from further discussions with the Registers of Scotland following stage 2. The amendments make changes to the procedures for issuing registration certificates and notification of changes to the register and clarify the date on which the challenge period starts in relation to first registration. The result of amendments 26, 27, 29 and 52 is that the keeper of the registers will now issue a certificate of registration only in relation to the first registration of a croft. Whenever the register is subsequently amended, the keeper will issue written notification of the change. Amendment 31 provides that there is no need for the keeper to issue a fresh certificate at the end of the challenge period. Amendment 37 therefore removes the requirement for a person who is challenging a first registration to notify the keeper of that challenge. Amendment 34 is a consequence of John Scott's stage 2 amendment to alter the start date of the challenge period. Amendments 63, 115, 121 and 122 make consequential changes to the provisions on the registration of common grazings and land that is held runrig. I move amendment 26.  Amendment 26 agreed to.   Amendments 27 to 29 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.

Amendments 42 to 45 are minor drafting amendments. Amendments 42 to 44 ensure that the keeper can rectify mistakes in the register that result from mistakes that are made by the commission when it is the applicant and is registering a croft for the first time. Amendments 45 and 48 ensure that the commission may be liable for costs that are  incurred through the renotification of the first registration of a croft when it makes a mistake. Amendment 47 provides that the keeper is not liable in indemnity where a person should have known at the time of registration of a mistake in the register, or where the loss is due to the person's own fraud or carelessness. It also prevents indemnity claims where there is a boundary discrepancy on the register that falls within accepted map discrepancy levels. I move amendment 42.

Amendment 145 is a new version of Peter Peacock's failed amendment at stage 2 that sought to require the compilation of community maps and plans. It appears that we have dropped the maps, held on to the plans and changed their purpose. They are now supposedly for the crofting communities' benefit rather than the commission's. Peter Peacock seems unable to come to terms with the fact that responsibility for crofting development already rests with Highlands and Islands Enterprise. It has already developed its growth at the edge approach, which does a vast amount of what he is talking about. Peter Peacock spent much of his time at stage 2 trying to scare everyone about the resource implications of getting the commission to do no more than its regulatory job properly—[ Interruption .]

Yet here he is suggesting that we lump this completely uncosted, unresourced and potentially extremely burdensome requirement on the commission. The proposal would simply take us backwards rather than forwards, and the amendment should be rejected.

Professor Jim Hunter said that it would be a huge step forward to have a register, particularly a map-based register. Sir Crispin Agnew said; "A map-based register of crofts is essential." Keith Graham, retired principal clerk to the Scottish Land Court, said "I welcome the general principle behind a definitive map-based register". Jonathan Hall of the NFUS said: "The NFU Scotland is firmly of the opinion that we need a definitive map-based register—there is no doubt that that is essential." Even Jean Balfour of the SRPBA said: "We support map-based registration in principle."  The SCF said: "The SCF strongly supports an effective crofting register."—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 10 February 2010; c 2354, 2357, 2385, 2386.] The National Trust for Scotland, a landowner, said that it welcomed the creation of a new map-based crofting register, which it believed was essential for the future of crofting. In the face of all that evidence, Labour and the Liberal Democrats are trying to destroy a proposal to create, for the first time, a proper, accurate, legal, reliable and map-based register of land held in crofting tenure. The existing crofting register is administrative only. The case for such a register and the benefits that it will bring is compelling. The Government has listened to some of the concerns that have been expressed about the crofting register and has responded with incentives to encourage communities to come forward with group registrations and a commitment to delay the mandatory trigger points for a year, which will give those communities three years to prepare group registrations. The first mandatory trigger cannot come in until 2013. To ensure that the register will deliver those benefits, we must allow for a fair challenge to first registration and registration must become mandatory if the voluntary approach does not deliver enough registrations. The benefits to crofters and society in the long term significantly outweigh the costs. The bill will meet the most basic requirement—it will provide clarity about what land is croft land and who has the rights and responsibilities for that land. Please oppose the Labour-Liberal Democrat amendments.

Before anyone gets started on the number of these minor technical drafting amendments, I point out that many of them will tidy up non-Government amendments that we supported at stage 2 on the basis that we would need to fix some of the drafting at stage 3. Others are technical changes and corrections to minor drafting errors, and some are minor consequentials to other Government amendments. In the interests of time, I propose not to go through each of the minor amendments in the group—members will be delighted to hear that—but to offer to expand on any amendment on which a member wishes further clarification. I move amendment 3.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will take Peter Peacock's amendments first and then Karen Gillon's. As members said, the Government has already transferred crofting development to Highlands and Islands Enterprise. That transfer took place on 1 April 2009. We considered that crofting communities would benefit more if the function became the responsibility of the agency whose primary responsibility is the social and economic development of the Highlands and Islands. We believe that the commission can best contribute to development by ensuring that crofting is properly regulated and that croft land is occupied and used. I therefore urge members to reject amendments 2 and 123. Amendment 4 is pointless. There is nothing to prevent the commission from requesting a map and nothing to prevent a person from declining the commission's request, so I do not see how the amendment would take us forward. As for amendment 124, it would overburden the commission with a number of ancillary duties rather than focusing it on regulation. On the other hand, I welcome Karen Gillon's amendment 144, which is a revised version of an amendment that she lodged at stage 2. It will ensure that the commission has explicit regard to supporting population retention in the crofting counties, which I believe we all support.

It is not for the Scottish Government to support any individual technology. Any technology that is used to treat waste materials must comply with standards that the Scottish Environment Protection Agency sets, to protect human health and the environment.

Elaine Smith knows that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment has spoken about zero waste in the chamber and will no doubt continue to do so. She will have every opportunity to continue to ask her questions. I advise Elaine Smith that many members deal with issues that relate to waste and incineration in their constituencies. The difficulties that she has experienced in her constituency are not unusual. I am somewhat surprised that, at a time of massive public sector cuts—with all their implications for future Scottish budgets—the Labour Party again demands an increase in public sector expenditure, which is in effect what Elaine Smith asked for. Is that to be Labour Party policy? At a time of public sector cuts, will the Labour Party continue to demand an increase in public sector expenditure? That is absurd.

I acknowledge that the issues raised in the debate are of genuine concern to the industry. The Scottish Government has a duty to all farmers and crofters to safeguard the support that is vital to their livelihoods. Agriculture matters to all of us. It employs nearly 10 per cent of the rural workforce. It provides 24 per cent of total inputs to our food industries. It maintains almost 80 per cent of the land, creating the landscape that draws so many tourists. Those are all good reasons why it is important not to take risks with the £660 million of agricultural support that is paid annually. The Scottish Government is obliged by the European Commission to enforce strictly the obligations that are set in return for the subsidy that is paid, and it has very limited discretion to vary those requirements. Failure of financial  control is severely penalised through the disallowance of European funding for schemes, and it is essential to minimise that risk. Northern Ireland has just been hit with a £66 million disallowance; we do not want that to happen to Scotland. Members should be aware that we were forced to tighten up the cross-compliance system because of audits elsewhere in the United Kingdom and Europe. That was to guard against the adverse consequences of disallowance. We need to keep the matter in context. Cross-compliance breaches result in a 3 per cent payment reduction, on average, which equates to £900 out of the average payment for those who are inspected. Seventy-five per cent of all cross-compliance inspections and 65 per cent of all cattle identification inspections result in no penalties, so the majority of people are managing to comply with the rules. Cattle ID and traceability will continue to be important. We need to know and be able to trace animal movements from birth to death, to support food safety and disease control. All cattle are required to be correctly identified and issued with a passport, in accordance with European regulations.

I will come on to proportionality, because that is important. The majority of breaches are the result of failure to report movements and deaths, return passports to the British cattle movement service or keep accurate animal medicine records or haulage details for transported animals. The majority of the industry is able to comply, but some people can and should do better.

A number of things might be wrong, but John Scott and most  members who are present know that the vast majority of the issue is not in the Government's hands. It is important for everyone to remember that we cannot unilaterally make a change. I agree with Liam McArthur that some farmers and crofters remain concerned. It is important to keep it in mind that we are working towards a more proportionate approach. Much work is being done in that respect. A difficulty with cattle numbers is that only one animal is needed to create a problem. I appreciate what people are saying, but one untraced animal can create a difficulty. To apply proportionality in relation to the numbers might be to overlook the fact that a single animal might create a big difficulty. The Government is working towards securing a more proportionate regime. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment raised the issue with the Commission directly a couple of months ago, in March, and raised the issue this month in conversation with the new Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. Indeed, the reason the cabinet secretary is not present for this debate is that he is in London, directly raising this issue, among others, in a face-to-face meeting with the secretary of state. The issues are at the forefront of our minds. A useful meeting took place between Government and Commission officials on 9 June, and officials are working out the details with UK colleagues. The details will be announced in due course. The motion calls for an amnesty on penalties. I say again that it is the European Commission that fixes rules on eligible support and consequently on reductions that are imposed for non-compliance.

I am grateful for Jamie McGrigor's intervention. There is a constant debate about whether rules and regulations apply fairly to the Scottish situation. I hope that he and his Liberal Democrat colleagues will take the opportunity that they now have to lobby their secretary of state much more strongly and help us to make the changes for which we are arguing. It is important to say that. The point that I was going to make about the amnesty is that it is not in our gift to create an amnesty—we cannot do it. Our difficulty is that if we tried to do so, we would end up with  disallowance. I hope that everybody here supports the on-going engagement with the commission. The motion describes the land eligibility issue, fairly, as one of the enforcement of regulations, but it also underscores that the rules about what constitutes eligible agricultural land have not, in fact, changed. Officials, in the company of European auditors, have too often found buildings, roads, lochs and so on claimed as agricultural land. We cannot defend that practice, nor accept the risk of significant disallowance of funding that comes with it. I hesitate to say it, but the flexibility that might have been allowed in the past will simply not be able to be applied.

I will come to that. I am trying to deal with the points that have been made. I say in passing that Peter Peacock's point about 3D mapping is interesting, but we are obliged to use the national mapping of the Ordnance Survey. If we move to any other system, we will be in breach of European Union rules. That is one of the difficulties that we are caught with. European regulations define eligible land. The criteria that apply to the current principal schemes are the same as those for the predecessor schemes, so there is no question of moving the goal posts. The key point is that the land must be capable of having agricultural activity undertaken on it. I dare say that most people here read the letter from the Scottish Government's chief agricultural officer in The Scottish Farmer, saying that if you can graze it or mow it, you can claim it. That is the kind of fairly basic eligibility that has not changed. Another point that was raised in the debate was about the information that is available to farmers. The application forms, for which the submission deadline was 17 May and on which all subsidy payments depend, have their own notes for guidance. The forms were issued to farmers on 15 March. The single farm payment scheme notes for guidance were issued separately, albeit later than had been planned. We have accepted that as a problem, and officials have apologised for that. I reassure members that lessons will be learned from the experience and used in the production of future scheme guidance. However, farmers were allowed to change land use declarations up to 30  May. The problem is that, notwithstanding that, the EU auditors now have their beady eyes on us, so the kind of amnesty suggested would just open us up to disallowances, as I said. We can undertake only very limited movement to try to do the kind of things to which people have referred. Liam McArthur, I think, mentioned the red tape agenda. He is right to refer to that, because we grapple with it all the time. I am advised that land and farming inspections to confirm eligibility have reduced from 1,800—perhaps it was 1,500—to 1,100 per year. We are therefore making some inroads. It may not be fast enough or as much as one would hope, but at least we are getting there. The Scottish Government's ambition is to see a sustainable farming industry that is supported by its full share of the available agricultural support. The very best of Scottish farmers are already very good at compliance. The challenge to us as a Government is to continue to work to ensure that their obligations are proportionate. We are, in fact, doing that as much as is open to us.  I hope that we can now rely on the support of the UK secretary of state and, indeed, on the rest of the industry to come up to the standard of compliance that is achieved by the very best of their fellow farmers and crofters. Everybody needs to keep it in mind, however, that we do not have a free hand; we have to comply with EU rules as much as anyone else does.  Meeting closed at 17:39.

Oh!

There are no plans to provide additional assistance to crofting communities for the control of rabbit populations, but there are wide-ranging consents that enable land managers to control rabbits. In addition, measures are available under the rural priorities element of the Scotland rural development programme to control rabbit populations, where those are directly linked to a management option.

Shooting, trapping, snaring, ferreting, long netting, gassing and the use of electric or other rabbit-proof fencing are all legal methods of rabbit control.

We have taken measures to improve the promotion and protection of wildlife corridors through the planning system. In 2009, the Scottish Government published the second national planning framework, which identifies the central Scotland green network as a national development. The aim is for a strategic network of woodland and other habitats, active travel routes,  green-space links, watercourses and waterways that provides an enhanced setting for development and other land uses and improved opportunities for outdoor recreation and cultural activity. In February, the Scottish Government published the consolidated Scottish planning policy, which states that development plans should identify and promote green networks where that will add value to the provision, protection, enhancement and connectivity of open space and habitats in city regions and in and around other towns.

The member will be aware that it would be inappropriate for me to comment on the merits of an individual planning application. On the question of what steps the residents might be able to take to trigger an environmental impact assessment, I point out that the Scottish ministers are empowered to make directions in relation to the need for an EIA in certain circumstances. It is open to members of the public or other third parties to write to officials with information suggesting why they consider that a proposed development requires an EIA, even though neither the planning authority nor the applicant takes that view. Scottish planning circular 8/2007 provides further guidance and information. The member might wish to read that.

The Scottish Government is encouraging new entrants to crofting in a variety of ways. Financial support is available from specific crofting grants and the Scotland rural development programme. The Scottish Government arranged a modification to the SRDP in October 2009 to lower the amount of agricultural activity required to qualify for the support for new entrants to 25 per cent. Obviously, that is significant for crofting. At the same time, the Scottish Government agreed a modification to the crofting counties agricultural grants scheme to allow an extra 10 per cent assistance to be made available to those under 40 years of age. That will be the subject of secondary legislation in the near future. The croft house grants scheme, currently under review, provides up to £22,000 assistance to help crofters to live on the crofts that they work. The Crofters Commission, acting under ministerial direction, is taking forward an absentee initiative. That in turn may free up crofts where the residency requirement is not being met, which should provide tenancy opportunities for new crofting entrants.

Jamie Stone will know that there is rarely unanimity among crofters about any proposal in respect of crofting. I do not suppose that we will achieve more unanimity than previous Governments on any aspect of what we are doing. The fundamental thrust of the bill is to deal with the twin problems of absenteeism and neglect in the crofting communities. It is precisely those twin problems that are, in effect, closing off opportunities for new entrants to crofting. If we can tackle those—which is what the bill is about—we stand a good chance of ensuring that more crofts become available for new entrants to crofting. That will be very much the test of the success of the bill when it is passed by the Parliament.

I welcome this debate to mark world oceans day. I note Liam McArthur's caveat  about the designation of particular days for particular causes, but perhaps world oceans day will have more resonance in Scotland, and I for one am looking forward to world mountain day in December. I congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing a pioneering debate, the holding of which is timely, given what is happening in the Gulf of Mexico. I suspect that tonight's debate might be the first of a series of annual debates as the event comes round each year. Scotland's seas are home to some 6,500 species of marine plants and animals, including whales, dolphins, seals and spectacular cold-water corals. If we include all the microscopic plants in our seas, that number increases hugely to around 40,000. We face huge biodiversity issues, and Robin Harper and Elaine Murray were quite right to raise some of them, even if my Australian upbringing means that I hear the theme tune to "Jaws" whenever the word "shark" is mentioned—Elaine Murray will forgive me for that. Scotland's seas also contribute to sustainable economic growth by supporting 50,000 jobs and overall economic activity that is worth about £2.2 billion, excluding oil and gas revenues. Alasdair Allan's point in that regard was well made. We have some of the best wave conditions in the world, and tremendous opportunities exist to harness that energy. To put matters into perspective, Scotland's seas cover an area that is six times larger than its land area. That is no small area to manage. We take the world oceans day theme of "Our oceans, our responsibility" extremely seriously, as we do the emerging United Nations theme of "Our oceans: opportunities and challenges". Stuart McMillan and a number of other members mentioned the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010, which, among other things, gave us new powers to establish a network of marine protected areas to protect some of our most precious marine species and habitats. It also delivered an improvement in the balance between seal conservation and sustainable fisheries and fish farms, as well as a streamlined licensing system. In addition, we are working with other UK Administrations, where necessary. Although marine activities such as defence, shipping and oil and gas have a direct impact on our seas, responsibility for them is currently reserved to Westminster. The issue of oil spills has been raised, which is unsurprising, given what is happening off the coast of America. I can advise the Parliament that there is a comprehensive national contingency plan to cover oil spills in all UK waters. Regular exercises are undertaken to ensure that the bodies that will respond to any spill—which include Marine Scotland, the Scottish  Environment Protection Agency, Scottish Natural Heritage and local authorities—know their roles. Furthermore, we aim to agree a joint UK marine policy statement, which will set out a consistent approach to underpin integrated management of reserved and devolved issues in the marine environment. The European marine strategy framework directive requires us to ensure that Scotland's seas have good environmental status by 2020. Given the dynamic nature of the marine environment, we cannot do that alone. We will need to work within the UK and with other countries to determine the action that is needed and to implement it. One of the issues to consider in the context of the directive is the global marine litter problem, which I am surprised that no one has mentioned. We have affirmed our intention to tackle that problem by supporting several initiatives, such as KIMO's fishing for litter initiative. In case anyone is wondering, KIMO is short for the Finnish name of a European Union organisation that deals with environmental protection and marine environment issues. In addition, we are developing a marine litter strategy in partnership with stakeholders. European co-operation will be critical. As Jamie McGrigor indicated, we need the best science to inform our marine decision making. To ensure that we have the best science, Marine Scotland is preparing a Scottish marine science strategy that will set out priorities for the Scottish public sector. In November, Mr Lochhead launched the marine alliance for science and technology for Scotland, otherwise known as MASTS, which is a new higher education pooling initiative—I am sorry about using two puns in the same sentence. Both of those will add a Scottish dimension to complement the UK marine science strategy that was prepared by the Marine Science Co-ordination Committee and launched earlier this year. With regard to Jamie McGrigor's highly specific point, the answer, as he might imagine, is not simple and I undertake to write to him on it. Our seas are also a tremendous source of food and energy. It has been recognised that a new regime is needed to replace the common fisheries policy. Scotland is actively involved in seeking the delegation of decision making to member states so that tailored fisheries measures can be introduced to improve sustainability and reduce discards. Scotland is the largest producer of farmed salmon in the European Union, and the second largest in the world. We are therefore determined to build on our existing management and ensure that that growing aquaculture industry acts as a good neighbour to those who share the aquatic environment.  Of course, Scotland also has an abundance of marine renewable energy resources—approximately 25 per cent of Europe's offshore wind and tidal potential and 10 per cent of Europe's wave potential. By any measure, those are significant resources. They could establish Scotland as a powerhouse for renewable energy in Europe, and they are central to our focus on increasing sustainable economic growth and to our response to climate change. Stuart McMillan also rightly reminds us that huge economic benefits derive from the recreational use of our seas. Reference was made to climate change, and our climate change adaptation framework has established a marine and fisheries work stream—another pun, sorry—which will develop an action plan to build resilience in relation to the changing climate. We continue to assess impacts and make scientific information easily accessible for policy makers through the marine climate change partnership, whose latest annual report card is due to be launched next month. I reiterate that Scotland's seas are extremely important to us and to the world. I note that some related events are being held this month. Elaine Murray might be pleased to know that three of the four that I have been informed about are in Dumfries and Galloway. As world oceans day takes hold of the public imagination, the number of events will grow year on year. We are carrying on Scotland's marine pioneering tradition with key marine legislation and our innovative approaches to developing marine renewables. We look forward to working with others as we take forward all those initiatives and work to develop Scotland's first national marine plan. Our seas are our responsibility and we must rise to the challenges and great opportunities that they provide.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

Scottish ministers have attended meetings of the EU environment council, but that subject has not been discussed.

The EU is currently involved in a number of debates about regulation of genetically modified organisms in the EU area. The Scottish Government is, of course, in favour of transparency in food labelling and believes that Scottish shoppers have the right to know what they are buying. Our stance on genetically modified organisms is well known. However, I understand that, although GM animal feed must be labelled as being GM, the European Food Safety Authority says that it is impossible to detect genetically modified material in food products such as meat, milk and eggs from animals that have been fed on GM feed. Therefore, there are technical difficulties. That said, I note that the European Parliament and the member have suggested something a little different. The more  general labelling idea is attractive, and I hope that it will be part of the Commission's review of the GM regulations.

The debate has been interesting and I am grateful to members for their contributions. Before I respond to a number of points that have been raised, I want to say that I am pleased that, at least at this stage, we broadly agree on the bill's principles. There has been agreement not only on the need for action to tackle absenteeism, neglect and speculation and the mechanisms in that respect, but on the need for a more democratic and accountable crofting commission. As for the issue on which there is perhaps most disagreement—the crofting register—it is vital for  the future of crofting that everybody is clear about the land that is held in crofting tenure, what the boundaries are and who has an interest in that land. That is important not just for the regulation of crofting—which, after all, has done without a map-based register for the past 55 years—but to everyone with an interest in crofting and, in particular, to the crofter. Why on earth should a crofter be faced with the prospect of anyone with an interest having the ability to go to the Scottish Land Court at any time to question whether their holding is a croft, whether they are the tenant of the croft and what the boundaries of the croft are? A proper crofting register such as the one that we are proposing would minimise that risk. It has been argued that such a move is unnecessary and that everybody knows where the boundaries are. I suppose that we should be grateful that no one has taken the same view about the boundaries of our own homes. In Scotland, we have a huge property register that has undergone enormous change over the past number of decades and is still not yet complete. As we will all recognise, these things take time. However, the assumption that everyone knows where the boundaries are is not borne out in practice. It is clearly not the case—if it were, the Land Court would not be doing the work that it is doing—and, indeed, it is less likely to be the case when the men with "the longest and greyest" beards, as Simon Fraser called them, pass away. My fear is that unless we start putting in place a mechanism for recording croft land, knowledge of crofting boundaries will be lost and more and more crofters will find themselves in the Land Court. In a previous existence, I had to deal with title deeds that described the boundaries of land in terms of the oak tree in the north-west corner and the big pile of stones at the other end. I fundamentally believe that we cannot continue in that way. A number of the points that members made in the debate were about wanting more money. I will set aside that issue for the moment, because I think that there are two sides to it. Sarah Boyack suggested that the crofting commission should have a direct say in planning; that it, and not the keeper of the registers of Scotland, should maintain the register; and that there should be a change to the franchise. She also seemed to infer that she was opposed to equalising the law between the tenants and owner-occupiers and wanted the current register to be updated with maps as a way of resolving certain issues. That said, in her closing speech, Ms Boyack pertinently pointed out that Parliament passed a verdict on certain parts of the 2006 bill, which became the 2007 act, and quite rightly removed areas on which there was no significant agreement. I gently point out to her that one  proposal that was removed was precisely that the current register should be updated and used and have maps added. So, by her logic, we should not proceed to have another argument about that, because it was removed from the previous proposals for legislation. There are things that we can talk about in Sarah Boyack's proposals, although I have indicated concerns about some of them, such as the proposal to give the commission a direct say in planning. There is a debate still to be had. I watched with interest John Scott's manoeuvring on the vexed issue of the alternative vote. One of his most interesting suggestions was the self-survey idea. We will want to explore that to find out what opportunities exist to help us do what we are doing. Liam McArthur clearly believes that the Shucksmith report should have been the mechanism for kicking into touch proposals for crofting legislation. That was certainly the tenor of his comments. I gently suggest to him that he should take care with that principle in case it comes back to bite his party's interest in another place. Government should not be about trying to find easy ways of kicking things into touch, although I fear that Liam McArthur might be involved in rather more of that in the next few years than he would otherwise have wished to be. He, too, has concerns about the register and he still seems to believe that there is a bottomless pit of money. However, I hold out hope, because he now has a direct line to the new chancellor in Westminster, so he might be able to resolve some of our financial concerns and ensure that we have as much money as we need to do the things that we need to do. Peter Peacock disagrees with a map-based register. He approached the issue in his usual mischievous fashion. He said that he objects to charging for regulatory activities that are required by law, so I presume that he will propose that we remove all fees from planning applications. In fact, charging for regulatory activities already happens. If we were to take the principled stand that I am sure Peter Peacock wants us to assume that he is taking, we would have to remove all fees for planning applications and other regulatory activities. Other members made good points. Rob Gibson made a particularly interesting point about a wider basis for considering the register, which was more about land use and, dare I say it, land reform. That was a much wider and more philosophical argument. Some members have an interest in land rental as a potential for tax. On many issues that arise if we take that broader and more philosophical basis, the register is extraordinarily important. It seems to me strange to want to  continue to deal with crofting in some kind of old-fashioned, out-of-date and 19th century way—for reasons that are not very clear—when we are now in the 21st century. We have to think about what that demands and what opportunities it gives us through technology and our understanding. As always, John Farquhar Munro made some interesting comments. I, too, welcome him back to the chamber. He said that we do not really need a bill at all. Of course, the problem with that approach is that it is a recipe for the Taynuilt situation arising again and again if we do not do something to fix the issue. The Whitbread loophole would not be closed, as we need legislation to close it. The difficulty with simply not having a bill is that the issues that have begun to open up and the practices that are not advantageous to crofting would never be dealt with. There is a real fear among many people that if crofting is not addressed in the 21st century, it is likely to die out. That will not happen overnight—nothing does—but the fear of many people, and of the Government, is that if we do not address it, it is likely gradually to disappear. For all the reasons that Sarah Boyack gave in her closing speech, which have to do with culture, history and tradition, I do not believe that we want crofting to disappear. It is therefore important that we address it. I thank the committee for all the work that it put in at stage 1 to inform this debate. I thank all the stakeholders who, through their evidence, helped us understand the issues that affect crofting. Although I wished occasionally that they could reach some kind of unanimous view, I have learnt that that will probably never happen. Our engagement with the stakeholders and the committee will continue from here. Sarah Boyack can be certain that I will take up the suggestion that we continue to have discussions about how we proceed. I urge members to reject Labour's amendment, because it distorts the clear message that I believe we should be sending out about tackling all the issues that threaten the future of crofting. In my view, it is not even particularly accurate, even if it is only to reflect Labour's position. The Scottish Crofting Federation's response to the consultation on the draft bill stated: "The proposal to charge crofters for regulation is [only] acceptable in cases where the crofter will financially benefit from the transaction—decrofting the house site for example." I rather think that that somewhat undermines Labour's assertion that "new charges ... are not supported by crofters". They might not be supported by some crofters, but, as we have seen, there is no unanimity in the crofting community.  I have listened to the points that have been made today and I will reflect on them in the days to come. I have indicated where the Government will lodge amendments at stage 2 and I am sure that we will continue to discuss ways in which our common vision for crofting can be realised. I point out, however, that I do not have a magic wand for fixing everything overnight—that does not happen. I certainly do not have a magic wand that prints money—none of us does. However, I have no doubt that everyone in this chamber wants a bright future for crofting—a future with thriving crofting townships and strong communities built by a permanent population that supports one another; where croft land is nurtured and used to grow fine food or to enhance the environment; and where people continue to learn the proud crofting heritage and culture that enriches our nation. I remain confident that the bill will set us off in that direction and that there remains the will in the chamber to see it through.

As most people know, crofting often invokes tales of the past. Nobody can deny the role of the crofting acts in bringing greater justice for tenants in the 19th century, but nobody can deny either that the circumstances in which we live today are significantly different from what they were 120 years ago. That is why I want to focus on the future. I want all of us to ask ourselves what we want crofting legislation to deliver for communities that live on land that is held under crofting tenure. The Government is clear that what it wants is driven by the purpose of creating sustainable economic growth and strong communities. In relation to crofting, we believe that that is best achieved by having people living on and using the land. The current system has delivered almost 2,000 absentee crofters—tenants and owner-occupiers—and an unknown number of neglected crofts. It needs reform. That is why the Crofting Reform etc Bill was introduced in 2006, why there was a committee of inquiry on crofting in 2008 and why we are here today. The Government has brought before Parliament the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill, which will deliver genuine reform. It will protect the rights of tenant crofters so that they may never again suffer abuses of power; place a duty on all crofters, whether they are owner-occupiers or tenants, to occupy and work the land; provide for a democratically accountable regulator that will regulate crofting in everyone's interests; protect croft land from speculation; and create an accurate and unambiguous crofting register that will clearly show land that is held in crofting tenure and provide greater security for everyone with an interest in that land.  I am clear that the Parliament can put crofting on the road to recovery through taking those steps. Indeed, it can make crofting a model for sustainable rural development. The existence of crofts can ensure a permanently resident population in our remote rural areas, which can help to bring greater cohesion to the country, create stronger local economies and sustain vital public services in those areas. Crofts will ensure that our land resource is managed and used to supplement the incomes of people who are resident in those areas through producing food, providing premises for businesses or enhancing the environment of beautiful parts of Scotland. I do not pretend that legislation alone will solve all of crofting's problems, but legislation is an important part of shaping a new future for it. Crofting will continue to benefit from financial support from the Government. There is a lot of debate about the form that that support should take, but today we want to put in place the right legislative framework for crofting to prosper. I am grateful to members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, who produced the stage 1 report on the bill. Crofting is complicated and controversial, and finding consensus is never easy, but I hope that we can do that in the chamber. I suspect that the alternative would be successive Governments deciding that, rather than touch crofting, it would be much easier not to go anywhere near it in the future. I turn to part 1 of the bill. I am pleased that the principle that the crofting commission should be partially elected has been accepted. I accept most of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's comments on the elections and membership of the commission, although I still believe that the details of the elections should be in subordinate legislation and that the committee's recommendations on possible changes to the franchise underline that. If experience or developments tell us that a change in the franchise would be desirable, having such details in the bill could prevent us from making changes easily. We need flexibility while also ensuring appropriate parliamentary scrutiny. It is also my view that those who are directly subject to the regulations should be the ones who are entitled to vote for the regulator. That said, we will consult fully on draft election regulations before we lay them before the Parliament. I am happy to accept the committee's majority recommendation that the alternative vote system be used for the purpose of the elections. That will not make John Scott happy, but the committee view was relatively clear. A lot has been said about the power for the commission to charge for regulatory applications. There has also been a lot of scaremongering, with  claims that the figures in the table in the financial memorandum represent the charges that the commission will levy. That is simply not true. The Government's policy is that regulatory applications where the individual and not the wider community is the principal beneficiary—for example, applications to decroft land or to apportion land from grazings to individual use—will be subject to a charge. It is not unreasonable to charge crofters a small percentage of the total cost to the public of processing such applications. During the stage 1 proceedings, the issue of tribunal status for the commission was raised. After some consideration, our advice is that the commission is not a judicial tribunal, despite its inclusion in the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1992. All that that does is to bring the commission under the supervision of the new Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council, which is right, given that it takes administrative decisions and should follow best practice. I turn to part 2. The only possible benefit of having a map-based crofting register is if it has some significance. This Government is not going to waste millions of pounds in setting up a voluntary register that means nothing and delivers nothing. However, we are willing to establish a register that has force in law and provides crofters with security in respect of the extent of their croft and their rights in that croft. Some have argued that that is unnecessary. If that were true, we would not see disputes in the Scottish Land Court and we would not have a register of crofts that is so hopelessly inaccurate. Under our proposals, once a croft is registered, there will be no doubt about where its boundaries are and who the crofter is. Through amendments that we will lodge at stage 2, no changes to a croft will have effect unless it is entered on the crofting register. That will ensure that we have an accurate register that provides crofters with complete security over their tenancy. The Government will cover the costs of creating the register, but it will not pay for the registration of individual crofts. The cost of registering a croft will be directly related to the volume of registrations per year. Making registration voluntary could simply make the register more expensive. I am happy to consider delaying the introduction of the mandatory trigger points, but for one year only. In doing so, I am going partially towards what the committee is looking for. However, the £100,000 that I will make available to incentivise group registrations through providing a discount for registration will also only be available for that one year. In the event that few communities come forward with group registrations, the underspend in that budget will go to the keeper of the registers of Scotland to cover her costs in operating the crofting register in the first year. Given the multiple  interests in common grazings, the Government has decided that it will pay for the first registration of common grazings. Amendments providing for their registration will be lodged by us at stage 2. I turn to part 3. I think that there is general acceptance that the requirements for crofters to live on and work their crofts need to be better enforced. Some have tried to say that tackling neglect is more important than tackling absenteeism, but our view is that they must be tackled together. We have built in sufficient flexibility to allow for special circumstances—it is important to say that—but the commission must be required to take action to address absenteeism and neglect and crofters must fulfil their duties. Each empty, neglected croft represents a missed opportunity for someone to make a permanent and significant contribution to the community. The committee was right to point out that the commission must be appropriately resourced to do that work. We will ensure that that happens. Nobody is suggesting that addressing all cases of absenteeism and neglect will be done overnight. That work has, in fact, already started, but the bill will make tackling absenteeism and neglect part of the commission's everyday work and not just subject to periodic initiatives. Processing regulatory applications is a necessary function, but it is through ensuring that crofters meet their obligations to live on the land and work it that the commission can make the greatest contribution to the Government's purpose. That brings me to part 4. It goes without saying that keeping land in crofting tenure is important to securing the future of crofting. That is why we must take action to ensure that croft land is protected from people speculating on what the value of the land would be if it were put to other uses. It has not been easy to devise a solution to that problem, as those who have been involved up to this stage will realise, but I am grateful for the committee's thoughts on the matter. I think that we all want to see the same result. The commission will have the general function of promoting the interests of crofting, which will include maintaining land in crofting tenure. I agree that there should be a presumption against development on inby land, and I believe that the commission's influence as a key agency in the production of development plans will help to achieve that. However, I am reluctant to involve the commission in individual planning applications, as that would go beyond the scope of its responsibilities and would have resource implications. I should say in passing that the Government agrees that it is perhaps time that the Whitbread v Macdonald loophole was closed. Perhaps some members in the chamber do not know that the advocate who won the case that confirmed the  loophole is now—a gentle irony—a minister in the Government that will close the loophole, which I suppose is a fine example of the old Scots saying that what goes around, comes around. However, I suppose that that is what happens occasionally. This is a defining moment for crofting. We have to choose between propping up a system that is failing or putting in place a vision for the future of crofting that will deliver growth and stronger communities. I know that there will never be unanimity on that vision. There is not unanimity among crofters themselves. I note that a former Labour minister who was very keen on crofting and who has long since retired is now, I think, indicating that he wishes, effectively, to go back on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 1976, which introduced the right to buy. However, we are now so much further forward from that legislation that that debate cannot be allowed to colour where we are today. The principles of the bill will deliver the vision that we have been discussing over the past few months. I commend the bill and the committee's report to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill.

The Deer Commission for  Scotland works with land managers and stalkers to produce extensive guidance on best practice, and it holds demonstration events throughout Scotland. In addition, the prospective wildlife and natural environment bill will include provisions relating to collaborative deer management. I hope to set out proposals for that bill in the next few days.

I confirm that the Government has carefully considered the issue of peri-urban deer, as deer seem to be appearing in built-up areas more frequently. That brings different challenges and problems from those that are faced with the normal way of managing deer. The issue is in our minds, and it has been in our minds when we have considered proposals for the wildlife and natural environment bill. The number of such deer is expected to increase, and I assure the member that the issue is and will continue to be at the forefront of our minds, as we expect the problem to get worse.

I hope that the member is not accusing the Government of treating the red deer herds as vermin. I have constantly asserted the importance to the rural economy of red deer, and it is worth reminding all members of that importance. Of course, deer are not farmed in the way that beasts are normally farmed, so significant problems sometimes arise that must be managed. However, most agencies and most people who are involved in Scotland's rural economy understand only too well how important red deer are to the future of Scotland.

We have regular discussions with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency on improving the effectiveness of environmental protection legislation and reducing regulatory burdens on businesses while continuing to protect the environment and human health.

I assure Robert Brown that the Government and SEPA have serious concerns about the developing trend that suggests that offences are not being taken as seriously as they should be. He might be slightly mollified when he understands that proposals are being discussed for addressing the situation. They include adopting civil sanction powers and encouraging more significant penalties when cases reach the courts. We are discussing options with solicitors on both those points. The discussions are not concluded, but I very much assure Robert Brown that it is precisely because of what has happened that we are having the discussions.

The consolidated Scottish planning policy, which was published in February 2010, sets out the Scottish Government's planning policies on flooding and refers to elements of the 2009 act that are relevant to the planning system.

I look forward to receiving details from Helen Eadie about the concern that she has raised. We must accept that  the 2009 act is still being brought into force, so some of what she has discussed has not commenced yet. However, I reassure her that we are discussing in detail flood risk assessments and the requirements on them in the 2009 act. I hope that the results of that will satisfy her. If not, I am sure that she will be in touch with me.

I assure Stuart McMillan that Inverclyde Council was represented at a Government-sponsored event, which was separate from the conference to which he referred. Sadly, I am unable to instruct local authorities to attend conferences. Nevertheless, Inverclyde Council has begun to engage directly with officials on flooding issues. I hope that the pressure that Stuart McMillan has continued to bring to bear on the council, of which I am well aware, is beginning to bear fruit.

I have just got my card into the console in time. Scottish Government waste officials have met Glasgow City Council on a number of occasions to discuss recycling. The most recent meeting was in mid-March, when officials discussed issues including the zero waste plan and Glasgow's plans to improve recycling performance.

The Government recognises the challenges that Glasgow City Council faces in increasing its recycling and compost uplift. I do not think that anybody wants to minimise the extent of those challenges, nor do I want to minimise the extent of the ambition in the council. Considerable support is available to local authorities to improve their performance, which includes the advice and guidance that Glasgow currently receives. Glasgow City Council gets its share of the total local authority budget and has to decide how it applies the funds. Other types of support are also being developed. I think that Pauline McNeill will find that Glasgow is getting as much help as it is possible to give it in the circumstances, and we hope that that will result in increased recycling levels in that council area.

I am not aware that any such approaches have been made by anyone in Government in recent months. There is a new approach to defining municipal waste, which means that Scotland has already met the revised 2013 landfill directive target, so we are making considerable progress. I reiterate that we accept that Glasgow City Council faces significant and particular challenges in maintaining and increasing its levels of recycling, and we want to do everything in our power to help it to overcome those challenges.

The 2014 Commonwealth games provide an excellent opportunity to promote environmentally beneficial measures, and the Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council are working together with our games delivery partners to deliver environmental benefits both during the games and afterwards. In particular, the games can act as a catalyst for the regeneration of large parts of the east end of Glasgow. In addition, the 2014 environmental forum continues to provide advice to and to challenge the 2014 games partners on the games' sustainability and environmental aspects.

I thank the member for his comments. I know that he has been very interested in the games' long-term benefits, particularly for his own constituents. Of course, the village itself, which, as he knows, will be built on mainly vacant and derelict land, will provide a transformation. The Government and its partners are also involved in a number of other projects to encourage people's connection with the environment. I do not know how many of those projects the member is aware of, but they include work by the Forestry Commission on planting an arboretum and creating in and around Glasgow a network of Commonwealth community forests that will focus on areas of economic deprivation. There will also be work to improve walkway and riverbank access to the Clyde. If the member is  concerned that certain specific areas are not being worked on in the way that he would like, he should write to me and I will attempt to get back to him with more detailed information.

Last month, officials had a brief telephone discussion about the council's plans for proposed measures at Fettercairn.

As the member knows, the Government has taken the view that setting up an independent inquiry is not required. A very wide-ranging review has taken place with all those involved in the aftermath of the floods, which we feel will be more effective in changing ways of responding to such incidents than the kind of inquiry the member has asked for. However, lessons are being learned. Indeed, as each incident takes place, we learn more lessons and try to apply them to future incidents.

SEPA is working with Aberdeenshire Council to see what can be achieved on the River Carron. It is difficult to make predictions for very small catchment areas such as the Carron, but SEPA has advised that a number of measures might be able to be put in place to help the situation, and I am happy to tell the member about them.

I am somewhat surprised that some members believe that three  aquaculture debates within 14 months is too many. Such is my enthusiasm for the industry that, frankly, I do not think that three is enough. I would have thought that everyone would be extremely keen to celebrate the industry's success. The fact that a variety of issues has been highlighted today that I do not recall having been raised in previous debates suggests, as Liam McArthur hinted, that we may well have been justified in moving to a third debate. I will not be drawn into reopening the planning debate that took place during consideration of the Marine (Scotland) Bill, but I hope that members will accept that the commitment shown in what was a joint ministerial initiative—let me say at this point that I am glad to welcome my colleague John Swinney, who has just joined us in the chamber for this debate—is a commitment to the future of our aquaculture industry. Elaine Murray and Sarah Boyack should be aware that that initiative was also about helping to build planning capacity in local authorities. Indeed, COSLA was fully involved as a key stakeholder all the way through the process. Like Liam McArthur, I believe that our local authorities will show themselves to be resilient in dealing with the issue. Elaine Murray made one or two comments right at the start of the debate that I want to respond to because they also touch on other issues that have arisen. The issue of environmental sustainability is fundamental to the industry. That is why the phrase appears something like three times on page 1 of "Delivering Planning Reform for Aquaculture". The fact is that we have acknowledged that point and put it up there. This industry of all industries knows perfectly well that environmental sustainability is vital to its future success. It has absolutely no vested interest in not achieving the goal of environmental sustainability, because it will suffer if it does not. The situation in Chile is a stark reminder of what happens if people get it wrong. Although that situation presents an opportunity that I hope and fully expect the Scottish industry will exploit to the full, it serves as a constant reminder of why going down the road of lifting regulation is not necessarily the answer. It will simply not be possible for me to deal with all the issues that have been raised in the debate. First, I will concentrate on three key, overarching concerns: PGI status, skills and escapes, which are interrelated. I will deal with some of the other issues if I have time, and I undertake to follow up the issues of folk who get left out of that process after the debate. PGI status was raised by a number of members. The current Scottish farmed salmon PGI criteria were set by the industry when it applied for PGI status in 2003. We have received an application to amend the PGI criteria. Once those criteria have  been finalised by the industry, they will be issued for public consultation, which will allow all interested parties to comment. That will allow us to make an informed decision on the future specification for PGI status. The Scottish Government is keen to support PGI criteria for Scottish salmon that are clear and unambiguous, and which are based on proposals from the industry that have been developed after consultation with wider interests. Richard Simpson asked whether the proposed amendment would downgrade current standards. Absolutely not. It will clarify the production steps that must take place in the specified geographical area. The process will be open to full consultation, and we are keen to hear views from across the industry. The upgrade that Mr Simpson referred to was an amendment to include organic production in PGI status; no other aspects were amended. I offer a mild caution to members. When they discuss PGI status, it is extremely important that they do not somehow give the impression that the present health and success of the product is in any way under threat. If people are not careful about how they discuss the issue, there is a danger that that is the impression they will give. It is absolutely not the case that the health and success of the product are under threat.

I am not entirely clear what Peter Peacock is suggesting—I might have a conversation with him afterwards. I turn to movements of ova and smolts, which are related to PGI status. International trade occurs, from which our smolt producers and Scottish buyers benefit. We must remember that. Norway operates to identical EU fish health standards, and there are currently no imports of live smolts from Norway to Scotland. I hope that members will take that on board. A number of members, notably John Scott and David Whitton, talked about skills. Several colleges in Scotland offer Scottish vocational qualifications in aquaculture. As Richard Simpson said, masters degree-level study is possible in various aspects of aquaculture. Lantra covers the aquaculture sector—I think that it was David Whitton who mentioned Lantra's work in that area. We encourage industry to make applications for European fisheries fund funding in relation to skills, and we hope to see more such applications  being made. The better markets and image group has a remit to ensure a greater focus on education and training, including the promotion of aquaculture as a viable career, and it is actively involved in discussions on that issue. Updating and improving access to formal qualifications on containment is also a recommendation of the improved containment working group. The issue of skills is embedded across the working groups, and it is quite important that it has not been separated off. Representatives from the fin-fish sector met in Fort William in December to review the national occupational standards, with a view to giving containment and predator control a much higher profile. The working group has identified as an immediate priority the elimination of escapes that are obviously caused by human error and, as was suggested, that means that there must be a programme of skills development and improved training of operators and site staff; the industry absolutely understands that, and work towards it is in hand. I hope therefore that members accept that the Government is very well aware of the issue of skills. Indeed, during the tours that I undertook last summer, I spoke to people who are involved in the aquaculture industry. I have had subsequent meetings with them, and the issue of skills comes up regularly. The Government and the industry are well aware of the need to deal with that issue. The skills question has informed the issue of farm escapes; several members have, quite rightly, raised that concern. As I said, we support the industry, but we have also made it very clear that it must act as a good neighbour. The recent escape clearly shows that the industry must do a lot more to address that issue; there is no doubt about that. The working group has identified the elimination of escapes that are caused by human error as the immediate priority and is working directly on that. The memorandum of understanding with Norway includes an agreement for the Scottish Government to learn from Norway on containment, and to consider the adoption of Norwegian standards in Scotland. We do not condone poor practice but, if members were to stop and think for a moment, they would realise that the industry will hardly want that to continue either since the fish that escape and are lost are livestock. The industry will not benefit from not being vigilant. Elaine Murray asked about the licensing group reporting to Parliament. A monitoring statement will be published on the Scottish Government website at regular intervals. I undertake to write to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee with an update after each ministerial group on aquaculture meets.  Richard Simpson raised the issue of bacterial kidney disease, and I can address some aspects of that point. The Scottish Government is consulting the salmon and trout industries on the most appropriate and efficacious monitoring and inspection regime to control any risk of BKD spread. We are aware of the problem, but BKD levels in Scotland are very low and there is no evidence thus far of it being endemic. We need to keep that in perspective. The subject of sea lice has been mentioned, as one would expect. That continues to be a real challenge for the industry but I return to the point that I made about containment and escapes—the industry gains nothing by allowing sea lice to develop out of control. The debate was interesting if for no other reason than to hear Dave Thompson talk about a very interesting fish: the wrasse. I can see that instead of wrasse, I will incur the Presiding Officer's wrath if I go on any longer. We will accept the Tory and Liberal Democrats amendments, but we reject the Green and Labour amendments.

He is in shock.

And exported.

As Elaine Murray and John Scott have raised that issue, I confirm that all the actions that were to be undertaken between January and March have been done, so we are absolutely on track.

I am glad to be here today to talk about Scotland's thriving and growing aquaculture sector, but before I do that, I had better say sorry to members who were unable to access as far in advance as ought to have been possible the document "Delivering Planning Reform for Aquaculture". I could go into a long, complicated explanation of what happened behind the scenes to create that difficulty, but suffice it to say that it meant that we did not have the appropriate amount of time set aside. The document is, however, only nine pages long, as those who have seen it will have realised, so although the delay was an unfortunate oversight, it was perhaps not fatal for the debate. I want to offer some thoughts on where the industry is, where it would like to go and how we are trying to help it to get there, not least through the publication of the paper that I mentioned. Scotland's aquaculture sector is a success story. Frankly, I cannot say that often enough. Aquaculture accounts for almost 40 per cent of Scotland's food exports, and the sector's total output is worth about £400 million a year at farm-gate prices. That puts aquaculture pretty much on a par with sea fisheries. I do not think that people realise how significant the aquaculture sector is to Scotland's economy. The bulk of the production is salmon, of which Scotland is the second largest producer in the world and the largest in the European Union, but trout and shellfish are also important, and there are niche species such as halibut, which is reared to great effect in a sustainable way in Gigha. Much of Scotland's aquaculture production is focused in the west and north of the country and it supports strong remote and rural communities in those areas, so it makes an important contribution to the fabric of our society. It is easy to overlook the huge benefits that aquaculture brings to parts of Scotland that badly need those jobs and that economic development. However, we can sometimes be so focused on local developments that we fail to see them in their wider context. The development of Scottish aquaculture needs to be seen in a global context. Aquaculture is now the world's fastest growing food-producing sector.  Internationally, it has grown at a rate of between 6 per cent and 8 per cent since the millennium. It already accounts for more than half of the fish supply for human consumption. Two primary factors will contribute to the growing importance of aquaculture for us all. First, the world's population will continue to grow quickly, from 6.8 billion people now to an estimated 9.1 billion by 2050. Secondly, global warming is predicted to lead to water scarcity and a reduction in the world's productive land. We need to use our marine resources more effectively to feed the world's population, and that means through aquaculture. We are aware that Scottish salmon production is benefiting from the worldwide shortage in the supply of salmon that was caused by the collapse of the Chilean industry. That presents our industry with an opportunity to grow, but also to invest in taking the sector to the next stage. I will come to how we are supporting the sector to do that in a way that is designed to avoid the mistakes that were made in Chile. So where are we going? Demand for our aquaculture produce will continue to rise—that is the big global picture. What possibilities does that hold for Scotland? The Scottish salmon industry tells us that it can grow its value by £150 million in the next five years and create up to 400 new jobs. We are starting to see the fruits of that optimism as new planning applications are being made to local authorities—the rightful place for decisions to be made on such applications. It is that optimism in the industry that so struck me when I came into my job this time last year. Despite the economic recession, I met people in the industry who were hugely optimistic and highly ambitious, notwithstanding the enormous difficulties that were pretty obvious elsewhere. The recent successful application for a fish farm to be operated by Lakeland Marine Farm Ltd at Carradale in Argyll and Bute is just one positive example of the growth that we are beginning to experience and the opportunities that it can offer local communities. I am also excited by the prospects for growth in the shellfish sector. For that reason, we have commissioned a study of the prospects and opportunities for shellfish farming in Scotland, which will try to quantify the scale of the opportunity and report later this year. Between 2007 and 2008, mussel production in Scotland grew by 22 per cent to almost 6,000 tonnes. In the previous round of European fisheries fund awards in 2009, grants to the mussel sector were signed off that alone should lead to a further increase in production of 1,400 tonnes. People will realise the scale of what we are talking about when they consider the reality of those numbers.  Mussels feed entirely on plankton, and so require no feed from their farmers and no therapeutants to keep them healthy; it seems to be the ideal farming experience. Oysters are similarly environmentally benign and tremendously healthy, and oyster production experienced a 45 per cent growth in 2007-08. The establishment of the national shellfish forum last year indicated the hopes that we have for the sector and my determination that it will thrive. The trout sector, which produced almost 8,000 tonnes in 2008, is also striving to improve its market position to allow investments in stock improvements to improve fish profitability and returns, and to increase large trout production in Scotland. We support those efforts, and encourage the sector to apply for European fisheries fund support in the south and east of the country with that in mind. We are supporting the aquaculture industry to achieve its goals. First, I will discuss the "Delivering Planning Reform for Aquaculture" document that was published yesterday morning. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, together with me, established the aquaculture planning task force in 2009. That task force, which involved those local authorities that have an active interest in aquaculture development, the industry and the statutory consultees to the planning process for aquaculture, has led to agreement on a number of specific actions that will improve the planning service for aquaculture. The process supports the retention of the fundamental purpose of the planning system, securing through democratic means development that is consistent with community and local interest. It also delivers tangible benefits to the aquaculture sector through improved efficiency. Those include up-to-date development plans, which provide greater certainty to communities and to industry; improved planning applications and environmental statements from the industry to speed up response times from the public sector; a more streamlined statutory consultation process; greater co-operation between public and private sectors; partnerships between stakeholders to deliver better developments in the right places; and improvements in the openness and transparency of the process. A key aspect of the process is the roll-out among statutory consultees of the modernised approach of providing prompt, solution-oriented and proportionate advice, and I ask members to support that today. In addition to "Delivering Planning Reform", work is continuing apace on the six working groups that, as members will recall, were established by "A Fresh Start: The renewed Strategic Framework for  Scottish Aquaculture". Those groups will report to me at the ministerial group on aquaculture on 22 June, but their progress to date has been commendable. The healthier fish and shellfish group has been tasked with further strengthening the industry's approach to sea lice and disease control, through synchronised production and treatments within management areas of an appropriate size. The group is currently engaged in an intensive period of discussion with the industry and will make its proposals to me in the summer. The work of the group is critical to ensuring that Scotland retains its comparatively good fish health status intact as it grows, avoiding the boom and bust that has occurred in other countries when production volume has been chased without due regard to the inescapable facts of biology. The group that is examining improved systems for licensing aquaculture developments is considering issues such as the need to revise the current locational guidelines for fish farms, in light of changes in the levels of nutrients that are discharged from such farms as feeds change. It is also considering how to model the effect of larger fish farms as salmon farmers seek to move into deeper waters with greater dilution of discharges from the sites. The improved containment group is carrying out incredibly exciting and important work as it develops a Scottish technical standard for fish-farming equipment such as moorings, cages and nets to minimise escapes of fish. The group aims to have that standard in place in 2011. I know that Robin Harper is keen to promote closed containment systems in both freshwater and seawater. I acknowledge the concern of those who worry about a perceived impact on wild fisheries of escapes such as last week's unfortunate escape on the Lochy. The containment working group is considering the question of closed containment. A focused closed containment sub-group has been established and meets for the first time next week. The membership of the group includes the industry, wild fisheries interests and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. We should give the group time to carry out its work. We must remember that moving from cage sites to freshwater or seawater tank production would require considerable capital investment and lead to higher on-going costs with an increase in carbon footprint. All those issues must be considered in the round and I expect the closed containment sub-group to do that. The technical standard for fish farms will cover freshwater production and will perhaps deal with some of Robin Harper's concerns. Therefore, I do  not propose to accept Robin Harper's amendment, although I hope that he accepts that progress is being made. The better marketing and improved image group is focused on addressing any misconceptions of the industry and on developing a coherent approach to the promotion of healthy Scottish seafood, which for example involves working with schools to ensure that children understand and enjoy our produce. The improved access to finance group is developing better data sources for information on Scottish aquaculture so that the industry can better present itself as a good prospect to investors. The group will also seek to build links between Scottish and Norwegian investors so that we can share lessons. I probably do not need to add that some of the difficulties that are being experienced throughout industry with accessing finance and getting the banks to come on board are also being experienced by those who are involved in aquaculture. The same issues apply to aquaculture. I am particularly pleased by the creation of the national shellfish forum, which I mentioned. For the first time, the forum brings together the key players in the shellfish industry and its regulators in a regular conversation on the future of the sector and what we can do to support its sustainable growth. I am keen for the public and private sectors to co-operate to ensure that Scotland benefits as much as possible as the sector develops. I hope that members have got a sense of my enormous enthusiasm for the industry. There is a huge amount of support. The Government has been expending considerable effort to ensure that what is a vital and growing part of Scotland's economy and industry gets what it needs to continue growing. I fully intend to stay as committed as possible to the very bright future that aquaculture has. I move, That the Parliament notes the continued development of an ambitious and sustainable Scottish aquaculture industry; recognises the economic importance of the industry to Scotland as a whole and many coastal communities in particular; notes the considerable work being carried out under the auspices of A Fresh Start - the renewed Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture , published on 21 May 2009, and notes the continuing commitment to dialogue on the future of the industry in Scotland.

There are no plans at present to do so, but I am aware of a developing debate in urban areas, particularly in relation to derelict land.

The original intention of the 2003 act was to remove barriers to sustainable development within rural communities, so it is defined as being about rural land reform and therefore rural right to buy, and is confined to communities of less than 10,000. The feeling was that the lives of people who live and work in large towns and cities are not constrained in the same way as those of people in the country. After all, it is easier for urban dwellers to choose to move homes or jobs; people in rural areas do not have the same kind of choices, unless they change their entire way of life. Therefore, there was considered not to be the same rationale for a community right to buy in the urban context.

The Glasgow local biodiversity partnership has made significant progress in implementing its local biodiversity action plan and a report on its progress is available on the Glasgow City Council website. For example, five local nature reserves have been established, ponds and wildflower meadows have been created and grassland management regimes have been changed, all to the benefit of wildlife. I have recently written to all local authorities and MSPs to highlight the importance of the international year of biodiversity and to urge them to take on board the key messages. I understand that Glasgow City Council already has a number of activities planned to mark the 2010 international year of biodiversity. I am looking forward to speaking at an urban biodiversity conference in Glasgow on 30 October 2010.

Yes, I agree with that. I hope that all councils are actively looking at biodiversity within their local areas, as the issue of biodiversity tends to be much wider than people immediately think. This year, we are looking at a change in emphasis going forward so that biodiversity is not just about specific species but is more about habitats and ecosystems, which means that biodiversity can apply as much in urban areas as in rural areas. I believe that Glasgow City Council has taken on board all those challenges. It has a number of  events planned. If the member wishes, I can write to him with more detail about those events or he can contact the council directly for a list of them. Nearly 100 events are being organised as part of the council's annual countryside events programme, so I would not say that the council is being at all laggard on the issue. I look forward to attending, I suspect, more than one of those events in the Glasgow area.

I will answer briefly, Presiding Officer. The member raises some interesting issues, which are under active consideration. As the member may be aware, the Public Petitions Committee has decided to defer further consideration of the petition until the study on which SNH and the BGS are currently collaborating is completed. That study will put the Government in a stronger position to decide on appropriate policy.

The Scottish Government is making good progress towards its greener strategic objectives. In particular, we have led the way with our leading-edge climate change legislation, which sets ambitious emissions reduction targets; we are well on the way to meeting our key recycling targets and exceeding our ambitious renewable electricity targets; and we are seeing increasing numbers of people accessing Scotland's fantastic natural environment.

I acknowledge the member's long-standing interest in the issue. I think that he asked a similar question about procurement last May. It is fair to say that all ministers in all departments are looking carefully at the work that they are doing to achieve what the Government is trying to achieve across the board. Since a more recent question—which I think John Park asked, although I may be wrong about that—the Scottish Government has published the sustainable procurement action plan for Scotland, which sets out clear guidance to all public bodies on how to procure with sustainability in mind. All departments and all ministers must think about that issue, not just me.

I recognise the member's continuing interest in that area of Government policy. The Scottish Government is well aware of NHS Lothian's plans to create gardens and grow-your-own spaces. The grow-your-own working group is taking an active interest in those proposals, and if they are successful they could serve as a model for the utilisation of Government-owned land elsewhere. The national health service will, of course, maintain overall control of the land.

I have held meetings with a wide range of stakeholders to ensure that their views are taken into account in developing the provisions of the wildlife and natural environment bill. Those discussions will continue until the bill has completed its parliamentary passage.

I have, of course, consulted widely on that issue and on the other issues in the proposed bill. I have spoken to Advocates for Animals, the League Against Cruel Sports and the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals; I have also spoken to land management organisations, because there is a balance to be struck. As a Government minister, I  must take into account all sides of the argument. We are trying, through both the snares orders that have just been laid and the provisions in the wildlife and natural environment bill, to strike the right balance to increase the professionalisation of those who set snares and ensure that the snares are identifiable back to those who set them. Through that professionalisation, I believe that we can reduce the number of non-target species that are caught in snares.

We are in the middle of continuing discussions on precisely those issues. Indeed, I met the Solicitor General last week to discuss the way in which the approach to wildlife crime is being developed. I want to encourage very strongly all police forces in Scotland to take the issue extremely seriously. Much of what is discovered is illegal snaring. Snaring is a legal activity, but the way in which it is done can be illegal and that, rightly, gets a great amount of publicity. We want to encourage a much stronger and more forceful attitude to wildlife crime across Scotland. That includes the police taking the issue as seriously as they can.

These data are not held centrally. If there are concerns about specific industrial sites, the relevant local authority and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency should be contacted.

There is, of course, a vacant and derelict land fund, which is targeted towards long-term vacancy and dereliction. The member's more immediate concerns should be addressed in the first instance through the appropriate local authority. Local authorities have a range of powers in that regard; I am happy to give the member chapter and verse if he wishes to tackle his local authority on the issue. We believe that local authorities' existing powers are wide ranging and we currently have no plans to extend them in connection with short-term vacancy and dereliction.

Specific instances would need to be brought before me. I very much hope that local authorities are using the powers that are available to them. There is little point in us legislating to allow local authorities powers if they are not going to be used. In respect of buildings, powers under section 87 of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 refer to the ability of a local authority to deal with, I think, the kind of situation to which the member refers. If there is a widespread view that local authorities are not using the appropriate powers, we may need to take up the issue with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, but I would need to have a great deal more information from across Scotland to do that.

As the big freeze turns to the slow thaw, authorities throughout the country are stepping up their efforts to ensure that any potential flood threats are tackled in a concerted and co-ordinated way. Throughout the heavy snow and freezing conditions over the past month, the Scottish Government and its partners have been preparing for a change in weather conditions and the challenges that presents. A public awareness campaign has been launched and intensive co- ordination is taking place between the Met Office, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, local authorities, Scottish Water and Transport Scotland to ensure that work needed to keep drains and water systems clear and prevent flooding incidents is targeted in the areas of likely need.

Questions about the budget are better addressed to my colleague, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. However, as a member who represents a constituency that has a substantial history of flooding and continues to have flooding issues, I am well aware of the difficulties that flooding raises for people and the concerns that folk have when they see that it is a possibility. There are current weather warnings in Highlands and Islands and Grampian. I checked with Traffic Scotland before I came here: two roads are closed because of flooding in Grampian and one road is closed in Highlands and Islands. At the moment, the situation seems to be well under control, but we will continue to monitor it regularly. We are ensuring that the basis for SEPA's new flood warning direct service will be targeted on a local scale for communities. That will be important in the future.

I am pleased to say that the feedback has been very positive and I look forward to hearing the outcome of the group's work. It will meet next on 11 March.

Those are the very issues that the working group is dealing with. I am happy to say that there will be a summit later this year—that is definite. The scope of and agenda for the summit are currently being addressed. I will ensure that the member's personal interest is  flagged up to the working group. She can perhaps ask to attend it herself.

I, too, congratulate Jim Tolson on securing the debate, which gives us a further opportunity to acknowledge all the incredibly good work that is done by the Scottish Allotments and Garden Society on what is effectively a shared agenda. I have already had considerable engagement with many people involved in allotment work and other grow-your-own schemes. I sometimes think  that every school in Perthshire is now growing fruit, which is all to the good. I know personally the benefits that growing our own fruit and vegetables can bring. I am happy to donate a jar of my own rowan and apple jelly to anybody who wants to try it. Growing your own is time out with added benefits in food—if you are good enough at what you are doing—fresh air and exercise. As Robin Harper said, allotments and gardens can also benefit biodiversity, although I sometimes think that the only biodiversity that is being encouraged in my garden is of the slugs-and-snails variety. Allotments and gardens form corridors for wildlife that often do not otherwise exist in built-up areas. That is particularly important for bees. I think we all know that we need to do something proactive about bees. Robin Harper informed me of something that I did not know: that, apparently, seven trees officially constitute an orchard. I am three trees ahead of the game and, as I intend to plant about five trees over the winter, I will join Robin Harper in creating an official orchard. Many members referred to the fact that allotments also deliver social benefits through, for example, open days, social events, horticultural shows and produce sales. Cathie Craigie in particular mentioned that aspect of allotments. Other members mentioned issues related to social interaction. The aspect of social interaction that struck me in relation to allotments is the intergenerational one, which is extremely important. I do not think that any member mentioned the enormous recycling benefit of allotments and grow-your-own schemes, which was surprising. Whenever I visit an allotment I see the amazingly inventive use of materials that would otherwise be discarded, which is effectively a diversion from landfill. I saw that particularly at the Springburn allotment that I visited a couple of months ago. That recycling aspect is important, too. If someone is a successful gardener, they not only increase access to affordable, healthy and nourishing food, but do the environment a big favour. The Government is fully committed to supporting all individuals and community groups who are involved in allotments. As members have acknowledged, allotment provision is the responsibility of local authorities, but I hear the concerns about how the legislation works in practice. If I have a moment, I will come back to that. Other organisations that play a role include Scottish Natural Heritage, the Forestry Commission for Scotland, the Federation of City Farms and Community Gardens, Trellis Scotland and the Lothians national health service. I visited Edinburgh's Bridgend allotments in November to see the excellent work that is being done there  through a partnership between NHS Lothian and the City of Edinburgh Council. When it comes to informal agreements—I think Jim Tolson mentioned those—NHS Lothian is an exemplar of how they can be made to work. It is important that green spaces, particularly in urban and deprived areas, are protected and enhanced and that we create new ones where possible. Such developments happen in the country, too. For example, Comrie Development Trust in my constituency has effectively built 29 new allotments on land that it got from the Ministry of Defence in a community buy-out. They are effectively private allotments, although they are run by the community. Even in the country there is an enormous demand for allotments. It is fantastic to hear about the work that is being done by Crossford community council, Crossford Allotment Association and the Carnegie Trust on the investigation of the provision of land for allotments, community gardens and social enterprise in Fife. It is an interesting area of work and I look forward to seeing it develop fully. Perhaps I can come and talk directly to the people involved. That kind of partnership will make a huge difference, and it underpins community cohesiveness. As members will know, Scotland has its first national food and drink policy, which we launched earlier this year. We highlighted the importance of, and our commitment to, grow-your-own initiatives. We are working with the NHS, Forestry Commission Scotland and SNH to identify land holdings in their name to try to ensure that, wherever possible, land is made available for allotments. Since the autumn of 2008 we have been putting in money, not least of which is the £700,000 through the climate challenge fund, directly to allotments and grow-your-own schemes. We have set up a grow-your-own working group, which met for the first time on 10 December. I hope that Nanette Milne will note that. The group will look at the idea of a summit. We will ask it to look at legislation, too. The subject is important to the Government and extremely important to me, given that I am involved in a grow-my-own scheme at home, and I am always happy to get experience when I go round the country visiting others. The new grow-your-own working group will take forward many points that members have raised in the debate. I am happy to share with members—Nanette Milne in particular—details of what the group plans to take forward. COSLA is on the working group. Many of the issues that members raised today will be explored during working group meetings.  I commend SAGS for all its work. I also commend Jim Tolson for bringing the debate to the chamber. Perhaps we should have a bring-and-buy sale—or a bring-and-offer-for-free sale, given that health and safety is an issue for the Parliament. We all could bring in produce. That would be an interesting exercise.

As the member might expect me to confirm, I meet officials from SEPA very regularly to discuss issues relating to flooding. The most recent meeting was on 12 November, when we had a detailed discussion about the recent flooding events in the north-east of Scotland. I have been involved in a teleconference this morning in respect of the situation that is beginning to unfold across much of the central belt and the south-west, where a very severe event is anticipated, as the Presiding Officer may know. The local strategic co-ordinating groups have been activated, and we are in as constant contact with them as is possible. We wish to reassure all members that everything that can be done in advance of any potential impact is being carried out. However, if individual members wish to know more specific information about their areas, I invite them to get in touch with my office directly.

SEPA allows dredging in certain places. It has a difficult decision to make when requests are made. Since 1997, local authorities have been under a duty to cleanse watercourses of debris and sediment where the authority considers that such works would substantially reduce the risk of flooding of non-agricultural land. That position might change very slightly under the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009. Individual requests for dredging are dealt with on an individual basis. I am not aware of generalised requests having been turned down in Aberdeenshire. If there are specific ones that the member wishes to raise, I can get back to her.

The setting up of a public local inquiry would not be a matter for the Government. I am aware that other members have added their voices to that call. How such an inquiry might be organised would be a matter for the various agencies involved. I certainly would not stand in the way of an inquiry taking place.

This is a matter for the relevant local authority, not the Scottish Government. Under the Flood Prevention (Scotland) Act 1961, local authorities have discretionary powers to repair and otherwise maintain in a due state of efficiency any barrier or other work for defence against flooding. Under the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009, most of which will come into effect later this month, it will be for the local authority both to assess whether the maintenance of privately owned defences substantially reduces flood risk in its area and to act accordingly.

As I have already indicated, the primary responsibility is with the local authority. If the member cares to write to me about the specific issue that he has raised, I will endeavour to establish the background to it and try to work out why there has been a delay. In general terms, the first ports of call for members on such issues should be the owner, whether the owner is domestic or commercial, and the local authority.

The increased risk of tidal surge is a factor in the general issue of flood risk assessment. It is a matter that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee has considered and which is in our minds. The member raises the issue of specific large companies and the work that they do. I am aware that Longannet power station wants to make some upgrades and that a flood risk assessment will be carried out as part of that. That would be the normal process by which those matters would be assessed. If the member has any indication that anything other than that is happening, I hope that he will communicate it to me.

The overall aim of the Government's flood risk management strategy is  to reduce flood risk by investment in flood protection schemes and flood warning arrangements, which will increase the resilience of people and communities. That will allow them to recover more quickly and easily from the consequences of flooding. Flooding will never be avoided completely, which is why resilience is so important.

We are in the very early stages of implementing the 2009 act. As I indicated in response to an earlier question, it is not yet fully implemented, so we will have to wait a little while to find out whether, under the new arrangements, some of what Gil Paterson would like to see will happen. The Government continues to consider and develop national policies to ensure that local responders are prepared for major emergencies, but it also wants to lead the development of a national adaptation framework that will provide direction for public service delivery and for understanding and responding to the risks. Some of that work will include the matters about which the member indicates he is concerned.

For a change.

He is taking lessons from you.

This is an important debate about the contribution that the central Scotland green network can make to the quality of life of people who live in the central belt. I am pleased to be able to set the scene today, and I hope that if any members are as yet unaware of that far-reaching project, they will be a little better informed after the debate. The network is a visionary and highly ambitious new green space initiative that will deliver an environmental step change for Scotland's central belt. It is a strategic network of woodland and other habitats, active travel routes, green space links, watercourses and waterways. It is also the biggest programme of its kind in Europe, comprising an area four times the size of greater London that stretches from Ayrshire, Inverclyde and Dunbartonshire in the west to Fife and East Lothian in the east. By making a dramatic and lasting improvement to the environment of central Scotland, the green network has the power to transform the lives and livelihoods of more than 3 million people who live there. It will enhance the setting for development and other land uses and will improve opportunities for outdoor recreation and cultural activity. The network is one of 14 strategic national developments that the Government set out last June in a national planning framework that will guide the country's development to 2030. The key strategic infrastructure that it identifies will enable Scotland to develop its full potential and support the Government's central purpose of sustainable economic growth. That puts the central Scotland green network on a par with, for example, the replacement Forth crossing or the high-speed rail link to London, and we regard it to be as important as those. The Government's vision is of a healthier and greener Scotland. We want strong, resilient and supportive communities that live in well-designed, sustainable places. We want the people of those communities to value and enjoy their natural environments and to live longer, healthier lives. The green network's vision is to help to deliver those outcomes and transform central Scotland through significant improvements in environmental quality, woodland cover and recreational opportunities.  That transformation will make central Scotland more attractive not only for the three million residents but for its visitors, and particularly for its investors. By creating and linking high-quality, accessible green space, the CSGN will enhance biodiversity, help to mitigate climate change, support sustainable economic growth and improve the quality of life of most of Scotland's population. By substantially increasing woodland cover and improving green space, the CSGN will transform landscapes for the region's communities and bring back to life the area's legacy of derelict and vacant land. Furthermore, creating a green network will complement improvements in rail, road and communications infrastructure in the area. In short, the network will make central Scotland a more attractive place in which to live and do business. Attracting new businesses to central Scotland is particularly important in these economically challenging times, because high-value, high-tech businesses are attracted to high-quality places. We believe that a green network will give the area a competitive edge and that delivering a better environment in central Scotland will help it to compete economically at a European and, indeed, a global level. A successful central Scotland green network has the power to deliver several of the national strategic objectives and make the area healthier, stronger, smarter, greener and wealthier. The initiative will start by co-ordinating and building on the good work that is already being done by existing green space initiatives, which include the Glasgow and Clyde valley green network, the Central Scotland Forest Trust, the Edinburgh and Lothians forest habitat network, the strategic work of Greenspace Scotland and a large number of more local initiatives. The Labour Party is right to point out that the initiative will require an extensive amount of partnership working across all levels of government and out into the private and voluntary sectors as well. The initiative will also build on strategic infrastructure developments, such as the millennium canal link and the Falkirk helix. The Edinburgh and Lothians forest habitat network is creating a multifunctional green network linking town and country, which includes proposals for Roslin glen and the Pentland hills. The central Scotland forest and the Forth and Clyde and Union canals are helping to transform the environment between Glasgow and Edinburgh. The Glasgow and Clyde valley green network partnership is taking forward a green space enhancement programme, which includes areas in the Clyde waterfront, Clyde gateway, Gartcosh-Gartloch and Ravenscraig. There is also potential for substantial habitat restoration and  enhancement through the Clyde gateway and the Commonwealth games legacy. The 19 local authorities in the area will obviously play an important role in, for example, promoting open space networks, facilitating countryside access and developing core path networks. The Scottish forestry strategy contains a commitment to expand and improve the quality of woodlands around settlements and to improve landscape amenity and recreational opportunities. As well as bringing vacant and derelict land back into beneficial use, well-sited woodlands will improve biodiversity and the resilience of the natural environment, helping it to adapt to climate change and absorb CO 2 . Improvements to large-scale ecological networks and habitat connections, including wetlands, will counter fragmentation and assist species migration. Effectively, the green network is not just for humans but for wildlife, which will be able to use the network as well. Developing strategic footpaths and cycleways will contribute to more sustainable transport networks and expand recreational opportunities beside and between population centres. In that way, the network will help to encourage active travel and healthier lifestyles—a park-and-stride approach to commuting, as it were.

I hope that all existing infrastructure, including regional parks, will become part and parcel of the CSGN. We will look for cross-linking where, and with whom, that is possible. There is no reason why the regional parks, where they intersect with the CSGN, should not be part of it. The main stakeholder bodies are already working together through an interim steering group that is led by Forestry Commission Scotland and Scottish Natural Heritage, and supported by the Central Scotland Forest Trust. I have asked officials in those bodies to assemble a work plan that will set out the way forward. We will launch that early next year. A high-level executive board comprising members of the representative bodies is being tasked to take forward the next phase. A chair is being recruited, and I expect to appoint a successful candidate early next year. I intend to take a pro-active role in the new board to ensure that the work translates to real actions on the ground.

The canal network and all waterways will be part and parcel of the CSGN. I know that British Waterways has its own ambitious plans. I had an interesting meeting with representatives of that organisation, at which they exhibited their level of ambition. I certainly want to encourage that where possible, because it will bring enormous benefit to the areas in which the waterways are located. We will ensure that all local authorities in the CSGN are involved. In order to do that, I will host a gathering next year of all relevant councillors. I imagine that it will be quite a large gathering, since they will be from 19 local authorities. However, it is important that they are all brought on board and are embedded in the process. Volunteer bodies, charities and not-for-profit organisations also have a key role to play in helping to turn the CSGN into a reality. In that regard, I intend to host a third sector summit next summer. As members have heard, a lot is already happening. Of course, the current economic reality means that we will have to make our existing resources go as far as possible. Much can be achieved through more efficient co-ordination and use of existing initiatives and their resources, including the Scotland rural development plan; the smarter choices, smarter places project; regeneration funding; the Forestry Commission's woods in and around towns programme and challenge funding; the repositioning of the national forest estate; the Clyde gateway; and, of course, the 2014 Commonwealth games legacy activity. I hope that just the mention of all those highlights the utter absurdity of the Liberal Democrat amendment. It will be apparent by now that the CSGN is a cross-sectoral, cross-departmental initiative. The department for rural affairs and the environment clearly has an important co-ordinating role to play. However, as I said at an SNH event here in Holyrood last week, a development of the scale and ambition of the CSGN cannot be achieved by one department alone.

Because it asks for that information for the entire national planning framework—all 14 projects. It wants the detail in six weeks for projects that might last 30 years. I feel sorry for the Labour Party having had to endure that kind of absurdity in coalition for eight years.  In order for the strategic national development to be fully successful, it will require the good will, commitment and contribution of colleagues from other departments. I was adamant at the outset that the CSGN should not be seen solely as an environmental initiative. Principal responsibility certainly sits with me and my department, but as a testament to the wide-ranging nature of the benefits that will be gained, the Minister for Housing and Communities, Alex Neil, will close this debate. However, that could just as easily have been done by the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change, the Minister for Public Health and Sport or any one of a number of others. We all need to work towards making the CSGN vision a reality. I have asked my officials to intensify engagement across a variety of portfolios. I shall pursue ministerial-level contacts accordingly. For any colleagues who are interested, both the Forestry Commission and SNH are happy to host site visits to show members what is already happening and the scale of what needs to be done in their local areas. I exhort all members with an interest and locus in the CSGN initiative to work with us in helping to deliver it. We all need to focus on delivering tangible benefits that will improve the environment, economic potential and the lives of people in central Scotland for generations to come. I move, That the Parliament recognises and supports the significant contribution that the Central Scotland Green Network can make to the quality of life of the three million people living in the central belt, not just through environmental and social benefits, such as improving habitat networks, enhancing landscapes, mitigating climate change, improving health and wellbeing and stimulating educational and cultural activity, outdoor recreation and community involvement, but also through increasing economic benefits, such as business development, urban regeneration and derelict land restoration.

This really useful debate has pointed up the need to have—and, indeed, the benefit of having—these slightly more reflective debates, because it has allowed a whole range of opinions to be expressed across and within the party groups. However, if anyone else says that I have been brave, I will begin to suspect that I have made the wrong decision. I should have said at the beginning of the debate that, like Jackie Baillie, I represent part of the area in which the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park sits. There is a tendency to forget that that park is not just about Loch Lomond; it covers many other lochs, including Loch Earn, half of which is in my constituency. I am going back some way now but in the 1980s, as a young solicitor working in Dumbarton District Council, I was on the steering group that began the process of setting up the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park. As a result, I  have some background and history on this matter, and remember the debates very well. I have listened with interest to what has been said this afternoon. As I implied in my opening speech, I am in a very generous mood and will accept the Liberal Democrat and Conservative amendments. Although both John Scott and Liam McArthur asked me to go further, I welcome the fact that they have endorsed the Government's direction of travel. I listened carefully to Labour members' speeches and, after considering the matter, I am prepared to accept their amendment. However, I make it crystal clear that there can be no consideration of a marine and coastal national park until the Marine (Scotland) Bill has successfully gone through its parliamentary stages. As for new national parks, which Sarah Boyack and Peter Peacock asked about, only Harris is being considered for such a designation. As it happens, I have already met the campaigners, and it is fair to say that they will have to overcome a considerable number of hurdles before they can move the proposal much further forward. The Galloway proposal had not been brought to my attention before but, thanks to John Scott, I am now aware of it. I should also point out that giving the strategy group the role of exploring criteria for new parks, including marine and coastal parks, is consistent with our policy, and I hope that that reassures members that we have not forgotten about the future. I have taken a considerable amount of notes and, in the time I have available, want to do justice to the points that members have made. First, I make it clear that I will not rise to the temptation offered by some members to comment directly on current planning rows. As members know perfectly well, none of those matters is likely to fall on my desk and I have absolutely no influence over the decision-making processes. Peter Peacock and Rob Gibson raised a number of serious points, some of which, as befits both members, were quite philosophical. I say to Peter Peacock that I am not one for hiding and that is certainly not what the strategy review group is about. He and Rob Gibson highlighted a number of issues that will be the subject of live debates as we go forward; after all, with this debate, we will never reach a point at which we will feel that everything is fixed and sorted. Indeed, I suspect that the issue will be raised regularly not only in the chamber but in Scotland as a whole. Christopher Harvie made his speech in his own inimitable fashion, educational as ever, as befits his background. Jamie McGrigor raised the issue of affordable housing, which I thought rather unfortunate  because, in truth, most of the members who are in the chamber know exactly what would happen if the restrictions that he mentioned were lifted. Affordable housing is already a big problem in rural Scotland. Jackie Baillie raised a separate housing issue. It is important to reflect on the problems that the occupancy policy raises. The Scottish Government has advised that occupancy restrictions should not be used unless there are exceptional circumstances to justify them. The Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority will make a decision on the future of the occupancy policy when it meets on 14 December, so I guess that we just have to watch this space. One or two members mentioned regional parks. Although the debate is about national parks, I will comment on some other schemes that are available and which members might not be aware of. It is important to mention that a variety of approaches can be taken to protected sites, other than the designation of a national park. One is the establishment of regional parks, which, before national parks appeared on the scene, led the way in Scotland on the practical and positive management of open-air recreation close to centres of population. We can be proud of the regional parks' achievements. I read in The Herald this morning about another big proposal for a regional park centred around the Campsies. The regional park idea has not gone away and I do not expect it to do so as it still has a part to play. We also have geoparks, of which members might not be so well aware. Scotland has three geoparks, which are areas with a geological heritage of particular importance. They use geology and other aspects of the natural and cultural heritage to promote sustainable economic development, usually through tourism. I congratulate Shetland on achieving geopark status earlier this year. It joins the other geoparks, of the north-west Highlands and Lochaber. The award of that United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization status is a great accolade for those areas and for Scotland as a whole. There are also biospheres, which are another UNESCO idea and which might be relevant to the proposal in Galloway. I am encouraged by renewed community interest in the biosphere concept. As Elaine Murray knows, the issue is a particularly live one in the south-west of Scotland, where three local authorities have come together to pursue the idea. The partnership sees the designation as making a contribution to a range of policies, including the social and economic development of the area, and it is carrying out a further and final round of public engagement on the proposal.

That is absolutely important. Some members might not be fully aware of the breadth of designations that are available. We do not always have to go through the national park set-up. I will say one or two words about some of the advantages of national parks. There is a huge issue about natural heritage, to which one or two members referred. Earlier this year, I launched a wildcat project in the Cairngorms. Some members might think that that was a very appropriate project for me to launch. Our national parks are also key in relation to climate change. Several good initiatives on climate change have been taken by national parks. We must recognise that the national parks, as well as other areas such as biospheres and geoparks, contribute to a range of public goods. That is not always as widely recognised as it might be. I am about to run out of time and I do not want to use more than my allotted space. I accept all the amendments. We have had an extraordinarily good debate and I look forward to the next one on national parks.

That makes sense.

Today's debate provides me with an opportunity to set out the Government's thinking on the way ahead for national parks. To start with, I remind all members of how important our national parks are to Scotland, especially in the year of homecoming. Each of our national parks has four aims: conservation, recreation, and the sustainable use of resources—of course—and the economic and social development of communities. The fourth aim is unique to Scotland. I know that there is interest in and enthusiasm for national parks across the chamber, and I think that the conveners of both national park authorities are in the public gallery with their chief executives. I extend a warm welcome to them all. I will address three issues: the national parks review, the contribution that the national parks make to sustainable social and economic development, and the national parks' role in delivering a greener Scotland. This summer, I signed off the strategic review of the national parks. I want to remind members why that review was conducted, what it recommended, how we consulted on the recommendations and when we will implement them. Why was there a strategic review? In 2008, Michael Russell, who has just joined us, announced the review in the context of the Government's commitment to more effective government. That translated into a couple of key questions: what is the most appropriate public body for delivering national park functions in Scotland, and what are the most appropriate employer and governance arrangements? The review was conducted in the summer of 2008. More than 280 individuals and organisations provided their views. The report was published in November 2008 at the same time as a public consultation was launched on some of the key recommendations. Those recommendations were that the two NPAs should continue as free-standing and separate non-departmental public bodies for the medium term; that a ministerially chaired national parks strategy group should be set up; that the national park authorities should work together; that the boards of the NPAs might be reduced in size; and that the conveners and  deputy conveners, rather than being elected, might be appointed from among board members. The consultation on those recommendations produced interesting results. I will explain how we have taken account of the responses in moving forward to implementation and deal with each of the five main consultation issues in turn. First, I confirm that both park authorities will remain as free-standing NDPBs. The majority of respondents supported the national park authorities. A typical comment was: "The current arrangements allow Park Authorities to deliver national policy outcomes through the development of local priorities for action which is a key strength of the present structure." Secondly, the proposal that there might be a national park strategy group attracted strong support, but very few respondents commented on its proposed remit. Instead, respondents preferred to make their own suggestions and provided unprompted views on the composition of any such group. I have to think about the broader agenda for simplifying the public sector, which means that any strategy group will need to exist for a fixed term and that it will have to have a definite end point and a clear sense of what it is being asked to achieve. I hope that that neatly deals with the Conservative amendment. I therefore intend to chair a small strategy group that will complete its work within 18 months. I will look for the group to provide strategic guidance that complements the national parks founding legislation, which sets out the criteria and detailed formal processes that must be used when setting up or extending a national park. The group should focus on establishing the principles that the Government might be expected to follow in considering both new national parks and boundary changes to existing national parks, and thereby help ministers to decide whether and when to activate the formal statutory process. I anticipate that there will be public consultation on those principles. Thirdly, there was strong support for the NPAs to work together. Some respondents commented that practices should be shared only when doing so would prove beneficial to both parks. I am pleased that good progress is already being made in that regard. In the summer, both park authorities approved a set of principles to underlie their joint working, particularly when that can be of mutual benefit to both parks. Fourthly, the review's recommendation that the 25-member boards of the NPAs might be slimmed down polarised views in the consultation. More agreed than disagreed with the proposal, but there was a clear steer from the consultees about the importance of the boards having three types of  member: ministerial appointees, council nominees and directly elected members. Views were sought on the relative proportions of those three categories of member, but there was no consensus. I have therefore decided that the boards should be reduced to fewer than 20 members while retaining a balance between the three categories of member and maintaining the absolute number of directly elected members. That, in turn, means that the proportion of directly elected members will increase. I hope that that makes the Liberal Democrats happy. It is my intention to bring about, by October 2010, a board of 19 for the Cairngorms National Park Authority and a board of 17 for Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority. The reason for the difference in size is simple. The extension of the Cairngorms national park into Perth and Kinross, which is already supported in the Scottish Parliament, means that the number of nominating councils will increase from four to five. I referred earlier to the formal processes that are required by the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 when changes are made. Those will now come into play as we bring about smaller boards. We have started a statutory consultation on modifying the designation orders that set up the parks. Finally, there is the issue of national park authority conveners. Currently, the founding legislation requires that conveners and their deputies be elected from among board members. The review recommended that conveners be appointed by ministers from existing board members, but a majority of consultees disagreed. They felt that the present system was democratic and that changing it could have an adverse effect on the sense of local accountability. I have listened to the consultees and therefore decided that conveners of the national park authorities will continue to be elected by board members. I turn briefly to the fourth aim of our national parks, which is to promote the sustainable and social development of the areas' communities, which sends a clear message that our national parks are about people as well as wildlife and landscapes. There are many well-documented examples of businesses seeing a unique selling point in their being based in a national park, including tourism-based businesses, farmers' markets and transport initiatives. The key point is that the marketing basis for all those businesses is the national park—the park is the brand. In addition, there are businesses that locate within the national parks for quality-of-life reasons. In common with many rural areas, the Cairngorms and Loch Lomond and the Trossachs have high  levels of self-employment, with almost a quarter of the working population being self-employed. Large numbers of visitors are also attracted to the parks: the Cairngorms national park was awarded the 2005 European charter for sustainable tourism—a first for a United Kingdom national park—and Loch Lomond and the Trossachs was awarded it in 2008. I am aware, however, that there is a small minority of visitors whose behaviour is antisocial and can, in some cases, be deemed criminal. I am particularly alert to the fact that the east side of the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park can become a key hotspot for such behaviour at particular times of the year. I agree with the national park authority that such issues need to be addressed, and they are being tackled on a partnership basis through a range of initiatives. Land management is also a vital part of the economy. The Cairngorms deer advisory group brings together land managers, public agencies and communities to share information and advice. The Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority administers the natural heritage grant scheme, under which more than 50 projects are under way and more than £500,000 in grants is delivered. Also, within the Cairngorms, a land-based business training scheme delivered training to 550 people last year. That figure should be borne in mind. In terms of social development, both parks are fostering sustainable communities. The Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority is running a pioneering community futures programme, which helps communities to prepare local action plans and raise funds. The Cairngorms National Park Authority is a partner in a multi-agency project under the heading "Our Community...A Way Forward", which provides baseline information on communities and their needs and then identifies the priorities for action. On health matters, both parks are great places to enjoy the outdoors, with the corresponding benefits to physical and mental health. Good progress has been made in both parks on increasing people's access through path improvements. A get active festival in the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park last year focused on what are known as the four Bs—boots, bikes, boats and buses—and encouraged people to leave their cars behind and get outdoors. On education, both parks have been working with Learning and Teaching Scotland and local authorities to develop outdoor learning opportunities as a delivery tool for the curriculum for excellence. Last year, the Europarc Federation junior ranger camp was held in the Cairngorms, and both parks are active on the John Muir award scheme.  I hope that members will now have a clear view of the successes of both parks and their contributions to the promotion of the economic and social development of the areas' communities as well as the many benefits that they bring to Scotland across a wide range of economic, social and educational functions. I am aware that I have not dealt with the Labour amendment. I promise our Labour friends that I will listen carefully to what they have to say and address the amendment in my closing remarks. I move, That the Parliament commends the contribution that Scotland's two national parks make to sustainable social and economic development and to delivering the Greener Scotland agenda; notes the outcome of the National Parks Strategic Review, and welcomes the proposal to set up a National Parks Strategy group to guide future strategy for Scotland's national parks.

I expect that the member's question was provoked by the discovery of unauthorised genetically modified linseed in Canadian imports to the European Union. Scottish produce benefits from a natural image among consumers. Although the commercial impact of any illegal presence of GM material in Scottish produce would depend on the nature of the material and on which sector or sectors were concerned, the Government's view is that any impact would be negative.

That is absolutely the Government's position and there is no intention whatever to change it. A great deal of debate is going on in the EU on how GM organisms are handled, and a consultation on the socioeconomic issues that are related to GMOs, into which the Government hopes to make an input, will be finalised in January. It is extremely important that we assess socioeconomic criteria in relation to unauthorised GMO releases and that we continue  our important work to ensure that Scotland's produce can continue to be sold into a high-quality, premium market.

The Scottish Government provided local government in Scotland with record levels of funding—£23 billion in the period 2008 to 2010. To help local authorities to deliver on recycling targets, the Scottish Government has allocated an additional £42 million from the zero waste fund in the period 2008 to 2010 and intends to allocate further funding for 2010-11. In addition, delivery organisations that are funded by Scottish Government, including the Waste and Resources Action Programme, Waste Aware Scotland and Remade Scotland, provide advice and support to local authorities throughout Scotland, to help them to improve recycling performance.

I am aware that there has been considerable newspaper coverage of the situation in Glasgow. Glasgow City Council faces a challenging few years, but I understand that in its single outcome agreement it committed to increasing its municipal waste recycling capacity to 31 per cent by 2010. I know that the council is having difficulty, and I understand that a review is being carried out by Glasgow Caledonian University, which will suggest ways forward. I hope that the council will be able to improve its performance in the coming months and years.

I am aware that Glasgow City Council faces difficulties in managing waste collection at tenemental properties, but Glasgow is not the only part of Scotland that has to deal with that issue, and other councils have to deal with different issues in waste collection. Discussions go on all the time in respect of local authority finance on the basis of the concordat that the Government agreed with local authorities. In making funding available to local authorities, the Government fully takes on board the challenges in each and every case. I do not expect that that will change in future.

The Scottish Government has regular discussions with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency on a range of environmental issues, including the environmental impact of power stations.

As Kenneth Gibson knows, the Scottish Government is extremely ambitious about the future for Scotland, including in relation to carbon capture and storage. It is extremely important that we take forward that technology. There is work, including work with the European Union, to be done to increase the likelihood of delivering carbon capture and storage. SEPA is well aware of what is required and is a serious player in its development.

It is normally the role of local authorities to lead the recovery process following an emergency. I take this opportunity to commend Moray Council on its hard work and continued support and assistance to residents over the past three weeks. The council provides on-going  assistance, including temporary accommodation; the packing of possessions in preparation for storage and the circulation of regular newsletters with information and updates. In addition, the Lord Lieutenant of Moray has set up a flood-relief fund to assist the victims of the flooding event. Moray Council is providing support to administer the fund.

The Belwin scheme is available to Moray Council, should it wish to make a claim for emergency financial assistance. I do not think that the council has made such a claim, but it has said that it may wish to do so, so a claim may be in the offing. We will continue to liaise with the council. A decision on whether to trigger the Belwin scheme will be taken following receipt of full details of the emergency.

Bill Wilson raises an interesting issue, because we no longer ring fence the money that is given to local authorities—it is for them to make decisions about to spend it. However, I advise Parliament that, in its first eight years, from 1999 to 2007, average spending on flooding each year was £5.5 million. In this Government's first year in office, the figure was £32.4 million; thereafter we moved to the new funding scheme. The Government's record on the issue is excellent.

As I said, the council has notified the Scottish Government that it may  wish to make a claim under the Belwin scheme. When full details of any such claim are before us, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will make a decision on the matter. That is what will happen if the council makes an application for any further capital grants that it considers to be appropriate. Of course, all councils are being tasked with finding savings over the coming years. The position of Moray Council is no different to that of any other council in that regard.

The Scottish Government is in continuous discussion with SEPA on the implementation of the EU water framework directive and will shortly be invited to approve the first river basin management plans, which are due for publication in December 2009.

I am well aware of the controversy that has emerged in respect of the River Doon. SEPA and Scottish Power have been in discussions for about two years about possible changes to the Galloway hydro scheme. One of the possible changes—the most extreme one—has generated an enormous amount of controversy, and I am aware of the widespread opposition. However, no formal proposals have yet been submitted by Scottish Power. They are expected to be submitted in December 2009, at which time SEPA will begin the formal consultation  process. All parties will have the opportunity to make representations to SEPA and, ultimately, to the Scottish ministers. Because of that, I must be a little careful what I say about the matter here.

I, too, congratulate Jamie McGrigor on obtaining the debate, even if it now allows us to say that we have heard him debating birds in the chamber. Those of us who know him well enough will appreciate that. Biodiversity is of critical value to the prosperity of our society. Indeed, I spent a good hour and a half yesterday chairing the biodiversity forum, so I have discussed within the past 24 hours some of the issues that underpin the motion. Biodiversity is also important to the welfare of our community. Songbirds are a treasure of nature. I think that every one of us feels the same. If we are unlucky enough to be awake for the dawn chorus, it is perhaps some consolation to listen to it while we are sleepless. It is an event of true wonder, unless we are trying to sleep. Nevertheless, it is the kind of thing that we would all be the poorer for if it did not exist. I share the concern that is expressed in the motion about the long-term decline in bird populations. We have debated that issue in the chamber previously on a motion from Nanette Milne, although that was on seabirds. As well as the joy that songbirds give us, terrestrial breeding birds are a good indicator of overall biodiversity because they react quickly to variations in habitat quality through changes in breeding output, survival and dispersal. As the motion notes, an army of enthusiastic volunteers helps to keep the records of the numbers of birds, making them among our best-recorded species. Members may know that one of our 45 national indicators is increasing the index of abundance of terrestrial breeding birds, which includes songbirds. I am pleased to say that that indicator is showing overall improvement and that the trend since the early 1990s is positive. Within the index, the picture for songbirds is mixed. The good news is that over the period there have been increases in many species, including song thrushes and house sparrows. Less positive is the fact that certain species are still declining. Others have stabilised but are not yet showing recovery.

I will mention some of those schemes a little later. However, given the weather at the moment, I think that farmers are anxious to get the harvest in when they can. I am also not quite sure whether the member's suggestion raises other issues. The matter is slightly more complicated than simply delaying harvesting. As I said, some species are increasing, some are declining and some are stabilising, so the overall picture is not clear. Even those species that have shown improvement in the recent past have some way to go before they return to the levels that were seen some 40 or more years ago. However, we can take some encouragement from the recent data. There is a danger in having a too simplistic analysis—a point that was well put by Nanette Milne—given that changes in agricultural practice have no doubt contributed to the long-term decline in certain songbirds. There is no reason for us not to admit that. We all know that many hedgerows were lost due to the intensification of production, the loss of a mosaic of pasture and arable land and changes in cropping practices. However, I think that we can now be confident that we have begun to turn the corner. Our farming and crofting communities are now our best asset in delivering improved habitats for Scottish songbirds through sustainable farming and crofting practices. To help to improve our songbird habitats, we are supporting our land managers through directly funded schemes under the Scotland rural development programme. We have also imposed mandatory cross-compliance conditions on all farmers who are in receipt of the single farm payment to ensure that there are no additional losses to important habitats. We are turning round the loss in hedgerows by providing a number of options through the SRDP and other related schemes. On the point that was raised about the corn bunting, we are a little concerned that there were not enough observations to give a result in the breeding bird survey in Scotland. We recognise the importance of the bird, and that is why we have given the species its own funding package within the SRDP. However, we need the support of north-east farmers to retain what is an iconic species—perhaps I could pray in aid for that support Alex Johnstone, who is one of those farmers.  We also need to be careful about the figures. For example, the catastrophic decline in house sparrows in England from 1976 to 2004 was not clearly mirrored in Scotland. We need to be a bit careful about which declines and increases we are talking about. Between 1995 and 2007, the number of house sparrows in Scotland has increased—sometimes I think that they are all in my garden. We need to be a little bit careful about where the figures apply to and where the problems exist. As I have discussed, we are seeing indications of recovery in Scotland in many of our songbird populations, including—although I do not want to overstay my welcome—swallows, house martins, grey wagtails, wrens, robins, blackbirds, song thrushes, mistle-thrushes, whitethroats, goldcrests, great tits, house sparrows, greenfinches and goldfinches. Skylark numbers have actually stabilised over that period. We need to try to get back to the higher numbers of skylarks that we had before, but the situation is not all doom and gloom and should not be presented as such. I know that the Songbird Survival Trust has a particular view of the predation of sparrow-hawks, buzzards and so on in preventing a more robust turnaround in songbird numbers, but the broad consensus of informed opinion—as Elaine Murray referred to—does not seem to be on the trust's side. I am aware of comprehensive and authoritative reviews of the evidence that were published by the moorland forum in 2005 and by the RSPB in 2007—I will forgive the RSPB for its description of cats as non-native predators. We need to have regard to such published evidence. Both studies reached similar conclusions. In the words of the RSPB study, "the evidence to implicate predators such as sparrowhawks in the declines of songbirds is very weak." It is clear that predators kill other animals—that is what makes them predators. In some circumstances, predation may affect populations of local species. However, the evidence that is currently available does not seem to support the Songbird Survival Trust's view that predators such as sparrow-hawks are an important factor in the overall populations of songbirds. I have seen sparrow-hawks in my garden trying to take down pigeons rather than songbirds, so the picture is perhaps more mixed than might at first be thought. I will finish on a positive note. I support the motion's commendation of "individual birdwatchers and bird groups in the Highlands and Islands and elsewhere in Scotland for their role in recording species' numbers". The commitment of those people to recording nature and to supporting schemes to improve  habitats and promote understanding is to be celebrated. I echo Robin Harper's sentiments and express my own appreciation for the many gardeners across Scotland who encourage birds in their gardens through planting choices, feeding, the provision of nesting boxes and the application of benign neglect, which is always helpful, despite the mess that birds might make. It is an area in which the action of individuals can make a big difference to biodiversity. Advice is available from SNH and the RSPB for those who want to increase the attractiveness of their garden as a home for songbirds.  Next year is the international year of biodiversity, so I hope that we will build on the enthusiasm of conservation volunteers and make biodiversity something that we in Scotland can be proud of. We appreciate biodiversity, which must go across all species. I am grateful for the opportunity that the motion has provided to discuss the issue; I simply ask members to be careful not to rush to very simplistic answers.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

I did.

Our national food and drink policy supports the development of allotments and grow-your-own-food projects. We want to encourage people to work together legally to take advantage of the opportunities that unused derelict lands present for community growing projects. We will produce practical advice and guidance that will encourage public bodies, communities and individuals to work together.

Given the extent of the media coverage, I guess that few people will be unaware of the current situation in Glasgow—and, indeed, of the advent of guerrilla gardeners throughout the country. The Government is working, alongside various public bodies, to examine potential further provision of allotments and community gardens. We know that there is great unmet demand for both. Ultimately, local authorities are responsible for deciding on priorities for their land. However, we hope that Glasgow City Council, which is the decision-making body in the north Kelvin meadow case, would have regard to the work that the national health service is doing to support a number of projects on health board land and, similarly, Scottish Natural Heritage's support for such initiatives.

I suspect that that issue is a little beyond my remit, as it is a local authority responsibility. I hope that all members will join us in having discussions about the future of such derelict land and point to the examples in which good progress has been made, such as on some otherwise unused health board land that has now been turned over to such projects. It often helps to point to examples.

We are aware that some 3,000 people are on a nationwide allotments waiting list and that 70 per cent of the currently allocated allotments are owned by local authorities. That leaves 30 per cent that are not, so there is also capacity to grow—that is a bit of a pun, of course—the numbers of allotments outwith local authority land. Nanette Milne will be happy to know that an allotments summit is under active consideration at the moment. We are aware of the enormous pressure on allotments and that we will have to try to find some way to resolve it.

I am pleased to open this debate on our forthcoming national waste management plan. The debate gives the Parliament a say on the plan, although members will have further opportunities to contribute when we carry out the written consultation. Waste management accounts for around 4 per cent of Scotland's climate change emissions. Of course, provisions in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill are designed to help Scotland move further on its journey towards zero waste. Although climate change emissions from waste management have fallen and although we put less into and capture more gas from landfill, there is no doubt that we can do far more to reduce landfill even further. Climate change is the main environmental challenge facing Scotland and the world, and zero waste helps us not just to tackle that problem but to meet renewable energy and heat targets. Moreover, moving to zero waste helps to drive environmental awareness. More than 80 per cent of Scottish households now participate in some form of recycling activity, which is a major advance on the position 10 or 20 years ago. The fact that that has been achieved by making it easier for people to recycle is a valuable lesson that we can learn in seeking to encourage other forms of environmental behaviour. Delivering on zero waste will also bring economic benefits for Scotland by creating jobs in the collection of material for recycling, in the sorting of material and in the reprocessing of material into new products. Jobs will also be created in waste treatment plants to deal with the waste that cannot be prevented or recycled. Finally, waste reduction can often help with the household expenses. After all, food waste is a high-profile issue at the moment, and reducing such waste means that we have spent less money on food that we have simply thrown away. Our new zero waste plan will set out how we can achieve high recycling rates. Of course, such a plan is required by the European Union and, as the current plan dates back to 2003, it is time to prepare a new one. We will start consulting in July and finalise the plan by February 2010.  However, in some cases, we want to go further and faster than EU requirements. We are particularly ambitious about waste prevention. In that respect, we have put in place many measures including our love food, hate waste campaign; subsidised home composting bins; work on reducing unwanted mail; advice to business on waste prevention and resource efficiency; and work on eco-schools and packaging. I am sure that many members have visited the eco-schools in their constituencies. Recent figures suggest that growth in municipal waste has stopped. However, we are calling on all of Scotland to build on that good foundation. The new plan will have a reuse framework, which will emphasise the importance of reusing materials such as furniture, building materials and packaging. As members will know, to tackle packaging, the Waste and Resources Action Programme, or WRAP, currently has a voluntary agreement with retailers—known as the Courtauld commitment—which has stopped growth in food packaging and reduced food waste. The commitment is being renewed and will go further. Scotland's new plan will encourage more voluntary agreements with industry. WRAP will work with the home improvement and do-it-yourself industry to reduce waste. WRAP has also established a commitment to halve the amount of construction, demolition and excavation waste going to landfill by 2012. We can announce today that the Scottish Government is signing that commitment, so that we can play our full part. We want to have more influence on how products are designed. We have prepared a report on that, which will appear with the consultation draft of our plan. Clean and sustainable design is at the heart of zero waste, as it is about encouraging products that are longer lasting, capable of being repaired or reused and recyclable at the end of their lives. All of that also means jobs. Influencing design is likely to be best achieved at an EU level, so the Government will press for that. Good design increases the capacity for recycling. We have gone from a recycling rate for municipal waste of about 5 per cent in 1999 to 33.5 per cent by December 2008. Of the 32 local authorities, 25 have recycling rates of 30 per cent or more and eight have reached 40 per cent or more. Those achievements are the result of hard work by local authorities, the private and community sectors and delivery bodies such as the Waste and Resources Action Programme, Waste Aware Scotland and Remade Scotland. That is all made possible by superb participation from the public.  Our long-term aim is a recycling rate of 70 per cent by 2025, which would make us one of the best performers in the world. However, if we are to achieve that, everyone needs to play their part. That means collecting more materials more of the time, including materials that we have only just begun to tackle, such as food waste and plastics.

There is currently a consultation taking place on whether that is a possible way forward. I know that there is a specific interest in the issue in the member's area. No final decision has been made on that. Food waste makes up about 17 per cent of the average household bin, and plastics make up about 8 per cent. Therefore, about 25 per cent of the average household bin is made up of those two materials that we have found it difficult to deal with in the past. One barrier is a lack of treatment sites for both materials. That is why we fund capital grant schemes that are run by WRAP for in-vessel composting plants and anaerobic digestion plants to treat food waste. The Scottish Government is also tackling plastics. WRAP is running a £5 million capital grants project for us, which closes on 26 June. The aim is to provide financial assistance towards a facility, or facilities, that can sort, recycle and reprocess a minimum of 20,000 tonnes of plastic waste a year. Such a facility would put Scotland at the cutting edge of plastics reprocessing. In respect of education and awareness, Waste Aware Scotland has been working with a number of authorities on a recycling adviser model. The aim is to provide in-depth support to householders to encourage them to do more recycling and to tackle any barriers that they might face. Recycling must become the norm for everybody, at home, at work and in public places. The Government will do more to promote recycling in public places. We want to build on existing work by local authorities and the private sector. We will have a round-table meeting with retailers and others to discuss and agree what more can be done to improve recycling outside the home. I want to cover the role of residual waste treatment. Although landfill is better regulated and better run than ever before, Scotland must move  further away from it. That is not a criticism of those in the private sector and local authorities who have worked hard to get us to where we are. One of the recommendations from our zero waste think tank was to ban more materials from landfill. Through WRAP Scotland, the Scottish Government has commissioned a research project that extends across the whole of the UK to look at the practicalities of landfill bans. The other main form of residual waste treatment is energy from waste. The issue attracts controversy and I know that there will be a variety of views in the chamber. Many people argue that there should be a larger role for energy from waste while others want it to be reduced. The issues were debated at the Government's waste summit in 2007 and the Government's position was outlined on 24 January 2008: no more than 25 per cent of municipal waste should be disposed of in that way. All energy from waste plants should have high levels of efficiency and our eventual aim is that such plants should capture heat as well as energy. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency has published thermal treatment guidelines to encourage higher efficiency plants and to keep them to tight requirements. The national waste management plan will reflect Scotland's opportunity to view waste as a valuable resource to be exploited rather than a problem to be solved. The move to treat waste as a resource has major benefits for climate change, the environment and the economy. The plan will also need to cover in detail how the work will be delivered. The original national waste strategy was published in 1999; the current plan dates from 2003 and the new one will be finalised in 2010. Over the years, we have learned more about what needs to be done. Now we must concentrate on delivery. That means more recycling collections, more composting plants and plastic reprocessing facilities. We all need to deliver the vision. The Government is providing leadership and we need to continue to build on existing work, do more and do it faster. I look forward to Scotland becoming a zero waste society. I move, That the Parliament notes Scotland's achievement of its share of the 2010 landfill diversion target 18 months early; encourages the Scottish Government to continue working with stakeholders to further improve recycling rates, increase reuse and do more on waste prevention, and looks forward to the forthcoming consultation on the new National Waste Management Plan, which will help Scotland further along the path to becoming a zero waste society.

The Government recently published the Scottish soil framework, which will co-ordinate the activities of Government and partner organisations in that area. Scottish Natural Heritage funds a number of projects to restore peatlands, and Forestry Commission Scotland has issued guidance on peatland restoration. Peatlands are important for their habitat value and carbon stocks.

There are currently no overall targets for peatland restoration. There  are, however, very specific localised targets for the improvement of the condition of peatland within sites that are designated for nature conservation purposes. Funding is available through the Scotland rural development programme, and advice on best practice in the management and restoration of peatlands has been developed for landowners. The Scottish soil framework shows that there are uncertainties regarding the impacts of restoration, especially on emissions and the uptake of greenhouse gases by peatland, and that further evidence is needed to develop the best approach. To that end, a series of expert workshops will be held over the summer to close those gaps in our knowledge.

I agree with Sarah Boyack on the importance of peatland in dealing with greenhouse gas emissions. That is what we will try to establish with a greater degree of certainty through the workshops that take place over the summer. The importance of peatland is well recognised. As the member knows, I will speak to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee next Wednesday morning about the environmental liability directive. It would be better for me to answer any questions on it at that meeting.

Gulls can be controlled, using lethal force if necessary, in a way that is consistent with the statutory framework that is provided by the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. The Scottish Government has provided advice to local authorities on a range of techniques for displacing urban gulls and is currently supporting a pilot project in Dumfries to assess the effectiveness of using a falcon to deter gulls from nesting in the town centre and causing a nuisance to residents. If the pilot proves successful, other local authorities might want to consider adopting the approach as an additional control option.

The general position is that the responsibility for dealing with urban gulls already lies with local authorities, rather than directly with the Scottish Government. The success of the trial will be monitored and, depending on the results, we will consider the advice that is given to local authorities. There is a range of options that local authorities can and should consider, including taking measures through the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 to prevent individuals from  feeding gulls, and ensuring that litter is kept off the streets, because litter encourages gulls. If the pilot is successful we will consider how best to roll out advice and information to local authorities, which can act accordingly. Other measures can be taken in the meantime.

The Government is aware of the widespread problem that gulls can cause, particularly in coastal areas, where they are endemic. I mentioned a couple of options that are within the powers of local authorities, and the list could be expanded. I will take on board what the member said. It might be worth reminding all local authorities of the range of options that are available, including—[ Interruption. ]

There is the capacity for the Government to issue a general licence for lethal control, which local authorities might want to consider as one of a range of options.

I congratulate Liam McArthur on securing a debate on what we all recognise is an issue of enormous importance to hard-pressed sheep farmers. Indeed, we should acknowledge at the outset the importance of all sheep producers to Scotland, for example in the retention of population in many rural areas; in rural development, which in many ways hinges on their work; in food production; and in the environmental benefits of that kind of farming. The Government is committed to supporting the sheep sector through measures including the less favoured areas support scheme. We are also committed to the control and eradication of animal diseases in Scotland. That is shown by our approach to bluetongue, in partnership with industry, and the subsidy of vaccines to the tune of £3 million. Before I proceed, I ought to put on the record that we recognise the importance of traceability. I think that we all acknowledge that effective traceability matters as a key component of disease prevention and control. However, our approach must be practical or it will not work. During the foot-and-mouth outbreak in 2001, the gaps in our traceability systems led directly to the spread of the disease. If we had had a better system for tracing livestock movements, many farms would have been spared, and it is possible that the outbreak could have been nipped in the bud. The benefits of an improved system were demonstrated in the more limited foot-and-mouth outbreak in 2007, when we were able to lift restrictions earlier. We cannot be complacent, because we will face critical exotic disease situations in the future. Foot-and-mouth disease remains a threat. As bluetongue demonstrated, it is never the things that we expect that catch us out. Climate change  potentially brings new dangers, and if we do not know where animals move to and from, we cannot effectively stem the flow of diseases. If anyone is still unsure about the importance of traceability, they should talk to any Dumfriesshire farmer who went through the trauma of the foot-and-mouth outbreak in 2001. Traceability is important, but the proposals that we are discussing are something else entirely. With the current EU regulations on EID, we are faced with a system, which previous Administrations agreed to, in which the marginal benefits to traceability are vastly outweighed by costs and bureaucracy. We have therefore fully supported our industry in negotiations to secure a far more workable solution that reflects the unique nature of the Scottish sheep industry. I still wonder whether that is understood across Europe. Although constant efforts are being made to bring the reality home in Europe, one wonders whether people there really see what is happening. It is important for us to have empathy with the sheep production sector and to express that empathy, because the sector faces enough challenges on Scotland's hills without what has been proposed. Peter Peacock recognises that. The danger is that the proposals may be seen, in many cases, as the straw that breaks the camel's back. The approach that we have taken has secured a number of concessions so far. The Administration has secured a further two-year delay in implementation, from 2008 to 2010, with a phased introduction between 2010 and 2012, and we have secured a derogation for animals that are intended only for slaughter. Liam McArthur called for more engagement by Scottish ministers. I am sure he knows that, just last month, Richard Lochhead met Commissioner Vassiliou, who agreed to explore further concessions within the regulations. He also knows perfectly well that the cabinet secretary is doing his utmost to turn round the EU juggernaut on the matter. That is not easy; indeed, a number of issues that have been raised today show that it is not simple.

Liam McArthur should allow me to continue a little. We have secured a commitment from the commissioner to explore an option to reduce the recording burden on farmers through the use of critical control points such as  markets and abattoirs. Such things are on-going. However, any proposal would need to go to a standing committee on food and animal health. Jim Hume raised the issue of tagging animals at the point of moving off farm. We are still exploring that issue as a potential way of moving forward. However, there is no doubt that we have inherited an extremely challenging situation. We continue to battle with the Commission to secure the best outcome for Scotland, and we continue to put pressure on Hilary Benn and the Commission to have the regulations changed. Richard Lochhead intends to raise the issue with Hilary Benn when they meet again next week. Scotland and the UK are working together to deliver as much flexibility as possible. However, as Peter Peacock pointed out, the problem is that if the support of other member states cannot be secured, we will, under our obligations, be required to implement the regulations. In those circumstances, it is helpful that the NFU is trying to engage its counterparts in other countries to lobby their Governments. That will provide additional support for the work that Hilary Benn and Richard Lochhead are trying to do. Whether we like it or not, membership of the EU means that we need to implement EU decisions. Absent an independent voice in Europe, we will continue to stand up to Brussels as best we can, but we need to be aware that, when all the shouting is done and everyone goes home, we will be left to deal with the future. With that in mind, we have committed £3 million to a pilot scheme to find out what sheep EID would mean in practice and what alterations would be required to make it work, if it will work at all. The results of phase 1 of the pilot will be due next month and will, I hope, be available to members. The Scottish industry, from producers to markets and abattoirs, has actively engaged in the pilot. Feedback from the industry and the pilot is highlighting and solving some of the practical and technical implementation issues that will need to be dealt with if we end up being forced down that road.  We remain ready to act on any and all opportunities to engage with the Commission—at official level, as well as politician level—to secure further changes to the regulations. Members may rest assured that we will do absolutely everything in our power to work in partnership with the industry to fight the battle on all fronts.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

I would need at least three or four times the minutes that have been allocated to me to answer every question that members have asked. I fear that some members will therefore be disappointed. If the document dealt with things in the detail that has been suggested, there would be little point in any of the working groups, in which some of the details will be worked through. I ought to say at the outset that I am happy to accept the Labour, Liberal Democrat and Tory amendments. I will not accept the Green party amendment, for a specific reason that I will outline later. I am glad that everyone has acknowledged the value of the industry and its ambition and optimism, which is one of the most striking features of the industry right now. It is extremely important that we continue to say whenever we can that the industry is hugely optimistic and that it is of enormous economic value to Scotland. That value is not often recognised, perhaps because people see things through the prism of sea fisheries, rather than the aquaculture industry. I hope that I will be able to deal with some of the bigger issues that have been raised by several members. Many members mentioned sea lice. We are committed to producing a proposal this year to establish a national system for the collection of sea lice data. I know that people scoff at that a little, but if we do not have the information in the first place, it is difficult to move on. That system will be a big step forward, as it will inform the industry's treatment strategies and guide the Scottish Government's research and action. Action must be based on sound science, hence the need for an expert working group, so that policy is informed by science. I will make more comments about sea lice later if I have time. Several members talked about freshwater aquaculture. I acknowledge the issues that surround that. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency is confident that its licensing approach under the Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2005—which are known as CAR—provides protection from the risk of eutrophication. However, we know that that is not an effective legislative means of dealing with escapes.  Recently commenced provisions provide the fish health inspectorate with powers to regulate and improve the containment of farm stock, thereby reducing the potential for interaction with wild salmonid populations. We hope that that work will bear fruit. Several members mentioned the siting of fish farms. As I have said, marine Scotland will establish a marine spatial planning system that will consider those issues. In the interim, we are establishing a process to allow agreements to be reached between the aquaculture industry, wild fisheries interests and regulators on areas in which expansion could be expected and areas where development might not be appropriate—we acknowledge that that might be the case. Several members, including John Scott and Elaine Murray, talked about seals. I salute Elaine Murray for her courage in saying that it is not the case that no seal should ever be shot. We are aware of the concerns about the issue and we are looking at it very carefully. In fact, I am looking very carefully at the moment to try to find the information that I have on the issue. I might have to come back to that shortly. No—I can give a quick comment. We will consider a licence system that is based on the model that has been developed in the Moray Firth seal management plan pilot. That will centre around an annual application process to cover activity during the whole year and will include provision for reporting and monitoring. The system will involve the use of the permitted potential biological removal method, which provides a maximum figure for the number of individuals that can be removed without affecting the wider population. We are trying to find the right balance, which is important. John Scott and many other members talked about the impact of ISA. The recent outbreak has been an enormous disappointment. As members might imagine, since coming into my ministerial post, that has been the focus of my interaction with the industry for very obvious reasons. I am only too aware of the difficulties that the outbreak raises. The recent new case is in the same area as the previous cases, so there is no evidence of spread outside the area. It is within the currently contained area and the biosecurity controls remain in place. Liam McArthur and others talked about support to expand export markets. We are in constant discussions with the industry. The member will not be surprised to know that my initial focus has been on ISA, which is understandable, but officials are aware of the need for such support. Finance is available through the EFF to make common-interest bids that will help the export market. For example, there was a recent award of about £215,000 to Scottish Quality Salmon for a targeted  promotional campaign in France for its label rouge Scottish farmed salmon, and for developing the product in other countries, too. There is a mechanism there that can be used to help, and I hope that people will take advantage of it. The marketing and image sub-group provides a forum for discussions with the industry on opportunities for further export. I have been told in discussion with the industry that Scotland can best support the sector by providing space to expand. It comes back to the provision of developmental space.

There are many things that I simply do not have time to mention. I will have to mop up some of them outside the confines of the debate. EFF awards are available if the right bids are put in, but we should not forget that they are application led. Robin Harper raised a number of points. The part of his amendment that causes the difficulty is nothing to do with the science or the issues that he raises; it is to do, I am afraid, with his specific comments about the expectation of confidentiality, the tripartite working group and the area management agreements. Given that the group is a voluntary organisation, we fear that any expectation that all the information is to be made public would end up undermining the voluntary approach, and that it would achieve precisely the opposite effect of what Robin Harper wants to achieve. I wonder whether Robin Harper would be prepared to withdraw the amendment in his name if I agreed to meet him about the other issues that he has discussed, on which we have no great concern, as we recognise their importance. Our difficulty is to do with the very specific issue of confidentiality and not undermining the voluntary arrangement in that respect. If we say that everything is going to be in public, we are afraid that producers simply will not come. We want to ensure that they engage.

Peter Peacock asked how we will keep people informed of various aspects of work. I can tell him that the sea lice group will report to the ministerial group on aquaculture, under the healthier fish and shellfish  theme, and we will publish all the minutes online. I am happy to provide an update to MSPs when the group reports. I personally hope that debates on aquaculture are not confined to just one per year—perhaps there will be opportunities to come back to the chamber on the subject. On action plans, the ministerial group will meet this summer, with a chair being appointed in June. Each group will have to develop a time-bound action plan, to be made available online. Relevant interests will be represented by groups. I am afraid that I will have to jump to the end of my speech now. I will deal briefly with export credits and finance. On 8 May 2009, the Export Credits Guarantee Department launched a public consultation on a proposal to offer a scheme to confirm letters of credit for British exports. I encourage all Scottish companies to participate in the consultation, which closes on 3 July. I hope that members will encourage any companies in their areas with significant concerns on the matter to participate. I should come to a close now. There are many issues that I have been unable to deal with, and I am sorry about that—I would like to have gone on a great deal longer. This is an extraordinarily important industry for Scotland, and I am hugely enthusiastic about it and supportive of it. I knew very little about the industry before but, in the short space of time for which I have had an interaction with it, I have been incredibly impressed by all the companies that I have seen, as I hope are members in the chamber. I very much commend to members further interaction with companies in their areas so that they can learn more and see more of that enthusiasm and ambition. I commend the strategy to the Parliament.

I am happy to be here for today's debate, but I begin by expressing my condolences to the families of Maarten Pieter Den Heijer and Robert MacDonald, the fish farm workers who died in the tragic accident on Loch Creran earlier this month. Our thoughts are with their family members and friends at this time, and we await the report on the incident from the relevant authorities. This is an important debate. The aquaculture industry is enormously important to Scotland, both economically and socially, and in particular to the many remote and rural communities within which much of the industry's activity takes place. The total farm gate value of Scottish aquaculture is estimated at around £350 million per annum, which is broadly in line with the value of catches from Scottish fishing vessels—a fact that many people might find surprising. We are the largest producer of farmed salmon in the European Union, and the third-largest producer in the world behind Norway and Chile, although current problems in the industry in Chile mean that Scotland could overtake it to become the world's second-largest producer. Aquaculture is a major success story for Scotland. There are 1,200 jobs in salmon production and a further 3,700 jobs in salmon processing alone. It is not just about salmon, however; Scotland also produces some 7,500 tonnes of rainbow trout, brown and sea trout, halibut and arctic char. That fin-fish production supports an additional 600 jobs, and shellfish production supports another 400 jobs. The United Nations' food and agriculture organisation states that aquaculture is probably the world's "fastest growing food-producing sector", which accounts for nearly 50 per cent of the world's consumed fish, compared with just 9 per cent in 1980. Importantly, it suggests that aquaculture is the only way to meet surging worldwide demand for seafood in a sustainable  way. Scotland should be in a good position to benefit from that increased demand. The strategic framework that we are discussing today results from a wide-ranging consultative process that took place throughout 2008. An analysis of the responses is available on the Scottish Government website. That consultative process included a debate in November, and the points that were raised at that time have—I hope—been addressed. Members who participated in that debate may be able to pick up on some of the issues that have now been dealt with. The framework sets out plans for a refocused ministerial group on aquaculture, which will be chaired by me and will meet for the first time this summer. It will oversee the work of five sub-groups, which will be working on critical themes for the industry: healthier fish and shellfish; improved systems for licensing aquaculture developments; improved containment; better marketing and improved image; and improved access to finance. I turn to the first theme of healthier fish and shellfish. Scotland's fish-health status compares extremely well with other countries that are farming the same species. However, the incidence of infectious salmon anaemia this year, which includes the confirmation this week of a site close to existing sites, and the continuing challenges that are posed by sea lice, pancreatic disease and bacterial kidney disease, underline the need to remain vigilant at all times. The healthy fish and shellfish group will have the task of further strengthening the industry's approach to disease control through carefully planned and managed approaches to disease and parasite control and synchronised production and treatments in management areas of an appropriate size, as suggested by the science. The group will be supported by a specialist expert group on sea lice, the details of which I recently set out in response to a question from Robin Harper. The sea lice group will examine the range of factors that contribute to the effectiveness of current treatment strategies and make recommendations on how we can be more effective. It will also comment on the proposals that we will bring forward later this year on strengthening Marine Scotland's understanding of the prevalence of sea lice in Scottish aquaculture. I have been very impressed by the industry's optimism and ambition; indeed, despite the current economic climate, it remains extraordinarily upbeat. That presents opportunities that we must grasp, but to do so we will need to improve the licensing and planning of aquaculture development. That will require a far more strategic approach to the siting of fish farms that not only recognises the importance of wild salmon and  trout rivers, but offers the industry much greater certainty about prospects for expansion and the areas in which such expansion can take place. Make no mistake: fish farms want to expand. The development of marine spatial planning in Scotland, which will be supported by the Marine (Scotland) Bill and Marine Scotland, provides an opportunity to get all this right. The licensing sub-group will provide a forum for early discussion of and agreement on siting between the relevant regulators, including local government, and the various interests. That work will inform not only future marine spatial planning but any revived relocation programme for fish farms. The industry's current code of good practice has already driven significant improvements in containment and the minimising of fish escapes. I know that the issue is of concern to many members; however, the number of escapes in 2008 was significantly down on that for 2007. In fact, so far in 2009, there has been only one reported escape, which I am sad to say happened only very recently. If it had not happened, I would have been able to say that there had been no escapes in 2009 to date. One escape is still one escape too many, but we should welcome the fact that a clear downward trend is emerging. The industry deserves a great deal of credit for that improvement and we will continue to work with it as the inspection regime under the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Act 2007 beds in. Predators can be a cause of escapes from fish farms, and the containment sub-group will examine how such events can be avoided, taking into account international best practice. A number of wild fisheries interests have expressed concern over freshwater smolt production, and the containment sub-group will consider the most appropriate equipment or facilities to ensure containment at such sites and will set out its views in due course. I am absolutely determined to promote a positive image of Scottish aquaculture at home and abroad, and the marketing and image sub-group will ensure that we get across the positive story that the industry has to tell about the health benefits of fish and shellfish; the strong progress on minimising environmental impacts by, for example, tackling escapes; progress on feed sustainability and so on. To get such messages across, we must raise public awareness and understanding of the industry, particularly given its importance to not only the whole Scottish economy, but many local communities. That sub-group will also consider another issue of concern to members: how best the aquaculture industry can attract and retain talented people. The strategy explicitly states that a greater focus on training and education will be required.  Scotland is already well equipped in that respect, with a number of Scottish vocational qualifications in aquaculture and degree-level study at Stirling University. Moreover, the European fisheries fund is open to bids from companies or associations for training purposes. As a result, resources are available to the industry to allow it to develop in that direction. The memorandum of understanding that we hope to sign this year with Norway on co-operation in aquaculture will allow us to compare approaches to training and education, to share lessons appropriately and to learn from good practice elsewhere. Like many other industries, the aquaculture industry faces challenges in securing finance. The access to finance sub-group will look at ways of improving that situation, including Marine Scotland considering with the industry what it can do to develop data and information sources that can highlight the value of and prospects for the industry in Scotland. I do not think that such matters are widely understood, and those efforts will be supported by the minimising of disease risks and the improved public perception that should follow the industry's continuing efforts to act as a good neighbour to other users of the water environment. We are also using the European fisheries fund to support the sustainable development of the industry in Scotland. The EFF is helping businesses to invest in the latest technology and is supporting trade bodies in opening new markets for our wonderful produce. Anybody who saw, as I did, the amazing expo in Brussels just a few weeks ago will understand the unbelievably staggering contribution that the aquaculture industry makes in Scotland, the importance of new markets, particularly given the Chilean collapse, and the incredible importance of the industry to the whole of the United Kingdom. We expect that shellfish interests will be covered by each of the five sub-groups. However, in recognition of the unique challenges and opportunities that the shellfish sector faces, we will establish a regular shellfish forum, with a secretariat provided by Marine Scotland and a membership that is drawn from those with an interest in supporting the sector's growth. I am particularly conscious that we can do more to promote the health and environmental benefits of shellfish to the public, and look forward to working with the industry on that. I will announce membership of the ministerial group on aquaculture and the chairs of our five sub-groups in June. "A Fresh Start: The renewed Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture" provides the context within which they will operate and the key outcomes against which we expect them to make progress. It is important that the  industry is judged against its actions. The progress that has been made in recent years must be recognised, as must the actions that are outlined to secure further improvements with respect to sea lice, disease control, containment and the strategic siting of fish farms. In turn, it is up to the public sector to listen to the industry's concerns and needs and to be responsive to them where we can. I reiterate that the industry is incredibly economically important to Scotland, and that amazing optimism and ambition have been expressed by people throughout the industry who, despite the current economic climate, see huge opportunities for expansion. That there is such a vibrant and growing industry that wants to grow further is incredibly important for the Scottish economy. I invite all members to support the Government's motion. I move, That the Parliament notes the publication of A Fresh Start - the renewed Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture and its key themes; promotes the continued development of an ambitious, sustainable, profitable, thriving and growing Scottish aquaculture industry; recognises the economic importance of the industry to Scotland as a whole and many coastal communities in particular; acknowledges the vital role to be played by aquaculture production, processing and associated businesses during the economic downturn; supports efforts to promote the many positives of the industry and to advance the enviable international reputation of quality Scottish aquaculture products, built on high environmental standards; encourages Marine Scotland to work with others to deliver a transparent, streamlined and proportionate regulatory framework that encourages shellfish and finfish industries while at the same time ensuring that adverse impacts on biodiversity and other users of the marine and freshwater environment are minimised and managed; welcomes proactive and effective engagement with other aquaculture-producing countries through sharing knowledge and promoting best practice and Scotland's role as a major contributor to international cooperation on research, and acknowledges the continued engagement of the shellfish and finfish industries and other stakeholders in the development and implementation of the Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture.

I am not 100 per cent certain that Einstein is actually the person who made the comment that has been cited. However, it is widely attributed to him, and I know that people understand the importance of bees from that comment, even if it was not Einstein who actually said it. I congratulate Peter Peacock on securing the debate and for the very impressive cross-party support that he obtained for the motion. The decline in the world's bee population is a matter for real concern and has in fact become a priority of my directorates. We are in the final stages of the preparation of a honey-bee health strategy, some details of which I can provide to the Parliament this evening. As we have heard, rapid, unexplained losses of honey-bee colonies pose a threat to Scottish agricultural production, a point that John Scott made very clear. They pose an even greater threat to global food security. Experts believe that Scotland lost up to a third of its honey-bees last year alone, on top of heavy losses in previous years. Other countries fared even worse.  There is a lot of debate and disagreement about the causes, as we must accept. Many of the possible causes have been discussed here this evening—Peter Peacock, Rob Gibson and Robin Harper did so extensively. The potential effects are very serious, whatever we decide is the cause. It is the usual story: lots of possible reasons but no obvious definite cause. It would be easy and popular to scapegoat one aspect, but scientists know that there is no magic bullet. Understanding the complexity of the matter might be the key to saving the insects. That is why we have been working with stakeholders and experts on a 10-year honey-bee health strategy, which was developed throughout 2008 to tackle this very issue. We intend to publish it in the near future. I hope that members will follow up the interest that has been shown in today's debate by engaging with us and with beekeepers to implement the strategy and develop a brighter future for Scottish apiculture. I also hope that members will encourage their local authorities and beekeepers to interact with one another—I said that in response to Liam McArthur, in particular. The honey-bee health strategy will broadly follow the framework and principles of the animal health and welfare strategy. We want to achieve a sustainable and healthy population of honey-bees in Scotland through work in five main areas. The first area is education. Although the challenges are beyond the capacities of individual beekeepers, good husbandry can and does have a significant role to play. Secondly, communication among policy officials at their desks, scientists in their laboratories and beekeepers in their gardens and fields requires effort and thought if it is to be focused and effective. Thirdly, good surveillance is needed, so that we can understand the situation on the ground, know how many beekeepers and colonies we have and track diseases in the field. Fourthly, research will be crucial. We do not yet know the extent of colony loss or disease problems in Scotland, nor what the key drivers are. Pesticides are a reserved matter, which makes it difficult for the Scottish Government to act in that regard. As I understand it, although neonicotinoids have been banned in a number of countries in Europe, they are not shown to have an impact on the rate of colony loss.

It is clear that there is a debate about that in the scientific community. I hope that DEFRA will explore every possible  cause. It would not be good enough if DEFRA were to ignore anything. I simply say that there is no unanimity on any particular issue. Finally, the strategy will focus on diagnostics. It is important to feed back information to beekeepers, to allow early intervention and disease prevention. We have identified new money for research. We have contributed up to £500,000 to a £10 million UK-wide research initiative. The money will be made available to research teams to investigate the relationships between biological and environmental factors that affect the health and lifespan of pollinators. That understanding will assist in the development of improved disease control and population management. It is not just about honey-bees. Our wild bees are also at risk, as Liam McArthur said. Bumble-bees play a crucial role in pollination: they can pollinate a wide range of crops and are essential for the pollination of certain crops. The problem does not seem to be critical in wild bee populations, but that might be because we do not yet know enough about what is happening.

I am sure that officials are well aware of the recommendation. Robin Harper might be thinking about Colonsay, which I will talk about shortly. Money is available through SRDP and SNH for a variety of different projects, which will help our understanding and make a difference. We will follow up the debate with a letter to interested members, which will set out sources of funding that their constituents and other stakeholders might find useful. As Peter Peacock identified in his motion, some places, such as Colonsay, are currently free of the varroa mite. We are exploring ways of maintaining that status. The legal advice is that the Colonsay black bee is not a wild species and is therefore outside the protection of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981—that is where we get into complicated arguments. Government officials and SNH scientists will meet on 5 June specifically to discuss issues to do with Colonsay and the black bee. Of course, the outcome will have ramifications for other parts of Scotland. We are aware of the issue and are working on it. There is much that we still do not know, such as how many people in Scotland keep bees, how many bees they keep and what the wild population is. We do know that we cannot watch from the sidelines and hope that populations will recover.  I thank members for their speeches and repeat my call for them to stay engaged. In the meantime, they might want to visit excellent and informative websites such as those of the Scottish Beekeepers Association and the Bumblebee Conservation Trust and apply the information that they find there to their own gardens. Like Elaine Murray, I have many bees in my garden. The number of bees tends to increase in line with the owner's neglect of their garden so, in this context, neglect can be truly benign. There is more land in gardens in the UK than there is in nature reserves, so small actions by many people can make a big difference.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

I am in the unusual position of having made a transition, midway through the bill's parliamentary process, from being the convener of the lead committee dealing with the bill to being the minister sitting on the other side of the room dealing with the committee's concerns. I understand that I share that dubious distinction with Sarah Boyack. We are perhaps the only two members of the Parliament who have had that experience, although I may have been luckier in that I have managed to get the bill through stage 3, whereas I think that the timing was rather more difficult for Sarah Boyack last time round. I thank all those who have been members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee and the various clerks who have dealt with the committee throughout the period in which it has discussed flooding. As members will have heard, the committee undertook an inquiry into flooding and flood management before we—I am still saying "we", but I mean the committee—considered the bill. No one doubts that we need new and improved flooding legislation. My constituency certainly has a traumatic history of serious flooding incidents, including the overwhelming floods of 1993, which are difficult to eradicate from the collective consciousness, therefore I am all too aware of the distress and suffering that flooding can cause individuals and communities. That awareness is shared by the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, whose constituency has also had to deal with such experiences. Indeed, the vexed issue of moving water rescue—which emerged late as a big issue—is also a matter with which I am familiar, as a result of events in the River Tay. However, having got to this stage, we all know that legislation alone is not enough. The Scottish Government has already put in place a framework to implement the bill. That work will build on partnerships and experiences that have been developed. As some members have said, it is vital that we have a sufficient number of specialist staff. The skills shortage became clear to everyone who was involved in the committee's inquiry and consideration of the bill. Last week, I met the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to discuss how we can ensure that Scotland has adequate skills and staffing to carry out the new duties that the bill will introduce. Furthermore, SEPA is planning to create 10 new posts in its flood risk science training programme  in this and the following two years. The successful candidates will work for SEPA on a part-time basis while studying for MSc degrees at the University of Dundee or the University of Stirling—SEPA's partners in the initiative. That will help us to deal with the significant issue that arose during the passage of the bill. I will try to deal with some of the points that have been made during the debate. As we would have expected him to, Robin Harper pleaded with us not to build on flood plains, but the fact is that we have already built on a great many flood plains. The process began so many hundreds of years ago that it is impossible for us to take back the land in question. The planning guidance that is provided to local authorities includes a presumption against building on functional flood plains that have not already been built on. We will continue to highlight that message when it is appropriate to do so. [ Interruption. ]

Karen Gillon asked what the impact will be of the fact that one of her amendments on planning was agreed to and the other was not. I can tell her that it will now be a requirement that a flood risk assessment be prepared, but no one will have to take any notice of it. We will have to go away and have a look at that, as we will have to do in relation to the decisions on all the amendments that the Parliament has considered today.

I had better just press on, if the member does not mind. John Scott talked about coastal flooding. I can assure him and Bill Wilson that tidal surges and other coastal flooding are fully covered by the bill. It is clear that we cannot prevent flooding, but the bill will ensure that our flood practitioners have the necessary framework to deal quickly and effectively with those areas that are at greatest risk. That is, after all, the principal aim of the bill. We ought to remember that local authorities will have an enormous amount of work to do as a result of it being passed. We will continue to take into account all relevant views as we develop secondary legislation. I put on record my thanks for the enormous amount of work that officials have done, to which other members have referred. As well as providing assistance with drafting, they held many meetings  and discussions with MSPs, non-governmental organisations such as Scottish Environment LINK and RSPB Scotland, and other stakeholders. We will continue to discuss issues with all stakeholders. Finally, I thank all members for their comments. It has been a commendable process, so I thank everyone who has contributed to the development of the bill, which I believe will make a significant and lasting difference to people who are at risk of becoming victims of flooding. I urge every member to support it and I commend it to Parliament.

I am grateful to John Scott for giving us the opportunity to discuss the issues that are raised in amendment 25. Concern has been raised at all stages of the bill about instances in which response arrangements have not gone well. However, I believe that a statutory framework for multi-agency response is already in place under the Civil Contingencies Act 2004. That highly practised multi-agency approach is the key principle that underpins our wider resilience strategy. The bill deals with flooding, but the range of rescue incidents involving water is far wider. That is why it would be wrong to pick out one single cause, such as flooding, and one single service for a statutory duty, without considering the issue more broadly. As members might know, the Minister for Community Safety announced yesterday that a comprehensive review of the emergency services' ability to deal with all forms of water rescue, including flood rescue, has been ordered. The review will be led by Paddy Tomkins, who as a former chief inspector of constabulary will bring with him a strong understanding of the legal and operational role of emergency services in responding to such emergencies. Among other matters, the review will examine the need for a change in the law on the responders who cover water rescue; the resources and capability of all agencies that are currently involved in water rescue emergencies, such as flooding; the need for changes in the current operational arrangements between responders; and the level of public awareness of the risks that are associated with open water, including flood water. At present, a wide range of agencies, including police, fire and rescue services, the Scottish Ambulance Service, the coastguard and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution could be called on to undertake a water rescue, with many interventions  involving a multi-agency response. The review will actively seek views from all those agencies for full consideration by ministers. Any proposals to reform the legal framework or change operational practice would be taken only after full public consultation. The review has the support of the Chief Fire Officers Association Scotland, which, as the committee knows, originally asked for an amendment on the issue. The review also has the support of the Fire Brigades Union, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and many other organisations, voluntary and statutory, that can be called on to support a flooding or water rescue event. I hope that the review will reassure the Parliament that the Scottish Government is doing everything that it can to ensure the correct response from all the emergency services in the event of a flood. I give a commitment to inform the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee of the outcome of the review and of any legislative or operational proposals in due course. The Minister for Community Safety has advised that he hopes that that will be done before the end of the year. For all those reasons, I urge John Scott to withdraw amendment 25.  Amendment 25, by agreement, withdrawn.

Amendments 52 and 53 will fix a minor omission from section 68. Amendment 52 will give local authorities that are lead authorities powers of entry for the purposes of preparing local flood risk management plans under section 29 and for the purposes of preparing reports under sections 32 and 33. Amendment 53 clarifies that those powers of entry will be available only to local authorities that are lead authorities under section 29(8). I move amendment 52.  Amendment 52 agreed to.  Amendment 53 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.

Amendments 54 and 55 ensure that the 10-year deadline for giving notice of a claim for compensation covers all the activities listed in section 71 in respect of which compensation can be awarded.  Amendment 66, which was lodged by Peter Peacock, seeks to ensure that any compensation due is made within a "reasonable period". I understand that the speed of payment is not usually an issue. Claimants are generally concerned more about the time that it takes the local authority to determine the amount of compensation that is due in the first place. In that respect, amendment 66 would achieve very little. The negotiation of whether compensation is due and the amount that should be payable depend on the circumstances of each case. Often it involves factors outwith the local authority's control, such as the quality of the information that is provided by the claimant in support of his claim and his timely response to any requests for further information. The authority might also have to commission specialist technical reports to inform the valuer about specific aspects that need to be taken into account. The intention behind amendment 66 might have been to speed up the negotiation process and ensure that it is completed within a reasonable period. However, agreement over compensation is rightly a two-way process, which makes it difficult to generalise about what a reasonable period might be. It might well be that the local authority has made a timely offer, but that the claimant disagrees with it. Indeed, there have been cases in which claims have been made for compensation and the valuer has subsequently shown that the claimant has not suffered any loss in value. However, getting to the bottom of such complicated situations can be a protracted process. Under those circumstances, it is difficult to understand what would constitute a reasonable time. That is why any question of disputed compensation is referred to the Lands Tribunal for Scotland, which is an independent body that can look at the case dispassionately and come to a reasoned decision. What constitutes a reasonable period will always depend on the factors and circumstances in each case, including how both parties have approached the negotiations, and such questions should probably be left to the tribunal to determine in each case. As the Lands Tribunal for Scotland is an independent body, the Scottish Government should not deal with the matter in guidance. However, amendment 66 has been lodged as a clear response to an expressed concern. In the circumstances, I wonder whether Peter Peacock would be satisfied at this stage with my commitment to discuss his more general issue with the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, COSLA and interested bodies to see whether any specific issues need to be teased out. On that basis, I ask Peter Peacock not to move amendment 66. I move amendment 54.

Amendment 59 is a response to an amendment that was lodged by Peter Peacock at stage 2, which aimed to address the concern that the bill as drafted did not place enough emphasis on the need for long-term planning. Amendment 59 requires flood risk management plans prepared by SEPA to describe whether each measure is to be implemented in the  six-year period before the plan is next reviewed, in the following six years or after some other period. I assure members again that the bill is very much about long-term planning and that, in all likelihood, flood risk management plans will have to look at how to tackle flood risk over the next 50-plus years. From discussions with the committee at stage 2, it was clear that there was a desire for more explicit information on the costs of measures to be included in flood risk management plans. Amendment 61 will require flood risk management plans to include information on the costs of measures that are to be implemented before the plan is next reviewed. I move amendment 59.

Members are concerned to ensure that Scottish Water is funded to carry out its new responsibilities under the bill. I recognise and share that concern. However, given the structure and operation of the regulatory framework in which Scottish Water operates, I do not believe that amendments 15 and 16 are necessary. I assure members that the existing framework will ensure that the new functions are funded. Scottish Water carries out a number of important functions, including—most obviously—the treatment and supply of drinking water and the treatment of waste water and sewage. Those functions are funded through the regulatory framework, but neither is identified specifically within the relevant legislation and there is no difference in importance between those functions and the new functions under the bill. Members might find it helpful if I say a few words about the funding of Scottish Water and the basic role of the Water Industry Commission in determining and setting charges. To determine the maximum charges for a period defined by ministers, the commission considers the cost of all the core functions that Scottish Water must perform in that period together with the requirements of any guidance or any applicable directions that ministers may have given to Scottish Water. That includes a direction from ministers setting the investment objectives that guide Scottish Water's investment programme. The definition of "core functions" in the Water Industry (Scotland) Act 2002 is very broad. It includes the basic functions of providing water and sewerage services but will also, on the passing of  the bill, include all of Scottish Water's flood risk-related functions under the bill. That means that the present text of the 2002 act will already require the cost of performing flood risk-related duties to be taken into account when charges are set, just as the duties in relation to water supply and waste water are taken into account. By focusing on just one of Scottish Water's important functions, the amendments risk undermining the carefully balanced regulatory framework. Scottish Water is already under a statutory obligation to act in the best way calculated to contribute to sustainable development, which is clearly the issue behind the amendments. In fact, the Government has issued Scottish Water with guidance on that duty, to which the commission must have regard in setting charges. We recognise that understanding of the issue continues to develop and, as I said at earlier stages of the bill, I would be happy to review and update the guidance in full consultation with all relevant organisations, bodies and groups. As the commission is an independent body, there is no provision for ministers to issue it with directions or guidance. However, I consider it essential that we work towards a shared understanding of sustainable development and its evolving role in the water industry. I can, therefore, commit to entering into open discussions with the commission and Scottish Water to pursue that shared understanding. I do not believe that the amendments will do anything to address the wider concern that members have outlined today. On that basis, I ask Robin Harper to withdraw amendment 15 and Peter Peacock not to move amendment 16.

Annual reports to Parliament provide valuable information on the implementation of legislation. The bill includes a requirement on Scottish ministers to report to Parliament on action taken during the year by ministers, SEPA and the responsible authorities for securing compliance with the requirements of the European Community floods directive. Amendments 46 and 47 will extend the scope of such reports to cover all action taken to develop flood risk management plans and subsequently to implement measures that are set out in those plans. That will give Parliament a full picture of the action that is being undertaken by those who are responsible for managing flood risk. I move amendment 46.  Amendment 46 agreed to.  Amendment 47 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.

I will speak to amendment 48 before I deal with amendments 11, 12, 20, 21 and 22. Amendment 48 is a technical amendment that seeks to remove the unnecessary overlap that was created by the cross-reference in  section 49 to acquiring land under section 55—I dare say that that is crystal clear to everyone. The other amendments in the group all aim to address a point that the committee made at stage 2. The committee was concerned that section 49 did not make it clear that local authorities could enter into agreements about how land is managed or make monetary contributions towards such work. Amendment 21 makes it clear that local authorities can enter into arrangements with landowners and occupiers to manage land in a way that will assist with the retention or slowing down of flood water, which could include a range of natural flood management measures. Amendment 22 will allow local authorities to pay landowners and occupiers for income that they lose as a result of entering into such agreements. I fully support the concept of entering into agreements about how land should be managed in that respect, so I support the amendments in the name of John Scott. Amendment 12, in the name of Elaine Murray, is clearly similar to amendment 22, in the name of John Scott, but we believe that it is narrower in scope and could make it more difficult for local authorities to pay landowners who agree to change land management practices. Amendment 11, which would add a reference to operations by local authorities that would assist with the retention of flood water or slow down the flow of such water, is not necessary, as the definition of flood protection work already includes operations to retain or slow flood water. For those reasons, I ask Elaine Murray to withdraw amendment 11 and not to move amendment 12, and I reiterate my support for the amendments in the name of John Scott.

As indicated, amendments 23 and 24 deal with an issue that was raised at stage 2. They expand section 57 to enable local authorities to recover from the landowner or occupier expenses that are incurred in carrying out clearance and repair works under section 51(1)(a), where the need for such work was caused by the positive actions of the owner or occupier. That would include, for example, situations in which a flood risk arises as a consequence of a landowner dumping debris in a river. Under those circumstances, it is entirely appropriate for a local authority to seek compensation for any works that it undertakes to rectify the situation. I am therefore happy to support amendments 23 and 24.  Amendment 23 agreed to.  Amendment 24 moved—[Elaine Murray]—and agreed to.

Amendments 13 and 14 appear to replicate existing duties that are already in planning legislation. Amendment 13 would require a flood risk assessment to be prepared where a development could increase the risk of properties being flooded. Amendment 14 would require planning authorities to have regard to that flood risk assessment when determining the application for planning permission. Where flood risk is an issue, planning authorities already have a statutory duty to consult SEPA on planning applications. In commenting on an application, SEPA may advise that an assessment of flood risk should be prepared, and the planning authority has the power to require applicants to submit such an assessment. In determining whether a flood risk assessment is necessary, SEPA will consult its flood risk experts, and both SEPA and the planning authority will consult SEPA's indicative flood maps. The authority must also consider SEPA's comments in response to an assessment before determining the application. That requirement arises from regulation 25 of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (Scotland) Regulations 2008, which prevents a planning authority from determining a planning application until it has given consultees such as SEPA time to respond. Further, if a planning authority proposes, contrary to SEPA's advice, to grant permission, the case must be notified to Scottish ministers, who may decide to call in the application. That approach allows the planning authority and SEPA to exercise judgment on the risk posed by the proposal, before requiring the applicant to pay for an expensive consultant's study. The need for a flood risk assessment is therefore something that planning authorities, with advice from SEPA, are best placed to decide. On that basis, I ask Karen Gillon to withdraw amendment 13 and not to move amendment 14.

I am curious about whether the member is going to make an allegation of undue influence in a specific case. If she is, I can say that there has been absolutely no proof whatsoever that any undue influence has been exerted in any planning case.

We lodged the amendments in the group in response to a recommendation by the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee in its stage 1 report that the Scottish Government "explore ways of ensuring that the appropriate emergency service acts proactively to manage flood risk". In some ways, the issue relates to the debate that we will have on group 15.  Amendments 37, 43 and 45 ensure that category 1 responders must be consulted on flood risk management plans and that they must be appropriately represented on all district and sub-district advisory groups. Amendments 49 to 51 ensure that SEPA will consult all relevant category 1 respondents in an area on the provision and alteration of flood warning systems. Amendments 57 and 63 define a category 1 responder as "a person or body listed in Part 2 of Schedule 1 to the Civil Contingencies Act 2004". Those bodies include the emergency services—fire, police and ambulance—among others. As I indicated, later we will discuss an amendment that proposes to give the fire and rescue service a specific role in flood risk management planning. I do not want to pre-empt that discussion, but I believe that the amendments that I have lodged strengthen the role of all category 1 responders in the flood risk management planning process. I trust that the amendments will be supported. I move amendment 37.  Amendment 37 agreed to.

During stage 2, John Scott lodged an amendment that sought to give Scottish ministers a role in deciding which bodies SEPA should consult about draft flood risk management plans. The Scottish ministers already had power to do that under section 26 of the bill, but I undertook to lodge an amendment at stage 3 that would make the drafting clearer. Amendments 38 and 39 clarify the Scottish ministers' existing powers to direct SEPA to undertake further consultation, if they consider that that is required. I move amendment 38.

I fear that Elaine Murray's hopes are going to be dashed. I regret that Peter Peacock decided to lodge amendment 4. It would of course require ministers to "have regard to flood risk management plans ... and local flood risk management plans" when making funding decisions. Under the bill, "The Scottish Ministers, SEPA and responsible authorities" have a duty to act "with a view to reducing overall flood risk", and they must "act with a view to achieving the objectives set out in the flood risk management plan". It is for ministers, in co-operation with the responsible authorities, to allocate funding across a wide range of Government responsibilities in order to meet agreed national and local priorities. To place an additional statutory duty on ministers to "have regard to" such plans risks elevating flood risk management above all the other important functions of SEPA and other responsible authorities that ministers must consider when determining spending priorities. If such requirements are going to begin to appear in other legislation, everything will become a priority—in which case, as we know, nothing will be a priority. For those reasons, I believe that amendment 4 is unnecessary, and I ask Peter Peacock to withdraw it.

Of necessity, my comments on this group will be longer. I will speak to amendments 27 to 30, 33, 36, 40 to 42, 44, 60 and 64 before turning my attention to the amendments lodged by Peter Peacock and Rhoda Grant. As I am sure that members will appreciate, I have a lot of ground to cover. To help members digest this particularly complex grouping, I intend to break it down into more manageable collections of amendments.  The first set of amendments that I will discuss relates to the assessment made under section 16. The assessment is intended to create for the first time a national picture of opportunities for natural flood risk management measures throughout Scotland. It will be a challenging exercise, but I do not expect SEPA to undertake the work in isolation: local authorities, the Forestry Commission and other bodies will be expected to contribute. Amendment 30 stipulates that the map accompanying the assessment made under section 16 must be prepared at a scale that SEPA considers will assist in considering measures under section 24 and the inclusion of information in local flood risk management plans prepared under section 29. Amendment 30 addresses directly concerns raised by the committee at stage 2; I recognise the constructive contributions that committee members made during the preparation of amendment 30 and other amendments. Peter Peacock has lodged a set of amendments that also deal with the issue of scale and section 16 assessments. Although I fully appreciate the good intentions behind his amendments, it is my view that amendments 5, 7 and 9 duplicate the amendments that I have lodged and that they therefore risk creating unnecessary duplication and confusion. For those reasons, I ask Peter Peacock not to move those amendments. The second set of amendments relates to information that should be included in the supplemental and implementation parts of a local flood risk management plan. Amendment 40 clarifies that local plans should include supplemental information on how implementing measures may alter or restore natural features and characteristics. Amendment 42 requires the lead local authority to specify how the responsible authorities will co-ordinate their functions to implement measures that alter, enhance or restore natural features and characteristics. Such co-ordination is particularly important as those types of measures must work in concert with measures in other parts of a catchment. Amendment 42 is the amendment to which I referred earlier. The amendments in this grouping all help to ensure that natural flood management options are considered in the preparation and implementation of local flood risk management plans, and I trust that they will be supported. Amendment 44 clarifies that SEPA may request responsible authorities to prepare information, assessments or maps about how the alteration, enhancement or restoration of natural features and characteristics could contribute to flood risk management. Amendments 33 and 60 deal with a duplication that arose as a consequence of two similar  amendments being agreed to at stage 2—one lodged by me and one by Peter Peacock. Peter Peacock and I have worked closely over the past few weeks to draft an alternative amendment that avoids such duplication. Amendment 60 will require SEPA to set out reasons for identifying measures in a flood risk management plan. When an assessment made under section 16 indicates that restoration or enhancement of natural features or characteristics could contribute to managing flood risk but a measure to take forward such an opportunity has not been identified, amendment 60 will require SEPA to set out the reasons why. Amendment 33 is a technical amendment to remove the remaining duplicate provisions. My amendment 36 and amendment 65, which has been lodged by Peter Peacock, relate to the setting of objectives and measures to tackle flooding problems. The setting of objectives and measures is a complex process that requires a variety of factors to be balanced carefully. Amendment 36 requires the Scottish ministers to issue guidance to SEPA and the responsible authorities on setting objectives and measures under sections 23 and 24. The guidance must pay particular attention to the consideration of measures to alter or restore natural features and characteristics. The first guidance must be issued by 22 December 2012 and will allow the Scottish ministers to set out a framework to support the selection of the most sustainable flood-risk management measures. Central to the selection of the most sustainable measures will be taking a catchment-focused approach. I expect SEPA and local authorities in taking such an approach to look first at how the timing, magnitude and duration of a flood can be altered to reduce flood risk—that is, what steps can be taken to manage the sources and pathways of flood waters before they cause a flood risk. By first focusing on the sources and pathways of flood waters, the aim is to reduce, but not necessarily replace, the need for traditional engineering solutions. Clearly, natural flood management options have an important role to play in that respect and, in most cases, I expect those options to be considered first. I intend fully to set out those and other important considerations in the guidance issued under amendment 36. I believe that amendment 65, which has been lodged by Peter Peacock, will complement this approach by requiring SEPA to consider the contribution that restoring natural features and characteristics can make to reducing, slowing or otherwise managing flood waters. I therefore support amendment 65.  Finally, I support amendments 17 and 18, which have been lodged by Rhoda Grant, who spent a considerable amount of time on the committee while the bill was going through, although she is no longer a member of it. The amendments will add reference to the restoration and alteration of natural features and characteristics to the definition of "flood protection work". Amendments 27 to 29, 41 and 64 are all consequential amendments. I move amendment 27.

Amendment 19 places a duty on the Scottish ministers, SEPA and responsible authorities to co-operate when they exercise their functions in order to adopt an integrated approach. That is entirely consistent with the spirit of the bill, so I support the amendment. Amendment 10 relates to the co-ordination of efforts to implement measures that cross multiple local plan districts. Local plan districts will be discrete flood risk management units based on catchments. As such, flood risk management efforts should never need to be co-ordinated across different districts. We therefore believe that amendment 10 is unnecessary. Furthermore, section 34 already includes provision on joint working arrangements between local authorities when local flood risk management plans are being prepared and, as Peter Peacock said, amendment 42, which will be discussed later, will require the lead local authority to set out information on how the efforts of all the bodies that are involved will be co-ordinated to implement measures. For those reasons, I urge Peter Peacock not to move amendment 10.

The concept of sustainable flood management was introduced by the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003. Broadly speaking, sustainable flood risk management is about taking a catchment-focused approach to organising actions to manage flood risk for current and future generations. Sustainable flood risk management is at the heart of the bill, so guidance on it is essential. Amendment 26 will require the Scottish ministers to issue guidance to SEPA and the responsible authorities on acting in the way that is best calculated to manage flood risk in a sustainable way. The guidance will have to be issued no later than 18 months after the relevant bill provisions are commenced, and it will have to be reviewed at least every six years and, when necessary, updated. Before the Scottish ministers issue guidance, they will have to consult SEPA and the responsible authorities. Further, amendment 26 will require the Scottish ministers to issue guidance on the social, environmental and economic impact of exercising flood risk functions. That addresses a specific concern that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee raised at stage 2 about the actions that the Scottish ministers, SEPA and the responsible authorities would take to ensure that the social, environmental and economic impacts of flood risk management are considered fully. Amendment 8, which was lodged by Robin Harper, is very similar in purpose to my amendment 26, the only difference being that my amendment would require guidance to be issued on sustainable flood risk management and on the equally important issue of considering the social, environmental and economic impact of exercising flood risk functions. My amendment is therefore rather wider. For that reason, I ask the member not to move his amendment 8. I move amendment 26.

Amendment 26 does what Robin Harper said and more. I am glad to hear that he is content with the amendment that we lodged.  Amendment 26 agreed to.

As the member knows, that is a matter for Perth and Kinross Council, which has wide powers under the Flood Prevention (Scotland) Act 1961 to mitigate the flooding of non-agricultural land in its area. I hope that the council will welcome the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, which will be debated at stage 3 next week.

I am aware of the issues in Kinross-shire, particularly the outstanding issue of Milnathort. The member will be happy to know that the council will introduce a further flood prevention scheme in the summer  that will deal with outstanding issues. The council has, in fact, commissioned a study of flooding in Kinross from the difficulties that have been identified there. Again, a report on that will be available in the summer. I hope that, when those reports are available, the member will be satisfied that the council is doing the work that it needs to do to ensure that the flood risk in its area is managed well.

I appear to be semi-closing the  debate, which is a rather unusual position to be in. I will not have time to address every point that will be addressed in the closing speech of tomorrow afternoon's debate. The allocation of two days to the debate is an indication of the bill's importance. Indeed, two days is still not enough time for every member who wants to speak to do so. The Government acknowledges that all ministers are climate change ministers, so by tomorrow evening members will have heard from several members of the ministerial team. That signals the collective commitment to ambitious legislation, not just while the bill goes through Parliament but after it has been passed, in the years ahead. The Government's approach is that Scotland should focus on its distinctive strengths and become world class in them. Scotland's rich rural resources are among its greatest strengths. We have an environment of European and, indeed, world importance. That is the portfolio in which I have most interest. Rural Scotland is making its contribution. Emissions from agriculture have fallen 18 per cent from the levels in the early 1990s and now account for around 13 per cent of Scotland's emissions, but we must maintain the downward trajectory. This seems like an appropriate point at which to make a more general comment about some of the things that have been said about emissions and targets. I reiterate that the annual targets will be set following the receipt of expert advice. However, the first batch—the targets for 2010 to 2022—must be set by 1 June next year and must be approved by the Parliament. That means that we will have certainty about the emissions reduction trajectory in little more than a year's time. They will be statutory targets set in secondary legislation and there will be complete certainty about them. I hope that that makes the matter slightly clearer. I will say a few more things about the rural affairs and environment portfolio. In response to the recommendations of our agriculture and climate change stakeholder group, we developed our farming for a better climate programme and we are developing our first ever framework to protect soils from pollution and climate change. That is an example of the work on climate change that is going on right across the Government. Forestry Commission Scotland is one of a group of environmental public bodies—including SEPA, SNH and Historic Scotland—that are committing to climate change action plans of their own. Members know have commented on our intention to increase forest cover from 17 per cent to around 25 per cent of Scotland's land area as our contribution to expanding the carbon sink. Expanding our forests would play an important  role in action on climate change, which is why we consulted on leasing to help fund forest-related mitigation measures. However, we have listened to what the public consultation told us, have withdrawn the proposals and will now consider the wider suggestions that various consultees made. I am glad that everybody is glad that we did that, but the fundamental requirement remains the same and has to be addressed. Forestry Commission Scotland will continue to develop arrangements for renewable energy projects using joint ventures, but the five-year gap before realistic income streams can come from joint ventures means that we have to take shorter-term measures. As indicated previously, that means an acceleration of the pre-existing sales programme in the interim. The income from renewables is expected to rise from its current level of £6 million per year to about £10 million per year by 2012 and £30 million per year by 2020. I hope that that answers some of Maureen Watt's comments. I listened to her speech with a certain degree of poignancy. We have shared committee scrutiny of the bill, even though I was surprised mid-scrutiny to turn into the object of scrutiny instead of the person doing the scrutinising. A couple of members mentioned waste management, which is a notable success. Emissions have been cut since the early 1990s as less waste has been sent to landfill, but we need to keep making progress. The bill's various enabling provisions on waste management provide back-up powers should the voluntary measures not succeed. I assume that the lack of major comment on them suggests that they have a degree of general support. I remind the Parliament that they would be introduced—if at all—by affirmative procedure, so there would be plenty opportunity for debate. Maureen Watt and Nanette Milne mentioned muirburn. They should be aware that, although it is included in the bill, other aspects of muirburn are likely to be addressed in separate legislation later in the Government's term in office. Adapting to climate change is a new and important area of work. Last week, Stewart Stevenson launched a consultation on a climate change adaptation framework, which addresses some of the points that Patricia Ferguson raised in her intervention. We want to share anything that we learn with others. The bill strikes the right balance. There has been a lot of discussion about the detail that members say should be in it. However, if it was all in the bill, the bill would be unfeasibly large and, more to the point, the bill's passage through the Parliament would be delayed.  It is acknowledged that adaptation matters and that Parliament should see regular and rigorous progress reports on how the Government is dealing with it. The Government is up for that. There are also powers to allow ministers to impose adaptation duties on organisations at a later date, if that is required. I commend the bill to members. There will be a full closing speech on it in tomorrow's debate. Points raised in this debate but not answered by me will be answered then. The bill is our chance, as legislators in 2009, to leave a huge legacy for not only the immediate but the long-term future of Scotland. I hope that we do not allow that legacy to be sunk by petty squabbling, which will not help anybody in the long run.

I am aware of concerns here and in other salmon farming countries about the effectiveness of SLICE. We propose therefore to establish a group of experts, drawn from our salmon farming, pharmaceutical and scientific communities, to examine the range of factors that could contribute to the effectiveness of current treatment strategies and make recommendations on how effectiveness can be optimised.

A number of people in the industry have raised the issue of sea lice with us, which is why we are setting up the group. The group will work from the summer onwards and a ministerial working group on aquaculture will oversee it. I expect the expert group to consider a wide range of options, including ones that may or may not have been mentioned by Robin Harper, and come to a reasoned response. Aquaculture is an extraordinarily important industry to Scotland; its value is greater than the value of sea fisheries. We have to keep that in mind.

Our external reviewer, Peter Cook, is in the process of finalising his advice and will be submitting it to the Scottish Government shortly. That will enable the Government to make any decisions about changes to the Scotland rural development programme, in the light of that advice, during May.

There have been four funding rounds in the past seven months, which even the member will agree is quite a considerable number. The funding round in February led to more than 1,000 approvals. In a sense, we were a little a victim of our success. We have extended the deadline for the next funding round and we will fix a date for that to be finalised as soon as we can. It is a matter that Peter Cook, who is an independent reviewer, may be considering—we will find out when he presents his report to us—but the success of the previous funding round flies in the face of all the people who were bemoaning how difficult it was to get money out of the SRDP and bodes very well for the future.

No. I do not think that that is necessarily the result. The existing applications will still be able to go forward. We have not cancelled anything. All we have done is extend the deadlines. We have had four in seven months, which by any standard beats previous records. I think that we intend to go on doing so.

Good progress is being made and we intend to consult later this year. We have established a steering group, which has considered a first draft of the new plan. We have begun work on the costs and benefits of meeting municipal waste targets and a strategic environmental assessment. We are also carrying out research on landfill bans. While the new plan is being prepared, progress continues; the most recent recycling rate for Scotland is 32.9 per cent.

The member is of course quite right that Fife Council has a good record on recycling. It produced one of the best performances in Scotland, with a recycling rate of 41.3 per cent. Members will realise that that figure is significantly above the Scottish average. Fife Council recycles more tonnes than any other local authority. The council is considering how to go forward on waste collection, but it is my understanding that no decisions have yet been made and that the council has set up a cross-party, member-officer group to consider the question. Obviously, a decision on the frequency of collections of household waste is a matter for each individual local authority, which will have regard to its own local needs and circumstances. I advise the member that it might be useful to have a look at what has happened in some other local  authority areas, because there are examples of extremely good practice. I hope that all local authorities, including Fife Council, look at those examples of good practice and think about adopting them in their own practice.

This has been quite a short debate but, in the main, it has been useful. Before picking up on some of the points that have been raised, I congratulate Rob Gibson on bringing the debate to the chamber, and I will echo him in speaking about the really good work that is going on in Scotland. Some of that work is not particularly well known, but perhaps it should be. In the Scottish Crop Research Institute we have had a major centre of excellence in crop research for a very long time, but I wonder how widely known that is in Scotland.  Rob Gibson is right to bring the subject to our attention. In doing so, he reminds us of how important conventional plant breeding has been and continues to be, which is easily forgotten in the big-business drive to push us all towards acceptance of GM. GM sometimes comes across as being part of the search for the holy grail, yet, if we pay attention to the news feeds, we know that it has many, many failures. As Rob Gibson mentioned, demand for non-GM varieties is on the up in countries that had seemed to be switching over to GM. The debate is being had already, and I say to Conservative members that, in my view, the GM side is losing the debate. That is because the experience of GM has not been the unalloyed success that some people would have us believe. I remind all members of that; Bill Wilson made some very telling points in that regard. The danger is that all the focus on GM can blind us to the huge successes that are being achieved by conventional plant breeding. For example, SCRI is doing a great deal of potato research. Having a debate about tatties might seem a bit of a joke, but in a lot of countries they can be the difference between life and death. Since 1920, 72 new varieties have resulted from SCRI's work. Rob Gibson mentioned Vales Sovereign potatoes, which have been voted Tesco fresh product of the year 2008. They are good not just for consumers but for the environment because they require less water and fertiliser. That sort of promise is made by the GM companies but, in fact, the delivery is coming from conventional plant breeding. I represent a Perthshire constituency, and I will crave members' indulgence to point out the brilliant work that is being done on raspberries, blackcurrants and blackberries, all of which are extremely important to our local economy. I think that, in the main, the SCRI varieties account for the overwhelming majority of the UK crops. Conventional breeding delivers and is here to stay. Plant breeding will play a major part in ensuring future food security, no matter what the GM lobby would have us believe—and I believe that its view on that is a massive red herring, if red herrings can be non-genetically modified to get them to that colour. In Scotland, we are very lucky to have a strong science-based research and development system. Every single pound of public money that is invested in plant research is returned to the economy 12 times over. We are also lucky to have world-leading research on conventional livestock genetics at the Scottish Agricultural College, which helps to maintain Scotland's reputation for excellence in livestock science. The production of new plant varieties is important to farmers and consumers. Recent research has shown that 93 per cent of the  increase in winter wheat yield between 1982 and 2007 was due to new varieties. The message is clear: with the benefit of new technologies, our plant and livestock breeders are making great strides in delivering new varieties that consumers want and the bigger yield that farmers need if they are to improve profitability while minimising environmental impact. Our plant and livestock breeders are doing that without recourse to the genetic modification to which people object. The debate was not meant to be about GM, but I will say something about the Government's position. Members should make no mistake: we are totally and fundamentally opposed to the cultivation of GM crops in Scotland. However, that does not mean that we are against the development of new technologies or the use of new technologies to hasten the production of new conventional varieties. Much modern breeding, including Scottish Government-funded work, uses approaches such as molecular assisted breeding, whereby markers that are linked to important traits are identified. The method was supported in last year's IAASTD report. Scottish Government research funding supports such developments. Scottish Government funding is also being used to examine new technologies to support conventional livestock breeding strategies, to select for a wider variety of traits, such as meat quality, animal health and welfare and environmental impact. We should not lose sight of that, although the Government respects the wishes of consumers who demand locally produced traditional and organic food.

I hope that the member is not suggesting that that is because we do not have GM—

If GM is not part of it, I wonder why the member got to his feet. Consumers might go to supermarkets specifically to look for Sovereign potatoes, Glen Ample raspberries or Aberdeen Angus beef, but I have not heard one person complain that they cannot find GM food in our supermarkets. Moreover, I am certain that, if such food were available and labelled GM, consumers would give it a huge body swerve. The fact is that Scottish consumers simply do not want GM food of any kind, and they are not alone in that. In March last year, a survey in which 1,000 citizens throughout the 27 EU countries were asked about their attitudes towards the environment found that 57 per cent of respondents were apprehensive about GMOs and only 21 per cent were in favour.  There is evidence that opposition to GM foods in America is growing, not decreasing, although America was a great flag-waver for GM crops. In 2005, a Gallup poll found that 45 per cent of respondents were opposed to the use of GM in agriculture and food production. GM is losing the argument.

I am coming to the end of my speech. Our producers and processors depend on Scotland's international reputation for purity and quality. I say to people who are involved in Scotland's agriculture community that we compromise that at our peril. The reputation of Scottish products is high, and many of the plant varieties that I have mentioned are already being grown as commercial crops or trialled overseas by SCRI and its commercial partners. Such crops can be found throughout Europe and in China, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and South Africa. I am happy to confirm that support for conventional and scientific plant breeding will continue to be an important component of Scotland's food and drink policy. That will not include a move towards genetic modification of the sort that people object to so strongly.  Meeting closed at 17:33.

Support for individuals and communities to undertake local environmental improvement projects is available from a variety of sources. Direct Scottish Government funding streams include the climate challenge fund, increase III, which supports community-based waste projects, and the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative. Support is also available from local authorities and organisations such as Scottish Natural Heritage.

I thank Mike Pringle for raising the issue. I am aware of the initiative that he talks about. Indeed, a number of other initiatives in his constituency are currently being funded—Marchmont St Giles church wildlife garden to name but one. It is important that local organisations understand that there are a variety of different sources of funding. For example, there has been a  tendency to think that, because increase III is about waste, the climate challenge fund cannot also be applied to for the same purposes. It is important for people to understand that there is a broad range of funding streams. I am not sure that the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill is an appropriate vehicle to take that forward, as a legislative burden is not necessarily the way to do it. It would be much better if local organisations explored all the options that are available. If Mike Pringle wishes to speak to me about some of the options of which he may not be aware, I would be only too happy to point him in their direction.

Yes—and I hope that all MSPs will take part in the national spring clean, as I intend to do myself. Sarah Boyack raises an important issue. My department is already considering it, because it is clear that there is some confusion about what money can be applied for and where people can go for support. It is important that funding is easily accessible for all small groups in all communities.

Sustainability is at the heart of the Government's forestry and renewable energy policies. Last year, the wood fuel task force reported on the potential additional woody material that could be sustainably produced from a range of sources and demonstrated that there is still scope for considerable expansion of the current market. Biomass is clearly a finite resource, but  we are working to ensure that standards for sustainable production are in place. The Scottish Government is liaising with the United Kingdom Government to support the development of European Union sustainability criteria.

The member will be pleased to hear that some of that work is already being undertaken. There is no doubt that demand for wood fuel is increasing and that, although the scope for new, very large plants is perhaps limited, huge opportunities are still available. It is absolutely the case that a wider range of materials, including waste biomass or imported fibre, will have to be used. The wood fuel task force has already identified significant additional sources of woody biomass that, if brought to market, will allow the biomass energy industry to develop alongside the existing wood processing sector. As the member has suggested, that will include the use of stumps, branches and other such material. Members should realise that these issues are being addressed monthly by a number of different groups. We are very aware of the industry's concerns and are trying to address them.

We understand the importance of people's everyday actions for the environment,  and we will use the SEABS findings to help inform our work to encourage greener behaviours through education, media campaigns and targeted actions to make greener choices easier in areas such as travel, recycling and energy use in the home.

I was rather hoping for a supplementary about sock darning, and I am sorry that I did not get that. The recent wind turbine regulations are not a matter for me. Perhaps the member would care to take up the issue directly with the department concerned, rather than bringing it in on the back of a question about the survey. The results of the survey were published only last week, and we hope that they will give a number of departments useful information so that we can begin to address many of the issues that the survey threw up.

I would like to say that the debate has been useful and constructive, but as I am not allowed to lie to the Parliament, I will not. I kept waiting for the positive stuff, but with one or two honourable exceptions, most Opposition members appeared to run out of time before they got to that bit of their speech. When I saw the Press Association coverage of what the Labour Party had put out, I was highly amused. Apparently, the Scottish Government faces calls for a programme of tree planting across the country's forests. Well, duh! What have we been talking about for the past two years? Labour talks about joint ventures, even though it is obvious that such ventures are being actively pursued. We have in front of us a motion that starts with a restatement of the obvious, calls on us to do something that we are already doing, asks us to pursue proposals on joint ventures that we are already pursuing and mentions the need for the SRDP to be reviewed, when a review is weeks away from completion. Although the amendments are perfectly acceptable, one of them asks us to consider forestry proposals as part of a land use strategy,  when that is already happening. I remind all members that land use issues are key to almost all the areas that are covered by the rural affairs and environment portfolio, so we are fully conscious of the competing demands and priorities. Interestingly, the motion says absolutely nothing about climate change.

I will undertake to do that, if the member is so desirous of pursuing the matter further. We know that joint ventures are under way. Sarah Boyack mentioned the challenges of the next five years, but she offered no ideas on what could plug that gap, which is the one that needs to be filled. We then heard from the Liberal Democrats. Jim Hume and Liam McArthur need not congratulate themselves too fulsomely because their campaign was one of disgraceful misrepresentation and scaremongering. We saw that again today—the Liberal Democrat speeches were negative and backward looking, and they contributed nothing. The leasing proposal is, of course, the one that created all the controversy and argument, but we forget what its purpose was. I remind members that it was a means to an end. The end was helping us to meet the challenge of climate change. We must think out of the box when we deal with climate change. The leasing proposal was an example of that approach, to be sure. As someone who lived abroad for many years, I think that one of the most depressing things about Scotland is that when anyone does any out-of-the-box thinking, there is a queue down the road and round the block of 100 folk who can give thousands of reasons why what has been proposed cannot be done. Ninety-nine of the people in that queue will be members of the Labour Party. On today's evidence, the other person will be a member of the Liberal Democrats. One of the most depressing aspects of our society is that too many people say what cannot be done, but they do not follow that up with what can be done. Helen Eadie exemplified that attitude. She called on us to do what we are already doing, quoted chunks of the Labour Party's briefing and gave us nothing by way of a positive response. Rob Gibson and Dave Thompson made excellent points about the negativity that has been evident in the debate. I acknowledge that Robin Harper, at least, had a positive suggestion to make. He raised the issue  of massive timber with me on a previous occasion, so I raised it with the Forestry Commission. I can advise that the Forestry Commission is aware of the potential of massive timber and that at least one Scottish company is already investigating the technology. That is a positive contribution, but it still does not deal with the next five years. I think that even Robin Harper would accept that the use of massive timber does not offer an immediate, short-term answer, because we must get the technology in place. Frankly, I am disappointed by the ridiculous response to a consultation that put out ideas for consideration. That response was all about what we could not do and had very little to say about what we could do. This Government is about what we can do, and we will continue to take that approach.

Nothing that I have heard from Sarah Boyack this morning is new; it seems to me that this morning's debate is an exercise in wheel spinning. The fact is that this Government is showing leadership in addressing the urgent global problem of climate change. It is clear that our forests can make an important contribution and that we must take full advantage of the opportunity that they offer. The technology report from the Atomic Energy Authority, which is not a reference that members will hear me use often, entitled "Mitigating Against Climate Change in Scotland: Identification and Initial Assessment of Policy Options", identified woodland creation as a high priority measure. Forests and woodlands have the advantage of bringing a wide range of other benefits. In addition to their environmental and social value, Scotland's forests contribute about £670 million to the Scottish economy and support more than 30,000 jobs in forest management, timber production and processing, and forest-related tourism, which by all accounts will increase this year. The wood processing industry has invested more than £250 million in the sector over the past three years. The 2006 Scottish forestry strategy included an aspiration to reach 25 per cent woodland cover in Scotland by the second half of the century, which means creating at least 10,000 hectares of new woodlands each year. Achieving that target would lock up an additional 4.4 million tonnes per year of CO 2 by 2050—for comparison, in 2006 total net greenhouse gas emissions in Scotland were 59 million tonnes. Woodland creation on that scale would therefore make a significant contribution to our target of reducing emissions by 80 per cent by 2050, but it needs additional funding to the order of £10 million to £15 million per year. Our consultation on the forestry provisions in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill was about identifying opportunities for that funding, and I remind the Parliament that the proposals in the consultation, which were brought forward in the bill, were a means to an end—not an end in themselves. We are listening because that is what consultation is about. That is what it has been  about throughout the Government's tenure in office, although that might not have been what it meant before 2007. The consultation was open, and throughout the process we said that we would listen to views before taking any decisions, which is precisely what we did. It is clear that the status quo is not an option. At 4,000 hectares per year, our tree planting rates are well below the aim of 10,000 hectares per year. After five to 10 years, we can expect additional funding for woodland creation on such a scale to come from renewable energy projects on the national forest estate. The estate has considerable potential for renewable energy development, and the Forestry Commission Scotland is vigorously pursuing the opportunities. The power to enter joint ventures will provide greater commercial flexibility. By dropping the leasing proposal, we face a short-term funding problem for woodland creation for up to five years. The SRDP offers about £23 million per year for woodland creation, but to achieve our ambition for woodland creation we must increase that amount. We cannot simply raid other parts of the SRDP pot or the Scottish Government budget, as some respondents to the consultation thought was possible. That is why we are asking the Forestry Commission Scotland to explore further use of well-established arrangements that were introduced in 2005 for selling areas that are of least public benefit to raise money for investment in new woodlands. The Forestry Commission Scotland selects for sale land that delivers a low level of public benefits with—for example—relatively little public access and use, limited community involvement and no significant natural or cultural assets that would be put at risk by sale. Potential options to increase funding include bringing forward the programme of sales—we are actively considering that—and using the proceeds to support woodland creation through the SRDP. I will meet the commission's national committee for Scotland next week to hear its views on that option. Meanwhile, we are actively engaged in strengthening the forestry measures in the Scotland rural development programme. At Mike Russell's request, George McRobbie prepared a comprehensive report on the forestry industry's behalf about improving the SRDP's operation. That work will feed into our wider review of the SRDP, which is considering the extent to which it can assist us in meeting the challenges of the economic downturn. The wider review will also consider necessary changes to the SRDP's priorities and objectives and to the delivery mechanisms, and we expect to take decisions on that in May. That information has been well known to Sarah Boyack all along.  We have already implemented George McRobbie's suggestion that we remove the 200-hectare constraint on annual compensation payments to farmers, and by this summer we hope to increase the grant rates for woodland creation. The necessary modification is with the European Commission and, if it is agreed by Brussels, it will increase grant rates by about 17 per cent. Following recent reviews of standard costs, we plan to submit another request to Brussels for further increases in grants. To help the industry to plan, the Forestry Commission Scotland will shortly publish on its website information about the proposed increases to woodland creation grants. The Government is committed to ensuring that forestry continues to make a major contribution to Scotland's economy and that it delivers social and environmental benefits, which include helping to meet our climate change targets. I do not think that there are any serious disagreements about our underlying aims. The challenge that we face is funding woodland creation in the next few years until renewables income comes on stream. I hope that we can look ahead and work together on that, but that means that people must be constructive and not simply negative. I move amendment S3M-3727.3, to insert after "years": "; notes that the Forestry Commission makes a major contribution to the economy of Scotland and can also make a major contribution towards helping Scotland meet its climate change targets".

As the member knows, the option of leasing parts of the national forest estate was part of our consultation on the forestry provisions in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. The responses to the consultation are being considered, along with an options review prepared by the Forestry Commission Scotland. An announcement will be made in due course.

I regret that the Campbeltown Courier is not on my regular reading list; perhaps the member will give me a copy of that press coverage. The unions have been reassured that the proposed leasing would have no deleterious effects on their situation. As for waiting for a decision, it will be taken far sooner than the time that it will take the Labour Party to produce something constructive on the subject—that has been totally absent.

As I have said, we are considering all options. The Forestry Commission Scotland has prepared an options review, which will be taken into consideration when the decision is made. I will make the decision when I make it, and members will be informed in due course.

I have a lot of scribbled notes, because members have raised a great many points. I will deal with as many of them as I can. First, it is worth recapping the reality of Scotland's seas and why they are vital. They hold 40,000 species and internationally important populations of marine mammals and seabirds. Scotland has renowned seabird populations, some of which are in serious decline, as we debated last night, and the largest seabird colony in Great Britain and Ireland, which has more than 1 million breeding seabirds—a number that it is virtually impossible to conceive of. We also have around 30 per cent of the world population of grey seals and 45 per cent of the European Community population of common seals. Scottish waters also contain 22 species of porpoise, dolphin and whales, as well as some of the finest marine habitats in Europe. That is all important in and of itself, and it is important that we cherish what we have. It is also important because it is part and parcel of Scotland's economic wellbeing. I do not consider  the two to be mutually exclusive. The Scottish fishing zone is one of the largest of any EU nation and sea fishing has always been a way of life in Scotland. It is a fundamental part of our food production. Scotland's seas provide £2.2 billion-worth of economic activity to the country. We cannot ignore that, but our aim is to create a framework for faster economic growth in a greener way. That is achievable. The truth is that there is agreement with Westminster on marine management that is already delivering some of the Government's goals. The executive devolution of marine planning and nature conservation to Scotland is a significant achievement. We must build on that. The creation and role of marine Scotland took up a substantial part of the debate. Getting marine Scotland up and running as soon as possible is essential if we are to deliver our vision and to do so as quickly as possible. The word "deliver" is important, because marine Scotland is the delivery mechanism for what we are trying to achieve through the bill. I am sorry that the Labour Party has taken the approach that it has taken in its amendment, which seems a little bit like saying "Hurry up and wait." Marine Scotland will be our champion for the marine environment. As part of the Scottish Government, it will provide direct accountability by Scottish ministers to the Parliament.

That is not necessarily the case. If Sarah Boyack thinks about it, she will see that marine Scotland is reconfiguring what already exists within Government, bringing it together, and providing it in a more focused and sensible way. The Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency and the Fisheries Research Services are already accountable to the Scottish Government marine directorate. They will all be part of marine Scotland. We need to give the staff of those bodies certainty and not simply wait yet another year or two to get it going. It is right to make the decision now on the status of marine Scotland before we introduce the bill in the next few months. That will avoid a year of delay and missed opportunities—a year that we cannot afford to lose. Marine Scotland will be taking on its new responsibilities as soon as the marine bill is enacted. We are  getting ahead of the game by doing it this way. Of course, we are listening to what stakeholders say about marine Scotland operating transparently, efficiently and fairly, but we have to get moving.

I will try to deal with some of the issues that have been raised. Stakeholder input was enormous, and many of the proposals—such as the new planning system, streamlined licensing, the improved conservation power, greater protection for seals and, yes, the creation of marine Scotland—received a favourable response. Today's debate brought up a number of useful points, and this is the final opportunity for them to be raised. John Scott talked about the UK bill, which does not give us the wider powers that we might want. However, we are discussing further devolution of wider nature conservation powers and we hope to get moving on that. Kenneth Gibson rightly raised the concerns of his constituents on Arran, with whom we are in constant dialogue. Liam McArthur wanted to raise the issue of dredging. We are aware of the harbour authorities' statutory duties, and we are considering how we can better achieve a balance between necessary controls while avoiding additional burdens. I hope to hear more from Liam McArthur on that. Robin Harper and Peter Peacock talked about the need for good science in what we are doing. There will be a scientific board in marine Scotland, so we are talking about delivering on the science already. Alasdair Allan raised a specific constituency interest of which I am well aware. No decisions have been made yet. I want to ensure that I do not run out of time, so I will try to get to those whom I have missed later. The important point is that today's debate was about the consultation on the bill. We owe it to everyone to ensure that we achieve the maximum economic growth that we can achieve, but that must be tempered by the realisation that the environment in which growth takes place—[ Interruption. ]

That environment cannot be an afterthought. The truth is that if we approach environmental collapse, there will be no economic growth; the two things are bound together. It cannot be an afterthought; it must  become part of the equation of growth, enhancing growth and, in turn, being enhanced by growth. That is what we are about, and I ask members to support the motion. I am sorry that Sarah Boyack's tone was the way it was, but we will not accept the Labour amendment. Being accused of being too positive is quite astonishing—the Labour Party should reflect on that. We are happy to accept all the other amendments. Some points were well made; we listened to them and we still have time to bring some of the issues on board. I hope to get back to all members on points that I have not been able to deal with in my closing speech. I ask members to support the motion.

The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Scottish Government are together reviewing the distribution of resources to local government. The review will include former ring-fenced capital funding for flood prevention and coast protection, which is now rolled up as part of the local government finance settlement. It will inform the next three-year local government finance settlement in 2011 to 2012.

As David Whitton knows, there is a deal of difference between the role of committees and the role of Government. I do not want to subject him to a politics 101 lecture about the requirements of parliamentary scrutiny. In my previous role, I carried out my function regardless of Government; I am now in a different role, and I am looking at the issue with fresh eyes. The spending review will examine the funding for local government flood defences, and I have every confidence that the money that is needed will be there.

I feel the pressures on the diary already, but I am happy to give that commitment to Stuart McMillan if I am able to find the time to get to Inverclyde. Inverclyde Council does not have a current flood prevention scheme and it is therefore not included in current spending. The council produced a report in 2007 and copied it to the Scottish ministers for information, but the last funding that it received was for a small scheme in 2001. If councils find  themselves in situations similar to Inverclyde's and they intend to try to develop schemes, I urge them to do so in early course. I hope that Stuart McMillan will transmit that to Inverclyde Council.

That information is not held by the Scottish Government.

We are aware of the problem. A considerable problem was identified at the Chunghwa demolition, where work was stopped by SEPA. We can at least have confidence that SEPA is on top of the problem  when it arises, which is on demolition. Throughout the decades we have built buildings that are full of ozone-depleting substances, but it is only on demolition that the problem becomes manifest. Ozone-depleting substances are not currently included in the climate change targets because they are covered by international agreement, through the Montreal protocol. In addition, considerable European and domestic regulations apply throughout the United Kingdom. SEPA has published a briefing note that has been made available to the demolition industry. As I said, SEPA is already playing a direct part in the issues that are raised by the kind of thing that has happened with the demolition of Chunghwa. If the member wishes to speak to me on the issue in more detail, I would be glad to have a conversation with her.

Under our Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, SEPA will be required to take the impacts of climate change into account in preparing the flood risk assessments. At this stage, it is too early to say that the flood hazard maps would be based on modelling of sea level changes. This is a very complex technical issue and there is a degree of scientific  uncertainty. The need for further specific flood risk research on this issue will be informed by the latest UK climate impacts projections, due to be published later this year. We will be consulting closely with SEPA on this matter.

I congratulate Bill Wilson on his assiduous following-up of this issue. From my previous incarnation on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee I know that the issue is of particular concern to him. I see that I will not be allowed to escape it in my new role. Current projections are based on figures from 2002, which came from the UK climate impacts programme. However, those data did not include information on storm surges, wave action or tidal range, and that is the basis of the scientific uncertainty. Recent research suggests that the current projections may be minimum estimates. Clearly, Governments around the world will have to consider how that will impact on their plans. I guarantee Bill Wilson that we will continue to engage at UK level to consider the impact of new projections that may become available towards the end of this year. At that time, we will be in a better position to decide whether or not we should ban building below a certain level around our coasts.

Access authorities throughout Scotland have been provided with powers under the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 to do whatever they consider appropriate for the purposes of supporting or maintaining paths in their areas. Each authority must develop access opportunities and make funds available as it sees  fit and in accordance with the terms of their single outcome agreements.

The member may be aware of my keen interest in long-distance footpaths. I am familiar with the Fife coastal path and its development; and I am familiar with a number of Scotland's other long-distance footpaths, existing and proposed. I hope that all local authorities are considering carefully the funding that they can make available to ensure that such developments proceed apace. Quite apart from any other considerations, that will be vital for the future of tourism in Scotland. I intend to holiday in Scotland this year, and walking the Fife coastal path is one plan that I am considering. Perhaps Marilyn Livingstone and I can have a conversation about that later.

I am pleased to be here for my debut performance as a new minister in the Government in response to my good friend Nanette Milne's motion. Earlier today, I was racking my brains trying to remember whether I had signed it. She has resolved that for me, but I fear that that might not be the only time that my back-bench activities and comments are referred to in the chamber. I expect that I shall have to get used to that. I thank everyone for their congratulations; in turn, I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate. As she rightly says, Scotland's marine environment is a wonderful resource and our seabird populations are a valuable part of that marine environment. The seabird populations are of European and global renown, and they attract visitors from all over the United Kingdom, Europe and the rest of the world. Peter Peacock made the point very well about how important they are. We tend to forget that our environment and the animals that exist there do not exist in vacuum; they are part and parcel of what makes this country what it is, and what makes it an attractive destination for people from around the world. The Government shares the concerns about recent reports of yet another poor breeding season in 2008 for seabird populations. We are particularly concerned about the arctic skua, the kittiwake and the arctic tern. A great deal of valuable work is being carried out on RSPB reserves across Scotland—I echo Ted Brocklebank's appreciative comments about that. The Government and nature conservation agencies work closely with the RSPB to monitor seabirds, and a recent report highlights serious declines in 2008 in certain species that were surveyed by the RSPB. However, it is important to point out that that report also highlights the fact that some species—great skuas, gannets and cormorants—have increased in number. Peter Peacock talked about those fluctuations. Ted Brocklebank also talked about the successful reintroduction of white-tailed sea eagles. However, if they start nicking people's sandwiches, we might get more than a few complaints, so we should hope that they are not interested in tuna fish and that they stick to rabbits. The problem is that the fluctuations show the difficulty faced by the Government and nature conservation agencies in diagnosing the causes of decline in particular seabird species, because there is no obvious, across-the-board decline. Clearly, we need to take a careful look at the underlying reasons for all declines.  One of the key issues is the reduced availability of the preferred food source, which both Nanette Milne and Kenneth Gibson spoke about. The problem looks like it might come down to our old friend, climate change, and the impact of rising sea surface temperatures. In particular, birds that like sand eels, such as kittiwakes, are experiencing major problems because they are not getting their food supply in the summer months, which affects their ability to nest and rear their young. If they cannot get sand eels, they turn to pipefish, which simply do not give them the necessary nourishment. The situation is analogous to people trying to meet all their nutritional needs just by eating chips, which is simply not possible; the same is true of seabirds and pipefish. The fact that seabirds live for a long time enables them to cope with poor breeding seasons, but what they are now experiencing goes beyond natural fluctuations; the present run of successive poor seasons is far more serious. The result is few chicks and low populations. Scotland has a good track record of taking positive action to meet the needs of seabirds, but before I discuss what measures are being taken, I turn briefly to the issue of reduced discards. The evidence appears to show that discards artificially elevated seabird populations, so the fact that discards have been reduced might not be having a direct effect on population decline, notwithstanding the issue's importance in specific areas. We must be careful about the overall mix. Peter Peacock mentioned sand eel fisheries. Examples of Scotland's good track record are the closure of the Wee Bankie sand eel fisheries off the east coast and the voluntary measures that have been taken around Shetland. However, despite those closures, seabird populations are still declining, which suggests that the issue is more complicated. That is where climate change rears its ugly head. We must continue to monitor sand eel populations, sea-surface temperatures and seabird populations.

That is an extremely interesting suggestion. We are already making quite big inroads into the use of plastic carrier bags through a different form of action. It is important to involve the private sector when we can. We are, of course, taking measures to tackle climate change—the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill is going through the Parliament. We are also working closely with Scottish Natural Heritage and the Joint Nature Conservation Committee to identify and designate special protection areas for seabird populations. A number of SPAs have been designated, others are being consulted on and we are working on the identification of further such areas. However, discussion of potential SPAs is not always met with enthusiasm by local human populations. Explanation of how important seabirds are to us as human beings is part and parcel of the education that we must undertake; seabirds should not be seen as separate species that are of lesser relevance. We realise that existing measures may not be enough to arrest the decline among iconic species. However, we are committed to safeguarding biodiversity and to protecting internationally renowned seabird populations. That will be part and parcel of our work on the forthcoming Scottish marine bill. That bill has been mentioned by a number of members so I will not go into it in great detail now. There will be more time in Parliament to discuss the bill and its relevance to seabird populations.  We are, of course, concerned about declining populations. Scotland is unique and has unique seabird populations. They act as indicators for much more than just sand eels; they are almost like canaries for the seas. We will have to keep a close eye on what is happening to them. We will want to continue all the work that we are currently doing, expanding it where possible. That will be done through the marine bill and the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. We value the contributions of all the Scottish and United Kingdom non-governmental organisations, such as the RSPB and Scottish Environment LINK. We are aware of the problem and are constantly on top of the measures that will be required in our efforts to fix the problems. The issue is very complicated, and I thank Nanette Milne for ensuring that it was brought before the Parliament.  Meeting closed at 17:40.

Rubbish.

This is a silly and premature debate, but I am grateful to Sarah Boyack for one thing: she seems to agree that this is a "cash-strapped Government". I hope that the minister will ensure that that is extracted from the Official Report and quoted back at Labour as often as necessary, because those were her words. I am fascinated by the Labour Party's opposition to private investment. Strangely, we do not hear Labour express that opposition when it comes to hospitals and schools, so I am slightly confused about where the principle lies at present. Let us cut to the chase. Are Labour and the Lib Dems now saying that increasing forest cover from 17 per cent to 25 per cent is not to be welcomed? In any case, how do they imagine that that can happen without an increase in employment? I do not know how on earth we could increase the forest estate without increasing the number of jobs.  At no point in the last year has there been the slightest cheep from Labour to the effect that it does not agree with the afforestation proposal, so I am puzzled. I remember that the sale of forest estate was included in the budget projections as a way of raising capital to start the process. I do not remember any Labour or Lib Dem member questioning the principle at that point. Indeed, when I checked, I could not find any Labour or Lib Dem member even asking a question on the subject. Who did? Well, I did, and so did John Scott.

We queried the view that, to increase the estate, the Government has to sell. On the face of it, that is a paradox. The minister thinks that he has come up with a cunning plan and he has put it out to consultation. That means that it is out to discussion and that nothing is set in stone. Labour must not apply its own notion of consultation to what the Government does. What we have is a real consultation.

I agree that the timing is bad. I have already written a grumpy letter to the minister in my capacity as convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, but committees in the Parliament have been put in impossible positions since 1999, so there is nothing new in that. If Labour is not opposed in principle to sale, and if it has only just discovered that principle, why is it so opposed to leasing?

There have been so many red herrings so far that the debate should have been on fisheries instead of forestry. Labour members might well argue that such a long lease—which, by the way, is very typical of commercial leases—is tantamount to a sale, but they can take it from me that a lease is not a sale. If they do not believe me, they need only look at any legal text book for the reality. However, we have already established that Labour is not opposed in principle to sale. This is the problem: what the Government is proposing is not a massive sell-off at all but the fact is that if we do not raise substantial amounts of money, we cannot undertake the new planting. The proposal is in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill for a reason, and I note that Labour has avoided that context completely in this debate.

Although carbon sequestration is not the only component in the approach to meeting emissions targets, it is an important one. If I raised some of these questions with the minister, he would no doubt ask me how I would raise the money. In turn, I ask Labour whether it has a cunning plan for raising £150 million to £200 million for carbon sequestration.

If we have to take carbon sequestration out of the equation—which is what Labour members seem to want to do—its members really have to say what they would do in its place. I have not heard a single word about that from either Sarah Boyack or Jim Hume—and that is what is missing from this debate.

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for the concessions that he has already made. Those concessions are important, because the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee has been involved in discussions about flooding for a long time. We first issued a call for written evidence back in September 2007, when we were embarking on our inquiry into flooding and flood  management. The report on that inquiry was published in May 2008. The bill was introduced to Parliament in September 2008, so we were able to exert considerable influence on it in the first place. The report on our inquiry contained 26 key recommendations, many of which—although not all—were taken up by the Government. It will not surprise members that a number of the recommendations in the stage 1 report on the bill are reiterations of views to which the committee had already come after its previous extensive inquiry. We approached stage 1 on the basis that we need not revisit in detail issues on which we had made recommendations in our earlier report and which had already been adopted in the bill—for example, the recommendation that lead responsibility should lie with SEPA. There seemed no point in going back over that story. We also had the benefit of an early indication of Government amendments that are likely to be lodged at stage 2, which allowed us to anticipate certain developments while we were still at stage 1 and was of enormous benefit—so much so that in our stage 1 report we recommend that, where possible, that should become standard practice. Such advance notice will not always be possible, but it was extremely beneficial to us and would also help other committees as they take evidence at stage 1. I thank everyone who was involved in the process—the clerking team, my colleagues on the committee, in particular members who were new to the committee in September and October, and all the witnesses who gave us their time and attention throughout the process, not least ministers and their officials. The key recommendations of our stage 1 report include the broad recommendation that the Parliament agree to the general principles of the bill. Members will realise that it would be impossible for me to go through all 38 additional recommendations. I will pick out key areas of debate, on some of which the cabinet secretary has already conceded. He and the Minister for Environment should be aware that, on the issues on which we are still pressing the Government for change, the committee was unanimous. The lack of an explicit duty on responsible authorities to implement measures on the ground is a potential weakness in the bill, so committee members will have been pleased to hear the cabinet secretary's concession in that regard. A local authority official told us in evidence that officials were already aware that the provisions of the bill were "permissive", which suggested to us that it was likely that a local authority that did not implement measures would avoid legal challenge. We were concerned that if there was a view that  the duty on local authorities was permissive, some councils might take a minimalist view of their duties. Therefore, the cabinet secretary's concession is well received. I am also grateful for the decision to include the word "sustainable" in the long title. There was considerable discussion in the committee about the matter, and the recommendation on sustainability in our inquiry report was carried into our stage 1 report. However, we accepted the minister's logic when he told us that to define "sustainable" in the bill would not be helpful, because our understanding of the term will change and evolve. We have come together on the issue, which is important. The committee understands that there is a desire to encourage greater use of natural flood management techniques, including the use of flood plains, wetlands and woodlands where that is appropriate. In our inquiry report, we argued for a presumption in favour of natural flood management, but it became clear that the word "presumption" was almost a barrier to consideration of the issue. We thought that that view was based on a misunderstanding, because we always accepted that the presumption could and would often be rebutted and overturned. We were concerned that, unless there was more explicit direction, the current culture, in which there seems to be a bias towards hard solutions, would be difficult to overcome.

The committee has never taken the view that there is a presumption in favour of hard solutions; we were concerned about the culture among professionals. We thought that if we were to shift the culture away from the default option of hard solutions, there must be a stronger drive towards encouraging natural solutions. That is why we made three recommendations in that regard in our report. We understand that the word "presumption" presents a barrier and we accept that a different approach can be considered. I hope that the minister will consider adopting the mechanism that we suggested or propose an alternative measure that would achieve the same end. It is about changing the culture. On long-term planning, our inquiry report called for a 25-year road map for investment, with  provision for regular updating. That general approach was commended during stage 1 by a number of witnesses. Scottish Water agreed that a nationally prioritised list of flooding schemes would help in its forward planning. Chris Spray, from SEPA, said: "We should look 20 or 25 years ahead."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 17 December 2008; c 1313.] The committee took the view that SEPA could therefore be expected to produce a long-term strategic assessment as well as the district-level plans that are already provided for. That would give us a clear hierarchy of plans and would involve longer-term priorities for 12 and 24-year periods coming before the Parliament at least once in each four-year session. It is inevitable that a key part of any debate about any policy in any Parliament under any Government will be about the vexed issue of funding. Our stage 1 recommendation follows on from a clear recommendation in the inquiry report. We remain uneasy about the method of funding allocation. I take on board what the cabinet secretary said this afternoon, but we hope that he will consider how to ensure that the strategic priorities are implemented in practice. We raised concerns about the skills base in our inquiry report and we continue to be concerned about it because additional staff will be required. As I understand it, 55 new staff will be needed for what happens in Scotland and there are currently 200 vacancies in the Environment Agency south of the border, so we are still concerned about the potential for a skills gap. I have been saying, "Perhaps, instead of putting your daughter on the stage, Mrs Worthington, it might be an idea to send her to university to study hydrology or some related profession." Coastal flooding has the potential to cause even greater devastation than fluvial and pluvial flooding. It is a big threat to infrastructure round our coast. It is essential that the most accurate predictions are available, and we have made a recommendation on that because of our concerns about the future. I reiterate that our recommendations were unanimous and that we sought a Government response on a number of issues before stage 2—indeed, we have had a Government response on significant issues already this afternoon, for which we are grateful. I also reiterate that the committee has come to the process with a highly detailed understanding of the issue—more so than is usually the case—and that its recommendations are not capricious or arrived at without careful consideration. We hope that the positive response that we got this afternoon will continue, because  that will make a good bill better. We commend the bill to Parliament.

This is an uncontroversial debate that is not party political, although when Labour members talk about the approach that they are taking I sometimes want to reach for the nit comb. Of course the idea of homecoming predates the current Government. We owe a huge debt of gratitude to Donald Gorrie and Jack McConnell, who initiated the enterprise that the Government is enthusiastically taking forward. The massive and catastrophic change in our economic circumstances could not have been foreseen when homecoming was dreamed up. We started by fearing that folk would not come to Scotland because they could not afford a holiday, but now, out of the blue, we can see a silver lining to the cloud that is the collapse of sterling. However drastic sterling's collapse is, in some areas it brings opportunities, because this year it will be cheap for people to come here on holiday and we will be a destination of choice. VisitBritain has recognised that and will use homecoming Scotland as a big part of its international campaigning. I predict that the rest of the United Kingdom will try to entice some of our visitors to London or Cardiff before or after their visit to Scotland. "Caledonia", the song that was used in the homecoming advertisement, has long been a favourite of mine, because it is about homesickness. I have listened to and loved it for many years, because I lived abroad for many years and absolutely understand—at every level—the pull of homesickness. People who have not lived outside Scotland for a long time will never be able to understand how strong that sense of homesickness can be. The advert will be incredibly useful, and I am glad that it is getting wider coverage and currency and that more and more people will see it during the year. It is important to emphasise that we are not just targeting expats. I am looking forward to the Scottish tides-Polish spring events that will take place in Perth from February to April, which reminds us that Scotland has new homecomers. We can invite all the Poles who have worked here and then gone home because their economy is stronger to come back for a holiday, bringing with them the parents and families to whom they used to write and send money. In the run-up to Christmas, I took the opportunity to write to all the Perths around the world, and I have had responses from Tasmania and New  York state. I am glad that people are coming to Scotland. I encourage members to write to the mayors of towns that have the same name as their local towns. Big industrial and corporate buy-in is down the line, and I predict that there will be more such buy-in as the year goes on. I wish that I had had my idea for a pilgrim way a couple of years ago—if I had done so, perhaps we could have launched the route this year. Individual members can take action. I say to the critics, "Get over yourselves. Stop sneering. Stop taking a snobby metropolitan approach." Homecoming offers enormous incentives, and there will be a problem only if people turn their mouths down instead of up.

The minister will be aware of how welcome the new early train service between Perth and Edinburgh has been. I have used it already, and quite splendid it is, too. I wonder if I might chance my arm a little further in respect of a slightly different part of my constituency, where there is a longstanding campaign to reopen the Blackford railway station. The minister may be aware of the campaign, which I fully support. Is there any real possibility that the station will reopen in the future?

The minister is aware of the work of the street pastor movement, which is spreading throughout Scotland. I know that he was impressed by the Perth street pastors when he met them. Given street pastors' potential impact on the incidence of antisocial behaviour on city streets on the busiest nights of the week, will he consider their work in his review, particularly as it is a wholly constructive intervention that seems to make a real difference?

The cabinet secretary knows about my interest in palliative care. Is she as surprised as I am by the new-found concerns that Labour MSPs such as Des McNulty are expressing? Will she remind us exactly when the decision in question was taken?

Is the minister aware of how widely the new timetable from Perth to Edinburgh is welcomed? Does he agree that an enormous improvement has been made for my constituents? Hitherto, they had to put up with appallingly low levels of service. Will he accept my thanks on their behalf for the new service?

To ask the Scottish Government when it last met NHS Tayside to discuss health provision for Perthshire. (S3O-5049)

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating NHS Tayside on being one of four health boards that have achieved the target for 95 per cent of cancer patients to be treated within the designated waiting time? Does she agree that that is good news for those people in my constituency who, sadly, are diagnosed with cancer? Will she remind us of the previous Administration's record in that regard?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement  this morning of new powers out to the 200-mile limit. His announcement is a welcome relief from what I would otherwise call groundhog day—or, rather, groundhog month. Every year, with monotonous regularity, the EU delivers initial proposals that would be unbelievably damaging to entire communities in Scotland. Then, with equal regularity, subsequent negotiations result in a final determination that pulls back from the more apocalyptic predictions and everyone breathes the annual—partial—sigh of relief. One fishery or another is lined up for annihilation, then a reprieve is offered at the last minute. Frankly, the annual round of brinkmanship is doing the EU no good at all. It is little wonder that the whole CFP is called into question. We should remember that more than two thirds of the UK fisheries industry is based in Scotland. It is of massive economic importance: the total value of the catch that was landed by Scottish vessels last year sits at £380 million. In the context of this year's negotiations, it is also worth remembering that there are many ways in which the Scottish industry is a pioneer. For example, our approach to sustainable fisheries is set to be adopted throughout the EU as part of the new cod recovery plan; levels of fishing have been reduced substantially over several years; and further voluntary measures are being taken that will continue to make a difference to cod stocks in the future. Scotland is also the first country in Europe to implement a new cod conservation scheme. Under the voluntary real-time closure scheme, skippers will signal when they encounter lower than expected numbers of cod and the area will be closed. The Government will also close areas where there appear to be too many undersized cod. Such measures show that there is no lack of willingness to take the issue seriously, but this year—once again—the industry has been initially confronted with a proposal that would amount to almost total shutdown of the west coast fisheries. In an attempt to assist recovery of the whiting, cod and haddock stocks, an effective zero catch suggestion would lead to the destruction of the langoustine trade, which would no doubt be regarded by Brussels as nothing more than collateral damage. As might be expected, my colleagues from the Western Isles are shocked by the implications of the EU's stance. Indeed, in the debate in the House of Commons last week, Angus Brendan MacNeil commented that it would mean the tie-up of 400 boats from Kinlochbervie southwards—or, perhaps, their appearance in the North Sea, which would be equally unwelcome. Maybe there is room for manoeuvre on that, but approaching negotiations in such an alarmist manner is no way  for the EU to win friends and influence people. Perhaps it has even given up trying. In passing, I add my voice to the request from other members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee that, however difficult it might be, the Government ensure that research is conducted into the west coast fisheries. If we are on our own with that one, we had better get the ammunition that we need for the negotiations. Most people agree that tackling the problem of discards may go some way towards ensuring that cod stocks will recover. Few can regard the existing system as making any sense at all. Chucking back fish that are already dead is of no use to anyone and, frankly, it looks like a criminal waste of food. We need much more information about the level of discards, but we must also ensure that measures are in place to reduce those levels. The cost of discards is enormous. In the North Sea, whitefish vessels discard between 500,000 and 880,000 tonnes of fish every year—that is €75 million-worth and about 42 per cent of total landings in a year. Scottish fishermen alone dump about 100,000 tonnes a year, which is £14 million-worth of fish. That is a lot of fish and a lot of money. It is not just a waste of food; it is also having damaging environmental and ecological effects. The discards summit in September identified potential solutions involving net-size changes, temporary closures of fisheries and restrictions on the number of days at sea. Those indicate the willingness of the industry to self-police, so it would be interesting to hear whether there has been any response from the EU to that. I cannot cover all the issues in one speech, but I reiterate the point that I made at the start: Scotland's fisheries make up the greater part of the total UK fishery. Therefore, I cannot see why Scotland's fisheries minister must sit outside the negotiations. It makes no sense at all, regardless of anyone's position on the constitution, and it hampers Scotland's ability to be heard on the issues that are most vital to our industry's future. Even the Commission acknowledges that the CFP as a whole has been less than successful. It has been criticised as being overcentralised. In that context, the SNP's anti-CFP stance seems, ironically, to be more in keeping with the EU's stance. I ask the other parties in the chamber to reflect on that reality instead of lodging rather silly amendments, such as the Labour amendment, to the motion that we are debating today.

The minister will be aware of my strong and long-standing interest in palliative care, now evidenced by my member's bill proposal, which has just been published. Does she agree that real end-of-life choices can be exercised only if we have ensured that good quality palliative care is available to all who need it, thereby ensuring that Scotland leads the world in assisted living as opposed to assisted dying?

Perhaps the member misunderstood what I said. An arrangement was made for me and Peter Wishart to meet the  unions, but the unions pulled out—it was not us who pulled out.

Tomorrow.

There is a grand macroeconomic debate to be had, but the people in Scotland who have already lost their jobs because of the current situation must sometimes hear about that grand debate and wonder when anyone is going to get round to talking about their experience. Job losses are already beginning to bite. There are massive job losses across all industries. In Perthshire, we have lost not just construction jobs but jobs all the way down the line in house building, buying and selling. Law offices are shedding jobs and even closing—one closed recently in Auchterarder. That is happening across Scotland right now. All the macroeconomic debates in the world are interesting, but the reality right now is that people have lost jobs and are facing more job losses. Shops that are currently empty or are closing now are unlikely to be snapped up in the near future. I am sure that other members in the chamber have had small businesspeople come to their surgeries looking for help to get their landlord to accept monthly, rather than quarterly, rents, or seeking assistance to keep their doors open. It comes down to cash flow for many of them and we know that the banks are giving them a rubber ear. If they are lucky, the cost of borrowing goes up; if they are unlucky, their credit lines get withdrawn. Losing HBOS is only going to make things worse. Alex Neil has already dealt with the HBOS-Lloyds merger at length. We need to remind ourselves and, unbelievably, the union, that where there is overlap there will be job losses, which means that more ordinary people will be out of work. We know that, yet too many people are sitting around waiting for the car crash to happen. I do not accuse my colleague Alex Neil of that, nor do I accuse the many people who are now calling for a halt to the merger process to allow some breathing space and perhaps new proposals to be developed. I am astonished at the total lack of  interest that is being expressed by two parties in the chamber, which seem content to sit back and damn the consequences. It is difficult to reach any conclusion other than that there is malign intent. I accuse Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling of putting their own perceived advantage before the advantage of Scotland. The destruction of the Bank of Scotland seems to be a politically desirable outcome for far too many people in this chamber.

I am glad that the member asks me that. I arranged a meeting with trade union representatives but—mysteriously—they pulled out of it. I wonder why. I accuse the HBOS board of callous indifference to the clamour. One wonders exactly how much money board members stand to make from the merger and whether they have calculated that they would not be quite so well off with any other development. What else explains their decision to set their faces against any other proposal? I do not know whether other banks are looking at HBOS, as the Bank of China was. It is beginning to look increasingly likely that the Treasury will see them all off at the pass. My preference is to retain HBOS as an independent bank, but surely there is no argument against hitting the pause button on the merger and allowing time for all the options to be explored properly. Another aspect of the financial sector that was discussed in the chamber when we previously debated HBOS was the insurance industry. That remains a strong part of Scotland's financial sector, but I am nervous about its future. In the intervening weeks since I last raised the subject, insurance share prices have plummeted, although they have risen a bit again. That is a concern to me because Aviva is a huge employer in my constituency. To be frank, I have been waiting for the insurance shoe to drop, because all the dodgy securities and various other instruments have been insured by somebody or other. In addition, the Dutch Government has just rescued Aegon. That might have negative implications for its Scottish operations, which consist primarily of Scottish Equitable. I am advised that the Financial Services Authority is working urgently on the solvency risks of UK insurers. That is a frightening thought. I hope and pray that the Scottish Government has people who are keeping on eye on that part of the financial sector. If it turns out to have problems  too, I am not sure whether we can take many more knocks. The Government cannot affect the situation at the macroeconomic level, but it has already done much that is good. The small business bonus scheme cannot be talked about enough. It was introduced before the economic situation arose, but that does not mean that it has not been of great help. It will go on being of great help to the 5,135 businesses in Perth and Kinross and the 124,629 businesses throughout Scotland that have already benefited from it. Who knows how many jobs have been saved by the small business bonus? It would be interesting to find out. John Swinney mentioned many other initiatives. The Scottish Government is doing much that is good, unlike the great helmsman, who steered us into the icefield and is trying to claim a victory for not colliding with an iceberg so far. I will be a little bit mischievous—the cabinet secretary can deal with me after if he wishes. Could budgets be further raided in some way, for example to deliver a one-off Scottish supplement to the winter fuel allowance? That would deliver help directly into the hands of the neediest households exactly when it was needed most.

I hear that—of course that is an issue, but we would need to find the money from other budgets. Even an extra £50 would make a difference. I know that such a measure would cost between £25 million and £30 million but—to use a current phrase—that might be a price worth paying.

So exciting was the debate so far that I managed to break the podium on the desk over there. I hope that we can all calm down a bit now.

Obviously, there is a need for a strategy because the invasion of non-native species is a huge issue that affects a wide range of economic activity in the country—agriculture, forestry, horticulture, fisheries and, of course, our pets. Such species can contribute to habitat loss and biodiversity changes and can destroy fragile ecosystems in many areas including the islands, which are mini-areas of the country that may need special protection. The control or eradication of non-native species is extremely difficult and costly, so prevention is by far the best way forward. I am indebted to the RSPB Scotland briefing for the information that one in 10 priority native species is threatened by the rising number of non-native species. The briefing also highlights the fact that non-native species have caused more bird extinctions since the 1800s than any other single factor. Obviously, the issue has a massive impact. Because of climate change, we will probably see more such problems. I suspect that it will be impossible to deal with the problem completely, as we cannot roll back climate change, although we are trying to stop it in its tracks. However, climate change is already beginning to take effect. As Elaine Murray mentioned, there are serious economic costs, with several billions of pounds already being spent annually. I understand that Japanese knotweed has to be eradicated from land that is being used for the 2012 London Olympics infrastructure. Just in passing, I wonder whether anyone ever put a final figure on the great North Uist hedgehog hunt—

So—there is no final figure. Obviously, research is extremely important as well. As has been mentioned, one of the three strands of the invasive non-native species framework strategy is prevention, which is obviously the best way forward. Given that a significant number of the biggest pests appear to emanate from across the Atlantic—American mink, American grey squirrels and American signal crayfish—I am moved to repeat the accusations that were made against American GIs during the war, who were said to be oversexed, overpaid and over here. One might add that they are—as has been discovered in Iraq—darned difficult to get rid of once they are over here. We are finding that that is true of these species. Clearly, early detection and rapid eradication are important where it has not been possible to prevent non-natives species from arriving. The best way of dealing with them is to get at them early. Where that is not possible, we need to look at long-term control and containment. However, I want to concentrate on building awareness and understanding, which is key to the whole issue. There is a significant debate to be had about how to achieve that. I do not believe that we need a survey to determine baseline awareness of the issue, as has been proposed. In my view, public awareness beyond the red versus grey argument is probably close to zero, even among the Greens. Although, unfortunately, neither of our Green MSPs is present in the chamber today, Patrick Harvie will not mind my saying that he has admitted to me that he knows absolutely nothing about Himalayan balsam. There are groups of people who could quickly be conscripted into the defending army, if that is how we want to view ourselves. Gardeners, walkers, farmers and freshwater fishermen are captive audiences both as receivers of information and as sources of intelligence. We need only consider the RSPB's annual garden birds survey to see how ordinary people can be mobilised to provide astonishingly useful information. All those groups read specialist press, most of which would likely be only too happy to help. Once upon a time, I used to read Cosmopolitan . Sadly, the passing of the years means that I also now read magazines such as Amateur Gardening , which this week includes two items that relate directly to today's debate. The first is a piece headed "Could bug halt superweed menace?" The piece is about Japanese knotweed, which is described as "a menace that thrives in poor soils, can crack concrete and strangles plants that lie in its path." In the light of the proposal to release a bug to kill  the Japanese knotweed, I would like to hear the minister's views on the use of other imported non-native species in that fashion. As the Australians found with the cane toad, that may not always be the best way forward. The second item is about how gardeners can help to eradicate the destructive South American primrose from blocking British waterways. There is a vast resource out there of potential information and intelligence gathering and assistance. We could utilise and mobilise those routes of information gathering and information dissemination, because such people are on our side. If either the cabinet secretary or the minister wants to know where Himalayan balsam can be found in Perthshire, any walker in Perthshire would be able to tell them, and they would get a map of it all very quickly indeed. I commend that approach to the problem: using it will be vital.

To ask the Scottish Government when it last held discussions with the house building industry and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities about the current housing situation. (S3O-4537)

The minister may be aware that, although national homelessness figures are going down, the opposite is the case for some local authorities, such as Perth and Kinross Council. Homelessness in Perth and Kinross has increased by 19 per cent on last year. Because of the limited housing stock, that creates huge pressures on the general waiting lists. Given the present housing market, the situation will only get worse. Can he offer any specific assistance to authorities that are experiencing such serious problems, for example by enabling the purchase of completed or part-completed housing stock? Will he ensure that the money that he has provided to be spent on affordable housing is directed to the areas of greatest need?

The minister has agreed to review the support for croft housing. I want to pick up on an issue that was referred to by Liam McArthur, which is of interest to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee because of our inquiry into rural housing. As the minister is aware, 20 years ago Government support covered 82 per cent of house building cost, but now it covers only 14 per cent. He is also aware that the loan element of support was removed in 2004, on the grounds that ordinary mortgages were easily and cheaply available. Now that we know that that is not likely to be the case in the foreseeable future, will restoration of the loan element be specifically included in any review that the minister undertakes? As far as I can see, that is not mentioned specifically in the Government response document.

Will the minister confirm that there are many ways of tackling sectarianism? That was evident right from the start of the process, and right back at the original cross-party Government working group, on  which I served. Will he confirm that it is a mistake to assume that, because one set of actions has been replaced by another, progress is not being made? Will he outline some of the events that have taken place beyond the Edinburgh castle event, to indicate to the chamber exactly what is being done to tackle this problem?

Whatever else Scotland expects us to do as a result of this crisis, the one thing that it will expect is that we stay united in our response. I am sorry that some discordant voices are beginning to be heard, because that will weaken any real attempt that we, as a Parliament, are making to move forward. The origins of the crisis go back quite a long way. It is a year since we started to see the queues outside Northern Rock, so it is not as if the crisis, in the bigger sense, has come upon us suddenly. Many of us have had to become conversant with terminology such as bear raids, short selling, collateral debt obligations and securitisation—all the things that are now exposed to the light of day. Dubious practices and so-called products are dressed up with fancy titles to make us think that they are real, when in fact they are not. The lid is well and truly blown off the smoke and mirrors of the money market. The crisis is taking place against a background of rising fuel prices, energy costs, food costs and personal domestic inflation, which is very high in comparison with the official figures. All those things mean that people are feeling vulnerable, and the shock that Scotland experienced over the past week adds to that feeling of vulnerability. We must remember that when we have these debates. There might be suspicion about when the HBOS-Lloyds TSB merger talks really began. I have no inside information and I do not suppose that any other person in the chamber does, either—other than the speculation that we read about in the press. I am not sure that, in the absence of fact, there is much to be gained from talking about the merger in those terms.

I appreciate that and I have read the same newspaper reports, but official merger talks are not the same as having a chat over a cup of coffee. However, that relates to how the market works, and I am not an expert in that. I heard last week, on Tuesday night or Wednesday morning at the latest, that a bear raid on HBOS was taking place, so the decision to suspend short selling after that was known was—[ Interruption. ] I see members shaking their heads, but that is what I heard. Perhaps BBC Scotland was completely wrong in reporting that, but if reporting was taking place, it is clear that that was apprehended to be happening. The suspension of short selling was right, so I am a little surprised  that it did not happen sooner last week. I go further: given that we are a year down the line from the rescue of Northern Rock, I am surprised that more such movement has not taken place in the past year.

No—I need to get on, thank you. I believe that the high street overlap between Lloyds TSB and HBOS will be greater than first imagined. In my constituency, that overlap occurs not just in Perth, but in Crieff, which is a town of only 6,000. Job losses in small towns will be pretty important. My constituency also has back-office jobs at Broxden business park. A perfectly simple request at the end of last week for the current number of employees there met a brick wall of silence, so I am grateful that the Government will put into the public domain more detailed information. That silence does not do much to make me confident that the protection of jobs in Scotland will be taken seriously. I hope that the Government will keep on top of that. I hear that credit was pulled from businesses last week. I know that one business in Dunfermline is fighting for its life and I wonder how many others throughout Scotland are affected. Will the Government keep tabs on that important matter? Murmurings of discontent about the merger are obvious—they go beyond questions about when the talks began. Critical questions are being asked—as recently as this morning, Sir Donald MacKay made interesting comments about what needs to be done in The Scotsman . I hope that the Government will not just stay on top of the existing proposal, but ensure that any other reasonable options are explored, even at this stage. We must all try to keep that in front of us. I echo a little of what Annabel Goldie said about being careful not to cast a shadow over the whole Scottish financial sector. I am lucky that Norwich Union has designated Perth, out of the whole UK, a key centre of excellence—another is in Bishopbriggs, so two of the seven centres are in Scotland. Norwich Union is expanding and is growing its commitment to Scotland. Its fundamental confidence in the Scottish financial sector is huge, although it faces a challenge on skills and on infrastructure. We should not do the whole sector down simply because we have concerns about the current situation. I hope that the Government will consider a nationwide impact study of what is going on. Having come from the left, I remember being told constantly that there is no such thing as a free  lunch. I must say that it is obvious that there ain't no such thing as a free market, either. Perhaps it is time that everybody woke up to that.

Does the First Minister have any influence on encouraging transparency about local job numbers in respect of both organisations? That information is proving to be somewhat difficult to extract. By jobs, I mean not just high street jobs but back-office jobs.

I noted that Liam McArthur has two copies of the consultation document and I listened with some amusement to the complaints from the Opposition about how late they got the document. At least they got it yesterday afternoon; those of us on the Government benches saw it for the first time only after the debate started this morning. I am, therefore, not going to listen too closely to the complaints of the Opposition members—they were lucky, and at least they were able to get the document into their speech. Some members of our Parliament—although not those who are present this morning—and other people labour under the mistaken belief that everyone who lives in the country lives in a sort of rural idyll and that all farmers are rich farmers. We will all have heard that sort of sentiment. I know that members present here this morning know better, which is why I sometimes wish that debates such as today's could also be attended by MSPs who harbour suspicions that folk from rural Scotland are kidding on when they say they have problems. Today, we are debating an issue that  involves severe disadvantage for many people in Scotland and for Scotland as a whole. Although the debate is about the hill livestock farmers who are especially hard pressed, the entire farming sector is under particular pressures just now and it is not an easy time for any farmer. However, some fundamental issues need to be addressed before we delve too much into the detail of the debate, which is in danger of becoming focused entirely on the LFASS. We must focus clearly on where the land-use priorities lie. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee has already completed an inquiry into flooding and flood management, we are part of the way through another on affordable rural housing, and we are soon to start another on aspects of food policy. Every member on that committee has been struck by the extent to which land use is an issue in each of those policy areas. In some cases, those areas compete with one another. In the early conference that we held in Aviemore on rural housing, we heard clearly that, after world war two, the planning system was set up with the explicit intention of keeping land in food production. That, of course, was a direct consequence of the huge food supply problems that were experienced by the population from 1939 to 1945, when reliance on food imports had to be abandoned. In the context of making land available for housing, that inbuilt planning bias was seen as being an obstacle to be overcome. While that was being discussed, the committee was already taking evidence on flooding that indicated that we might end up paying farmers to allow controlled flooding on some of their fields, and that we should probably restrict some house-building sites to ensure that we are not building on flood plains. Meanwhile, we need to bear in mind the laudable aim of increasing the amount of forestry land from 17 per cent to 25 per cent. What is that land currently being used for? What must we stop doing with it if we are to start growing trees on it? Of course, if we take land out of food production in order to build houses, provide flood protection measures or grow trees, we might confront food security issues and food security has, in the past year, risen much higher on the political agenda. Maybe the post-war planners had it right after all. First and foremost, there is an urgent need for a clear and coherent land use strategy that sets out our priorities—I know that the Government has already committed itself to that. However, we must accept that not everything can be a priority: if everything is a priority, then nothing is a priority. Some important decisions will have to be made relatively soon about where the focus has to be.  What is particularly striking about hill farmers is the extent to which they are vital to the good management of rural Scotland. I am not sure that it is widely understood that farming activity is often central to environmental benefit, as it produces that benefit without making a big deal out of it. We have all received a briefing from RSPB Scotland that spells that out. It also makes important points about the way in which the LFASS is paid out, and says that not enough goes to the extremely disadvantaged areas. That needs to be considered further. Richard Lochhead has dealt with some of the specific issues around the LFASS. The reality of Scottish farming, with 85 per cent of the land falling within the less favoured area designation—although some of those areas are more less favoured than others, if I may be allowed to use a slightly awkward grammatical construction—means that continued support is vital. It is disturbing that the implications of an end to subsidies in 2013 do not appear to have occurred to the UK Government—I say that to try to be fair to the UK Government, because the alternative, which I would hate to think about, is that it has occurred to it, but it just does not care. I would prefer to assume that it had not noticed what it was doing. I hope that the Scottish Government maintains the pressure on this issue. However, I say to Sarah Boyack that places such as Ireland and Austria have an enormous benefit that Scotland does not have when they are negotiating their positions in Europe: they are independent and get to negotiate directly on behalf of their people and their farming industries. It is difficult to see how farming can continue in Scotland's marginal areas unless there is public subsidy. However, we have to be clear about what the priority for that subsidy is. Are we to pay farmers for producing food, first and foremost, or are farmers to be seen as small businesspeople who might or might not occasionally produce foodstuffs, but for whom that is not necessarily the main return for subsidy? I believe that it must be the former. Hugely competing demands are made of farmers, and all farmers in Scotland have to be clear about the principal reason for their existence. If we acknowledge that it is food production, then we have to subsidise it as such, and the other benefits must be seen as being additional, rather than core.

We have listened to many speeches about the glass being half full. In that regard, I note John Park's failure to tell us what his constituent thought about the small business bonus scheme. There is no doubt that she welcomed it and is using it to further her business.

How different Scotland looks, both to itself and to the wider world, in year 2 of our Administration. There is increased confidence, increased optimism and an increased sense of direction. I understand that not everyone buys into that sense of direction, but at least there is now a clear road map for Scotland. That situation compares starkly with the first eight years of devolution. To paraphrase Yeats, "All is changed, changed utterly"—although this time for the better. Given my position as convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, it would be remiss of me not to mention the three bills that will directly affect that committee's work. We are  promised a flood risk management bill and a marine bill, both of which will receive initial consideration by my committee. There is also the climate change bill, in which we will have a significant interest, even if we will not be the lead committee for stage 1 consideration. The committee has already done significant work in the area of flood risk management. Although the Government has not immediately adopted all our recommendations, I have no doubt that we will have lively and wholly constructive engagement with it on the legislative way forward. The marine bill will make great changes and take huge strides forward for Scotland's marine environment, and I look forward to its introduction. Of course, my interests are not confined to those of my committee. I am absolutely delighted that the Government is pressing ahead with plans to abolish the unfair council tax and to introduce a fairer local income tax that is based on the ability to pay. The challenge to Labour is about fairness. The challenge to the Liberal Democrats is for them to engage constructively with the Government on the issue. I say to my former sparring partner Mike Rumbles that "consensus" does not mean everyone simply agreeing with what he wants—although that is how he usually interprets it. Earlier in the debate, Murdo Fraser expressed his party's opposition to a local income tax, saying that organisation after organisation was lining up to attack it. Strangely, he made no mention of the hundreds and thousands of ordinary people who are lining up to support it—at the last count, it was 88 per cent of the population. Are their views to be set aside so easily? If that is the Tory way, it is little wonder that the Tories are sitting where they are in the opinion polls in Scotland. As they say in the north of England, the Tories should think on. That said, at least the Tories said where the money would come from for their alternative measures—through an attack on Scottish Water, which I fear would be done with an eye on breaking it up and flogging it off to the highest bidder. Plus ça change. I woke on Sunday morning to the strains of "Darling is a Charlie, a Charlie, a Charlie" emanating from the radio: either I was dreaming it or Radio Scotland was having a bit of a laugh. Either way, it is incredibly sad that the UK chancellor has become such a laughing stock. Many MSPs may not be aware that he also gave an interview to the Stornoway Gazette in which he said that his most important priority that day was to unblock a drain. Fair is fair, he was on his holidays, but if I were him I would be careful about using the word "drain" in any context, given that the words "down the" and "circling" come forcibly to mind. There is no magic touch at the moment at number 11 Downing Street.  Meanwhile, it is clear that Opposition members in the Scottish Parliament expect miracles from the SNP Government. According to the Opposition, a failure to implement our entire manifesto in year one is a manifest failure. Evidently, they had even higher expectations of Alex Salmond than we had, and that is saying something. We need only look at the turnaround in Scotland since Alex started waving his magic wand. However, what did we hear from Iain Gray? We heard talk of his "nagging doubts". I have a hint for Iain: when you spend 13 minutes and 14 seconds nagging, you should not be surprised when your audience switches off. Here is the truth that Iain and his colleagues hate to hear—

Scotland switched on last May: it switched on to the SNP, the SNP Government and a bright future for Scotland. I started with a quote and I will end with one. In an SNP Scotland: "All Shall Be Well; And All Shall Be Well; And All Manner of Things Shall Be Well."

Jim Tolson was not even at the committee meeting.

Will the member give way?

We all remember the images from England last year when very serious flooding took place in the middle of the summer. The devastation and distress were only too evident, and the consequences are still being felt by families and businesses throughout the flood-hit areas. In the Scottish context, with the floods in Elgin still relatively fresh, and given the certainty of new legislation on both flooding and climate change, the subject of the first inquiry of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee in the current session was the unanimous choice of the whole committee. I thank all those who have been involved in the committee's work, including the clerks, in particular Mark Roberts and my now departed clerk Andrew Mylne—who has departed to another job rather than departed Earth—and the researchers, in particular Tom Edwards. I also give a special mention to the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, Glasgow City Council and WWF Scotland, which organised a series of visits for committee members in November last year. The timing of the inquiry was unusual, in that it ran parallel to the Government's consultation on its legislative proposals, which ensured that there were a number of inbuilt challenges. I look forward to hearing from the Minister for Environment about the Government's intended direction of travel and, although I do not expect the normal detailed response to the inquiry, I nevertheless remind both the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment and the minister that the committee inquiry ranged further than what is intended for the legislation. I have just received the written response to our recommendations—unfortunately I have not had the opportunity to read through it, so I look forward to seeing the comments. The committee wished to ensure that its views were taken into account by the Government, so our timetable was very much governed by that requirement. I thank all the witnesses who gave of their time to the inquiry, especially those who  attended the meeting in Elgin. That was no doubt a welcome decision for the Moray-based witnesses, but it may have been less welcome for those who travelled from Glasgow and Edinburgh. The report is long and detailed, so it is impossible for me to cover its every aspect and recommendation, but I will highlight the most important areas that it covers. We began the inquiry against the backdrop of climate change. Our first evidence came from the Met Office. Professor John Mitchell told the committee that our past climate was no longer a safe guide to what might be expected in the future. He also gave us a stark warning that there is little point in trying to prevent flooding, and that we will instead have to become better at managing it. Much of the inquiry centred on such management. We heard evidence from the Met Office about the serious lack of high-resolution radar coverage of Scotland, despite such coverage being necessary for accurate flood warnings. Only 50 per cent of Scotland is covered, compared with 95 per cent coverage of England and Wales. That finding, which surprised and shocked all committee members, forms the basis for recommendation 21. The witnesses from the Met Office were also among the many witnesses who pointed to a serious shortage of hydrological expertise in Scotland. That skills issue clearly needs to be addressed. The committee believes that Government must be proactive on that front, which forms the basis for recommendation 5. As the evidence sessions progressed, it became clear to us that chief among the changes that we had to consider was the likelihood of an increase in pluvial flooding, in which drainage systems are simply overwhelmed by the amount of water with which they have to deal. Members might recall that the flooding in Hull and Sheffield arose from that very problem. Scottish Water witnesses were keen to point out that we simply cannot afford to keep building bigger and bigger drains and pumping stations to direct water away from settlements, and that we must instead either prevent or slow down the rate at which water enters drainage systems. Although many witnesses acknowledged the importance of that issue for the future, there was no agreement on where responsibility for directing such activity lies. The committee therefore took the view that the Government must set out a pathway and provide funding to ensure that the potential for pluvial flooding is mapped and addressed. As recommendation 2 makes clear, key to that would be Scottish Water's objectives giving greater priority to pluvial flood management.  Pluvial flooding was just one of the more strategic issues which we had to consider, but it soon became evident to the committee that time and space are also important. I realise that that might sound like something from an episode of "Doctor Who", but we discovered that we need to change both the temporal and spatial scale of our thinking on flooding. As a result of that consideration, witnesses overwhelmingly agreed that what is required is catchment-based management. That view is reflected in recommendation 14. To reflect our view that we need to think over a much longer timescale than we do at present, we have also suggested that there should be a 25-year strategy to guide prioritisation of investment in flood management. However, we must also look for clear criteria for prioritising funding of future flood management. There was also a significant debate about who should be involved in the strategic control of flood risk management and how that should be carried out. It is fair to say that on this there was no unanimity among witnesses. Essentially, the issue boils down to whether there should be a new strategic flooding agency—or, indeed, a tsar—or whether the responsibility should be imposed on SEPA. With no clear steer from witnesses, the committee deliberated on the matter and decided that, if we were to recommend the establishment of a new agency, we would in effect be reinventing the wheel—in this case, SEPA, which already exists. As a result, the committee concluded that SEPA's role should be expanded to encompass the strategic flood management role—which, of course, would have resource implications for the organisation. In our view, that did not mean that SEPA should have sole responsibility for the role, but that it should co-ordinate the large number of existing bodies, such as local authorities, that also have roles. The committee specifically does not see the model of the Environment Agency in England and Wales as being suitable for Scotland. There was throughout the inquiry also significant discussion about the merits of natural flood management techniques. It is fair to say that even the proponents of natural flood management do not argue that it should be the only weapon in our armoury. Given some members' bemusement over the issue at the start of the inquiry, we were grateful for the clear distinction that was drawn between sustainable flood management and natural flood management. The committee feels that further research is needed into the effectiveness of natural flood management; however, as recommendations 14 and 15 make clear, on balance we take the view that there should be a presumption in favour of natural flood management techniques. We feel that, although such techniques should not be mandatory, they  would have to be the first port of call when dealing with flood management and justification would have to be given to depart from them. That said, it is not expected that that would mean an end to hard solutions, which would still have a role to play. Equally, it became clear to the committee that flood management is not just about flood plans per se; the planning system, building regulations and land use all have parts to play. We have therefore made a number of recommendations, the more important of which refer to the planning system. IN that respect, we commend the approach taken by Dumfries and Galloway Council, which has compared its strategic plan with its flood risk plan to ensure that the two are compatible. However, the committee has gone further in suggesting in recommendation 18 that full flood risk assessments should be a prerequisite for planning permission for developments in areas at risk of flooding. That said, Scotland—and, indeed, the Government—should take some comfort from the fact that the insurance industry already regards the Scottish approach to flood management as being better than that which is taken in England and Wales. The Government might wish to build on that by persuading insurers to reflect that belief in their premiums, which is not something that they do at the moment. Finally, I turn to an area that was covered by our inquiry but which will not be dealt with in the proposed bill—the system of flood warnings and the emergency response to the devastation that we see in the aftermath of flooding. Although that is an area in which constant updating is probably required, it is clear from evidence that the present arrangements are widely viewed as being unsatisfactory. The Government must address that situation, even if the anticipated bill is not the right vehicle for doing so. There needs to be greater emphasis on dissemination of flood warnings. Witnesses made it clear to us that in many cases messages are simply not getting through. Flood victims in Elgin, in particular, provided compelling testament about the extent to which they were unprepared for what happened. Committee members were surprised that it seemed almost that there were parallel but unofficial warning systems in place, the most effective of which was the anecdotal evidence that was received by businesses such as those in Elgin that had a great deal to lose if they were caught unprepared. The fact that those businesses relied on unofficial warning systems because the official warning systems were simply not fit for purpose is a big indictment of the present arrangements. It seems to be extraordinary that phoning the farmer up the road is a more effective way of managing a potential flood than is relying on official warning systems. Our report makes a number of  recommendations in that general area, and I hope that the minister will take them under advisement separately, even if they do not form part of the upcoming bill. In one particular regard, the recommendations must be considered, if only out of a sense of fairness. Time and again, witnesses told us that individual home owners had to take responsibility for taking steps to protect their properties. We heard that from the insurers, the police and others. When they were questioned about what information their bodies give to home owners to inform them of what steps could be taken, the witnesses all fell silent. That is not good enough: if we are to demand individual responsibility, we must give people the information and wherewithal to help them fulfil that responsibility. In that regard, I direct the cabinet secretary's attention to recommendation 24, and I look forward to hearing his response—he might have to pass the matter on to another minister. I commend the report to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's 2nd Report, 2008 (Session 3): Flooding and Flood Management (SP Paper 96).

Is the member now speaking for the Labour Party in its centre-right mode?

Just exactly what size of business does the member think that he is talking about when he talks about fleets of cars? Most of the businesses benefiting from the scheme are tiny—one person, or two people at most.

I have looked forward to the debate for some time, and not just because I, too, can declare as an interest the fact that my constituency office is saving money, which will support the employment of another person—yes, another new job is being created. There is no doubt in my mind that in a few years the small business bonus scheme will be seen to have had a hugely positive effect on towns, villages and local shopping areas around Scotland—the benefits are already visible in my constituency—and I am sure that we will come back to it before 2011. Business rates for small businesses have been slashed. I am sure that there is not a single MSP who will not be able to point to small businesses in their areas that have experienced a major boost to their income and expenditure figures. I challenge members who are lukewarm about the policy—Labour members appear to be even more negative than that—to express their faint praise to those small businesses for whom it has been a lifeline. I would be happy to provide John Park with numerous examples of such businesses in my constituency, every one of which I am sure would be glad to speak to him about what a great boon they consider the small business bonus scheme to have been. Is it enough? In truth, no amount of money will ever be enough—we know that. Arguments can always be made for the provision of more money, and I expect that more than one of us have received letters and e-mails from businesses that do not qualify for the scheme, in which they express their disappointment at being left out. However, we must start somewhere, and it does seem right that we have started with very small businesses. I have to pinch myself when I hear what some members say because, make no mistake, we are not talking about huge businesses. The businesses in question are tiny; most likely, they involve one self-employed person, who perhaps has one or two employees, who will probably be family members. When we support such "businesses"—that seems a very grand word to  use for some of them—we are supporting families and keeping people away from the dole queue. Just as important, we are contributing to the survival of some of our smallest and most marginal communities. How on earth can any of that be wrong? The removal of one big bill from the annual expenditures of such microbusinesses shows that this Government means business when it says that it wants to foster a can-do atmosphere in Scotland. For once, business leaders are in agreement about a Government policy. The FSB—the voice of small businesses—has been unequivocal in its support and has made helpful suggestions about how the policy can be made even more effective. I commend to the minister the various points that it has made about the dissemination of information and the possibility of retrospective claims; the minister has already conceded an independent assessment. These are very difficult times for businesses of any kind. Fuel costs are rising, so prices are rising, too. Households are beginning to cut back on discretionary spending. I am in no doubt about the fact that the scheme's existence this year will have kept open some businesses that would otherwise have had to shut their doors. The cost to society of such business closures is far greater than the immediate effect might suggest. Job losses, even on a small scale, add up across the country. Business closures mean loss of family income and the possibility of debt and worse. Preventing that represents a major contribution to the health of Scotland. Small businesses in England and Wales have made it clear that they would give their eye teeth for the same scheme to be applied in their countries. More than 5,000 businesses in Perth and Kinross have a rateable value of less than £8,000. In 2009-10 alone, they will save, on average, £1,360. Another 900 or so businesses will save an average of between £1,340 and £1,870. That is a lot of money in just one area of Scotland. Someone said that it almost does not matter what that money is spent on, because it will be spent in the community in some way, shape or form. It is not just figures on paper: it is real people behind real counters with real shop fronts on real high streets. It is not just high streets, though; down the side streets of Perth members will meet new shop owners who will openly tell them what a difference the scheme has made to their first-year projections. I can tell the Lib Dems that one shop owner is married to a former Lib Dem official who is equally effusive about the policy. It is not just shops; it is also the tradesmen who can stay on in their premises, or move into premises out of their vans or take on extra help when they need it. Even in the current climate,  new businesses are opening in small towns such as Crieff and Auchterarder and are already making a difference to them. I have no doubt that a factor in their calculations was the removal of the huge rates burden that they would otherwise have had to bear. Existing businesses that have benefited in the same towns might otherwise have struggled to cope with the current situation. In my home town of Crieff, I see with my own eyes the change in the shopping streets as small business after small business opens its doors. Let the doomsayers croak on; the truth is that I could introduce them to any number of people who would tell them how welcome and important the scheme is and what it says about a Government that is determined to encourage business with all the tools at its disposal. Would that we had the tools that would allow us to make a difference to much bigger businesses.

I will not rehearse the crime statistics. Everyone knows that the figures are high and getting higher and that they probably still do not cover all the wildlife crime that takes place. From the responses to a series of questions that I asked on the subject in 2006, it became clear that there has been no nationally accepted system of recording wildlife and environmental crime—I raised the issue in the debate in October 2007. I have searched the recommendations of the joint review and I am not sure that a standardised reporting system has been specifically addressed. Perhaps the minister can comment on the matter in his closing speech. I hope that my concern is misplaced but, if such a national system is not among the recommendations, I feel strongly that it should be part of any future wildlife crime reduction strategy, because if we do not have a true picture of the problem it will be impossible to know if any strategy is working. Another concern is that there does not seem to have been any national plan to reduce wildlife crime and, even locally, only a few areas seem to have taken such crime seriously. I am glad that Tayside is one of those areas and I take the opportunity to pay tribute to Alan Stewart, the former police inspector who is now Tayside Police's full-time civilian wildlife and environment officer. He was the first wildlife liaison officer in  Scotland when he was appointed by Tayside Police in 1993. Reaching right back into his police career, he has been proactively involved in pursuing wildlife crime since the 1960s. Although he is perhaps not single-handedly responsible for Tayside's long-standing good practice, he must share much of the credit. No one denies the extent of the difficulty presented by this area of criminal behaviour. I have commented on the previous lack of a national wildlife crime reduction plan, but we have to acknowledge that it is impossible to police vast tracts of our rural landscape and that, even if we ascertain that a crime has been committed, evidence gathering is difficult. Short of a countryside-wide network of rural closed-circuit television cameras to help in the investigation of wildlife crime—believe me, I have contemplated that—there will always be a problem gathering the evidence that is required to achieve a successful prosecution. It is therefore vital to encourage communities and individuals to play their part in reporting suspicious behaviour. I wonder how that will be achieved, because it is essential. The authors of the review disclose a distressing failure to treat this area of crime seriously. That is fundamental, because if the police do not gather sufficient intelligence, do not take proper notice of the intelligence that they get or if they delay investigation, it will be harder to uncover the information that is required. I am not sure how it will be possible to persuade all police forces that the approach taken by both Grampian Police and Tayside Police is a model that they should follow, but that should be done—I hope that the minister can indicate how. Intelligence and evidence gathering to the extent that perpetrators can be identified, charged and prosecuted is one side of the deterrence equation. The other side is the disposal, assuming a verdict of guilty, which is where the evidence is important. The report is rather kind to the courts when it deals with that aspect of the debate. I am not sure that most people would agree that the disposals always fit the crime. There certainly seems little to suggest that the fines that are handed out in most cases are much of a deterrent. I hope that that aspect of the issue will continue to be monitored. After all, the biggest predator in our countryside might be said to be the two-legged, wingless poisoner. No one would mourn the eradication of that species.

Does the minister feel that the CPA Scotland branch has a role to play in the external affairs aspect of her brief? If the answer is yes, will she elaborate on which areas and by which mechanisms she believes that that role could be taken forward?

At the outset, I should make a brief declaration of interests. In my former life as an advocate, I acted in a number of crofting cases. If I have time, I will mention one of them. One or two people have already said that crofting is more than just a unique form of land tenure: its very distinctiveness makes it a vital part of Scotland's cultural heritage. For that reason alone, no one would want it to disappear into history; for that reason alone, it is worth cherishing. It is ironic, given the scale of some of the problems that we now face—Tavish Scott mentioned some of them—that a very old form of tenure may turn out to be well adapted to the modern era. I have quickly read through the Shucksmith report, and I thank the committee of inquiry on crofting for delivering a report that will help to mark out a new future for crofting in Scotland. The recommendations on a new form of governance are interesting, and almost mirror what has been happening in some parts of Scotland as a result of crofters collectively exercising their right to buy under the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003. It may be accidental, but it looks as if successful community buy-outs have helped to define a path that we can now follow. I wonder whether the minister will comment on that observation when he closes the debate. Winding up the Crofters Commission may be controversial in some quarters, but the intention is to return control to more locally based groups. My one caveat is that I am not sure how that sits with the plan to vastly reduce the number of quangos. I am not sure whether each of the new crofting boards will be a quango, but the local democracy issue that is embedded in the proposals is interesting. Other parts of rural Scotland may begin to look with envy on that local democracy.  The governance section of the report mentions setting up a crofting and community development body, ideally within Highlands and Islands Enterprise. I have no argument with that in theory, but it rather begs another question about the future: could crofting tenure be made available in a much bigger area of Scotland? The minister has initiated a consultation on proposals to extend crofting areas beyond the currently designated crofting counties, but it seems tied to the Highlands and Islands. Would there be some merit in making crofting tenure available even further afield? Why should not other parts of rural Scotland benefit from crofting tenure? Indeed, why should Perthshire be excluded? Tying the new development body too tightly to HIE would seem to preclude such an extension from the outset. Crofting has a huge impact on two big areas of concern—housing and food production. I am pleased that the report acknowledges that absentee crofters have the same impact on the availability of local housing as any other second home owners. I am pleased that the report acknowledges that. Last week, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, of which I am convener, visited Kinloch Rannoch, Blair Atholl, Ballinluig and other places in northern Perthshire in furtherance of its inquiry into affordable rural housing. The issue of extending crofting tenancy areas was raised then, so my earlier comments may find some support in wider areas than people might immediately imagine. We met the managers of Atholl Estates, which by most standards is a well-run estate and does a great deal to help to create affordable local housing, but not all estates are as enlightened. It would be helpful to find ways of encouraging those other estates to become so. Extending crofting tenancy areas would greatly encourage that. I am particularly interested in the impact of the right to buy on the availability of croft housing. The problem is that, too often, the right to buy is exercised by those who are not interested in working the croft. When it is swiftly followed by an application to decroft, it means that yet another house is lost, as is the use of the land. I have to make a confession. There is a widely discussed judgment in crofting circles called the Kinlochewe judgment, in which a loophole was spotted in the crofting legislation and lawyers proceeded to push that door wide open. I was the advocate who argued in favour of the judgment, so I am partly responsible for the exploitation of the loophole. There is some irony now in my arguing for that loophole to be closed. I echo Sarah Boyack's note of caution about legislating with time and care, because if we legislate and leave loopholes, lawyers will spot them and exploit them. However, I am heartened  that the problem is recognised in the report, with the recommendation that the local crofting board should have the power to suspend a tenant's right to buy in certain circumstances. That is controversial, but it is important that we discuss it. Crofting is germane to all debates that we have on food policy and food security, so it would be helpful to have some way of designating croft-produced food so that those of us who would seek it out and choose it have the opportunity to do so. On that point, I am particularly struck by how much crofting fits in with the cittaslow ideals, of which I am a great proponent, as is the minister. Cittaslow could have been designed to include crofting townships. I hope that in future it will.

I, too, congratulate Chris Harvie on securing the first debate since the end of 2004 that is directly on supermarkets. I also congratulate Patrick Harvie,  because what he said suggests that he is perhaps the only member who never shops in a supermarket. I guess that that is what he implied.

I thank the member. I made that point to echo Christine Grahame's point about hypocrisy and how careful we have to be. The truth of the matter is that I would be surprised if anyone who is elected to the Parliament does not shop in the supermarket at some point. Some will do so more than others, but we all find ourselves there and, mostly, we will continue to do so. There are very good reasons for that. By the time people get home at night, nothing else is open—the supermarket is the only place that they can go to easily and quickly to get all the shopping done. That is why supermarkets have become so popular. We should not stop shopping in our local high streets and farmers markets. I recall seeing a figure—I wish that I had kept it because I have never been able to find it again—that showed that if we all made just one purchase a week in our local shops, that would be sufficient to ensure their economic health into the future. We should look very closely at that. A number of the briefings that we have received refer to the wider benefits of shopping locally. It is not just about the shop local idea; there are social, environmental and health benefits, some of which members have mentioned. That package of benefits adds up to a potential cultural shift: if we shop locally, we could reverse the wholesale cultural shift towards supermarkets that we must accept has taken place. Shopping locally would provide a more even balance. I want to mention two or three specific issues that need to be considered if we are to start to shift the balance back. First, as Helen Eadie mentioned, we have to tackle the unequal relationship between the multiples and local suppliers. There is no doubt that we will have to get in there and do something if we are to make that relationship more useful for local suppliers and prevent the multiples from bringing huge pressures to bear on them. One of my bugbears is that we must achieve a level playing field between the multiples, which offer free parking, and the town centre, which does not. It is not rocket science to work out where folk will go if they have to drive around the town centre to find a parking space that they then have to pay for, as opposed to nipping up to the free car park  outside the supermarket. That needs to be considered. We also need to build on the small business support that has already been put in place, and which is already making a visible difference in rural towns—it is certainly making a difference in Crieff. Such incentives could be put in place to help small shops. However, we also need to challenge some of the small retailers to think about how they deliver what they offer so that they can balance out the primacy of the supermarkets. I am lucky to live in Crieff, where we have two very good delicatessens on the High Street, both of which feature in "Scotland the Best". There are loads of other independent shops that sell not only food but fashion and other non-food items. That is all in a town that already has one largish supermarket and a smaller branch of another multiple. Crieff High Street is hanging on. However, another big supermarket row is developing, with two of the big multiples going head to head. That has not yet been resolved, so whether Crieff High Street will continue to hang on is another matter. The truth is that it is up to each of us to use our purchasing power to make the difference. We should start with our individual commitments today. We should all be a lot less hypocritical about some of these debates, too.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take to implement the recommendations of the Sutherland review of free personal care. (S3F-739)

Does the Deputy First Minister recall the Health Committee's care inquiry in 2006, the recommendations of which have mostly been echoed by the recent Sutherland review? Does she agree that the previous Executive missed a huge opportunity to tackle some of the problems that were already being experienced at that time? I welcome the Deputy First Minister's comments on the attendance allowance. Will she now take the issue forward in company with all those who support the return of those moneys, including Lord Sutherland, Henry McLeish and local authorities? That would be welcomed by many, including Labour Party members—even if some of them will not admit that.

At the first Rural Affairs and Environment Committee away day last summer, we discussed, among other matters, the possibility of a food policy inquiry. At the time, it was felt that there was little urgency and that we should get on with more pressing matters. Mike Rumbles was involved in those discussions and I do not recall him arguing differently at the time—he has clearly developed a degree of hindsight. That fact makes his contribution to the debate even more inappropriate—we have all had to learn about this subject. Fast forward to March 2008 and the UK Government's new chief scientific adviser warned us that a food crisis will take hold before climate change. We seem to be in a whole new world of trouble. There has been no escaping the recent news stories linked to problems with the food supply. Governments are now threatened, which in turn threatens regional and global stability. Hardship is being experienced in much of the developed world, and even on our own doorstep people are beginning to remark on the frequency with which food prices are rising and the effect that that has on the choices that they make. The issue poses a huge challenge to us all. If the escalating cost of rice has forced a number of countries to limit their exports of that grain, we know that in the near future we, too, will all be paying a great deal more if rice is what we want to eat. I take on board the points made by Robin Harper about that. We need to address many key issues; I will flag up three of them. The first is biofuels, which a number of members have mentioned. Last year's next best thing is rapidly turning into this year's nightmare as we contemplate the wholesale switch from food production to fuel production to reduce our reliance on oil—a switch that has led directly to food shortages and higher food prices.  To paraphrase one commentator, who has been quoted already, we are now taking out of the mouths of babies in order to keep our cars on the road. There is no finger of blame here: everyone bought into the biofuel idea. We all thought that it was a great idea, but we had not thought through the consequences of an unregulated market and we now know better. We will have to address the problem before even more tracts of good land are put to that use. What do they say about the road to hell? It is time to rethink the targets and what we consider to be a good biofuel and what we do not. The second topic I will discuss is land use. At a Rural Affairs and Environment Committee-run event on housing last year, I listened to people who knew something about the history of the planning system and understood clearly for the first time that much of it was drawn up in the aftermath of world war two, when food rationing was still in force and there was a strong desire to ensure that agricultural land stayed in agricultural use. It became a mantra that one of the obstacles to house building was that we could not get more land rezoned for housing. However, here we are potentially facing some of the same food security issues that had to be addressed post war, so who now would argue too strongly for removing land from food production? Instead, we should think about increasing domestic food production and how that knocks on to building the number of houses that we need in Scotland. It also has implications for the future of flood management, as we have discussed in the committee. My third point is about food sufficiency, which Peter Peacock touched on. We will never be self-sufficient in bananas in Scotland, but can we be self-sufficient in some basic foodstuffs? As boring as that might be to contemplate, there may now be an argument for Government establishing levels of food sufficiency and working towards achieving them if that goal has not already been achieved. It seems appropriate to raise the fact that Perth, in my constituency, is Scotland's first cittaslow town, and is now being joined by Linlithgow. All MSPs should encourage that movement in their own towns and villages, and I hope that they will.

The cabinet secretary is aware of my concerns about vulnerable witnesses, following a recently reported case in my constituency. I wrote to him about that and I thank him for his response, which I received just today. Does he agree that a further issue to tackle is the plea-in-mitigation aspects of cases that involve vulnerable witnesses and complainers when a plea of guilty has been made and therefore no trial has been held? In such circumstances, few controls appear to apply to comments that might be made, however adverse they are.

Is the First Minister as surprised as I am that the Foreign Office apparently expects that Scottish taxpayers should pick up the policing costs for the 2005 G8 summit, which was held in my constituency? The bill is for £600,000. Does the First Minister agree that the outgoing Executive should have made a far better job of protecting Scotland's interests, and can he now do anything to ensure that, whatever happens, policing in Tayside is not adversely affected as a result of that bill?

It is customary at members' business debates to congratulate the member concerned on obtaining the debate, but, although Jeremy Purvis's persistence can definitely be acknowledged, I wonder at what point he will recognise that there is simply no enthusiasm in the Parliament for what he wants to do. That is surely borne out by the fact that his motion gained only one signature. As vice-convener of the cross-party group on palliative care—I see that the convener, Michael McMahon, is here as well—my interests lie in a diametrically opposed direction. I seek an expansion of palliative care and an extension of the hospice movement, not the introduction of something that would have the opposite effect. I hope that medical science will increasingly allow us to ease the last few days, weeks, months or years of our lives, whatever the reason for our final breath. Nor do I expect heroic efforts always to be undertaken by doctors. Sometimes it is right that people be allowed to refuse further and perhaps painful and pointless interventions that will be effective for only a little time, but standing back and letting nature take its course is not the same as intervening deliberately to help nature along. I said that palliative care is diametrically opposed to what Jeremy Purvis proposes, but I go further. What he proposes would have a detrimental effect on palliative care. I do not accuse him of malign intent. I am certain that he acts from the best of intentions, but he is profoundly mistaken, because with the best will in the world, his idea, if implemented, would lead us down a dangerous road. The experience in other countries has been by no means as positive as has been presented. In the Netherlands, the law has been used to demand an extension of euthanasia for those in extreme mental distress. Involuntary euthanasia has also been practiced there. I think we used to  call that murder, actually. The Dutch guidelines have been almost unenforceable and constantly contravened. One Dutch study discovered that more than 50 per cent of Dutch doctors had actually suggested euthanasia to their patients and a staggering 25 per cent owned up to ending patients' lives without their consent. Brave new world, indeed.

I do not know whether such figures exist. If they do, it would be interesting to have them. When the law is changed, the position changes from being exceptional to being routine, and both palliative and hospice care begin to lag behind. Why bother, after all, if we are ending the lives of those who might benefit from that care? Oregon has fared little better—I acknowledge that Jeremy Purvis is trying to fix one of the deficiencies in the Oregon experience by confining his intentions to people who are coming to the very end of terminal illness, but palliative care has been compromised there and that is a consistent pattern. Members will all have received the British Medical Association's briefing for this debate—the BMA's position is implacable, and rightly so. However much sympathy we may have for those who are dying and wish to hasten their own end, they do not have the right to demand that other parties be implicated in that process.

We can trade studies, and I have seen studies that suggest that the situation in Oregon is by no means as positive as the member suggests. The profoundly destructive nature of the change in the law for the relationship with all medical staff cannot be overstated. There have been a massive number of opt-outs for conscience reasons, followed by a decision that those with serious concerns should stay out of those branches of medicine in which it will become an issue. There are practical reasons for not going down that road, but ultimately there is another, higher reason: it is plain wrong in itself, morally and ethically. For goodness' sake, let us concentrate  on alleviating pain and suffering to ease death, not to bring about death as the member advocates.

I am encouraged by the task force's straightforward assertion that there could be a 50 per cent increase in post mortem organ donation in the United Kingdom—and presumably Scotland—within five years. It flags up current barriers to that—barriers that need to be addressed. I endorse all of Mary Scanlon's examples of the current unfortunate reality that we have to work in. It is a reality that is failing.  We all know the benefits of organ transplants—nobody denies them. A total of 15 million people in the UK are aware enough of those benefits to be on the organ donation register. However, according to the task force, 40 per cent of relatives withhold consent. It is extremely important for us to understand why that happens. I do not have the answer, but it is not enough to say the figure is too high without asking the serious question of how that figure comes about. Is it a trust issue, for example? If it is, we may be better advised to address that than to attempt to sidestep family opposition. Indeed, the task force report suggests that even in the present scenario, various legal and ethical questions do not seem to have been resolved, for example the doctors' role: one to argue for the potential donor, and presumably another to argue for the potential donee. Paragraph 1.23 of the report envisages a change in health board culture, "with timely consultation of the NHS Organ Donor Register". I can envisage "timely" taking on rather a different meaning for the clinicians than for the about-to-be-grieving families. We are already getting into the kind of emotional difficulties that bedevil the issue. I note also in paragraph 1.26 the professional concerns about so-called clinical triggers—referred to by Ian McKee—that would presumably drive the timely consultation of the register. Would it be expected that the family had been notified when those two activities were taking place? Recommendation 6 says that "Donation activity should be monitored" and rates reported, and that those reports "should be part of the assessment of Trusts"— presumably it means the boards. What happens if a board fails? Does it mean pressure on the board? Where and to whom is the pressure to be transmitted? Those are questions that need to be considered. We have heard that an increased availability of organs will not necessarily increase the rate of transplants, but I welcome the task force report and hope that there are answers to some of the questions. In the main, I want the recommendations to be implemented. I was particularly interested in what the task force said in paragraph 1.44, on "Honouring the gift of donation". In a sense, that is key to everything, and it raises two issues. The first is that organ donation is a gift, and the only real meaning of the word "gift" is something that is freely given. My right to give that gift cannot be turned into another's right to demand my organs. Secondly, the private nature of donation means that the family of the deceased see no public recognition of  that gift—a recognition that would acknowledge their grief as well as the benefit to someone else. I am sure that implementation of the report's recommendation on that would be extremely welcome. I hope that improvements in the way that we do things will be implemented on the back of the task force's report and allowed to bed in to give us a better sense of the true need to make further changes. Given that most organs become available after road traffic accidents, we must ensure that apparent success rates elsewhere are not, in part, a result of higher accident rates, as has already been suggested. Regardless of how we might individually feel about presumed consent—or however we want to describe it—can we at least find out why 40 per cent of families currently do not agree to transplants despite the apparent 90-odd per cent approval for organ donation? The fact is that there are very different actual donation rates from country to country, even countries where presumed consent has been implemented. That suggests to me that something else is going on—something more fundamental and cultural—that should be addressed first. The task force's key approach is surely the right one: to change the culture. The soft consent system that is in place in Spain still gives families the final say, and if we introduced it in Scotland but still had 40 per cent of families saying no, we would not be much further forward, so we need to address that issue. Contrary to Ian McKee's point, any issue that results in Mike Rumbles and me being on the same side is worthy of consideration. On a slightly more cynical point, I must ask what sums of money have been spent on promoting and publicising organ donation over the past 10 or 20 years. I suspect that they are pitifully small in comparison with the benefits that are to be gained. In those circumstances, what is the likelihood that any more—or even as much—would be spent on a consistent and continuing campaign to publicise an opt-out system? It is vanishingly small, I would say. If we do not want to spend much on promoting the benefits, how likely are we to spend on a campaign to, as some describe it, do the opposite? I welcome the campaign that has been announced today, but we have had few of them over the past 20 years. Nowhere in any of the literature do I read of the campaigns that must, surely, exist in other countries for precisely this purpose. Is the real truth that most people will be presumed to know and that little money is ever spent presenting them with the options at all? Those are all serious issues that need to be addressed before we take the matter any further.

Before I ask my question, I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, for my mobile phone inadvertently going off. I genuinely thought that I had switched it off before I came into the chamber. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Perth College regarding its future. (S3O-2165)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the Ministry of Defence's decision to sell off the Defence Aviation Repair Agency facility at Almondbank. She may not be aware of the MOD's consistent commitment to providing apprenticeship places, which are important for Perth College. Will she undertake discussions with Vector Aerospace, which will be the new owner, to ensure the continuation of that apprenticeship programme? It has been an astounding success and is integral to a healthy future for Perth College, which is, of course, also part of the UHI Millennium Institute's bid for university status.

The First Minister is aware that the Ministry of Defence this week gave the green light to the sale of both the Defence Aviation Repair Agency at Almondbank—which employs 350 people in my constituency—and DARA Fleetlands to the small Canadian company, Vector Aerospace, for only £17 million. Is the First Minister aware that, less than five years ago, £5 million was invested in Almondbank alone, making the £17 million purchase price look like a bargain-basement  price? Will he and his Government join me in supporting the joint trade unions in their continued efforts to ensure the future security of their members' jobs? What can he do to help in those efforts?

I apologise in advance for needing to leave the chamber before the end of the debate, which I congratulate Liz Smith on securing. She has provided a welcome reminder of how useful it is that many members bring extensive expertise to the Parliament's business. I am sure that everyone will agree on the importance of extra-curricular activities in providing the rounded education that our children need and the health benefits that come from being out of doors. The motion mentions the community awareness  project that is run by Crieff high school in my constituency, in the town in which I live. I am delighted to have the opportunity to echo Liz Smith's praise for the people behind the project—which is essentially about building links between school and community—and, in particular, the young people who are making it a success. I am confident that the community of Crieff will respond to the pupils' efforts and I look forward to more local businesses getting involved in helping the project. As I have mentioned the extra-curricular activities of Crieff high school, I am sure that other members will agree that now is an appropriate time to pay tribute to the actions of the three young Crieff pupils on a school skiing trip in the French Alps who saved the life of their ski instructor when he was involved in a fall. Fifth-year pupils Jamie Henry, Bruce Coull and Alex Wilson showed great composure and resourcefulness after their instructor was injured. They are a credit to their families, their school and their town. Without their actions, the situation could have become much more serious. Given that young people are often vilified in the public domain, we should remember young people such as those three boys. Crieff high school is not unique, of course. The dedication of teachers means that most schools will provide a range of outdoor extra-curricular activities that allow pupils to engage positively with local and global communities. For example, David Gardner and Mari Evans, two senior pupils at St Columba's high school in Perth, have recently returned from India, where they visited the Association of People with Disability in Bangalore. Pupils from St Columba's were chosen to participate in the trip because of the school's years of continued support for that project, for which it has raised more than £30,000. The community school of Auchterarder has been designated as an integrated community school, which means that it aims, through partnership with a variety of agencies, to achieve closer involvement with local communities and to provide precisely the more co-ordinated and holistic approach that Liz Smith talked about. I should also mention that Perth high school has been taking part in the John Muir awards scheme, the slogan of which is, "Discover, Explore, Conserve, Share". Nothing as exciting as that was ever available to me when I was at high school. Far too often, the image that we have of our young folk is of a disenchanted, disengaged youth who hangs around the streets smoking and drinking and causing nuisance and vandalism. The truth is far from that stereotype. We tend of necessity to concentrate on the things that are wrong, because we are concerned  with trying to fix them and put them right. Unfortunately, such a focus can sometimes mask the fact that by far the vast majority of our young people are extremely decent, conscientious and concerned human beings who are determined to be useful members of society. Indeed, we have seen some examples already this afternoon.

In this debate, it is assumed that the arguments in favour of change are so self-evident that any reasonable  person would agree with them, so there is a danger that this important issue will not be debated properly. For that reason, I congratulate George Foulkes on bringing the matter to Parliament, at a more civilised time of the day and in a more civilised forum than those to which he may have been accustomed in the place where both of us formerly served. I have made the opposite journey from George Foulkes. For most of my adult life, I supported a switch to presumed consent. Like many people, I believe, I did so on an easy and superficial level. However, my support for presumed consent did not survive a full debate on the subject that I attended about 10 years ago. I went into the debate a supporter of presumed consent and came out an opponent. I concede that the proposal is superficially attractive and I understand why people are drawn to it: it is a big hit, it costs but little and it looks like we can argue that there are winners all round. My response to that suggestion is, "Maybe—up to a point, m'lud.' It is interesting that on the two occasions when health committees of Parliament have considered the issue, they have not agreed to the introduction of presumed consent. I was involved in the second set of deliberations, in the context of consideration of the Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill in 2005 and 2006. Why did the Health Committee not agree to the introduction of presumed consent, and why am I opposed to it? The principal reason is that it turns consent on its head. Consent should be a positive decision. We expect that to be the case in all our human endeavours, from criminal law right down to the tiny print that requires us to opt out of junk mail if we do not want to receive it. We are always annoyed when, because of a requirement to opt out, we end up with stuff cascading through our letterboxes. A gift is not a gift if we attach the word "presumed" to it. The proposal turns on its head the notion of organ donation as a gift. Presumed consent has a chequered history. That is one of the reasons why the Health Committee took the view that it did when it considered the issue. The Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill arose in part out of the Alder Hey disaster. We need to remember the distress that people felt at that time, which arose directly from presumed consent. On those occasions, doctors presumed without bothering to ask. A presumption was made. The end is laudable, but ends do not justify the use of just any means. Huge issues of trust are involved, and the proposal does not address the issue of hard versus soft presumed consent or the enormous differences between the two. I do not have a problem with organ donation. I have signed the organ donor register many times.  Whenever the card wore out, I got a new card, and it is great that the register is now online. However, I will be dead at the point when the decision has to be made, so I am concerned more about the grieving families that are left behind. At that point, it ceases to be about me. It is about the people I leave behind. What would I do? I would have to think hard about it. I am happy to have my organs donated, but I am not happy for my family to be put under pressure at that point. The matter needs to be considered extremely carefully. There is also a big practical issue. What incentive will there ever be to publicise an opt-out register? We can barely spend money to publicise the opt-in register that we have at present. There would be no incentive to bring an opt-out register to people's attention. I suspect that the first many people would hear about it would be in hospital at a time when they were least able to handle it.

The minister mentioned red squirrels and salmon. I am sorry that he did not mention the Scottish wildcat,  which he knows is under enormous threat. Would he care to comment on the state and future of that species, whose loss would be devastating for Scotland? I ask him to do that without making cheeky remarks.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that a great deal of domestic waste emanates from the contents of our supermarket shopping—and not just from carrier bags and food waste, whether compostable or otherwise? The cabinet secretary sets targets for the reduction and prevention of waste but, short of dumping excess packaging on the supermarket floor to avoid it being added to our own household waste, will he indicate how he will bring about the  changes that will be required if we are to make a substantial difference to that aspect of the waste mountain and if we are to meet the increased need for recycling facilities?

I congratulate John Swinney on being at the centre of yet another historic occasion. I cannot think of anybody whom I would rather see in that situation. As anticipated, the Government's first budget is controversial—it was unlikely to be otherwise. In response to Tom McCabe, I say that, in my experience, there is never enough money and nobody ever feels that they have been given everything that they need. That has never changed and I suspect that it never will, so we need to understand and accept it. After listening carefully to Tavish Scott's speech, I suspect strongly that the Liberal Democrats are going to pluck up every single ounce of their courage and abstain in the vote on the motion. I strongly welcome many items in the budget, and they must not be put in jeopardy, because the budget delivers a lot. It delivers a reduction in prescription charges, moving towards their abolition, which the Health Committee voted in favour of in respect of a member's bill in the previous session of Parliament. That will make a big difference to some very low-paid people who struggle massively with health issues as a result of the current regime. The budget will also increase free personal care funding for the first time since the policy was introduced, bringing an end to the standstill funding that the Health Committee in the previous session also identified as an issue, because people who receive free personal care comprise some of the most vulnerable, weak and needy. The budget will put more money into housing, which is particularly important for the whole of Scotland. There will be another dental school in  Aberdeen—we have all been talking about that for years, but now, for the first time, it is actually going to happen. We are abolishing the graduate endowment fee—and frankly, I do not get people writing to me saying what an outrage it is that we are going to abolish it; I get people writing to me wanting to know if we can backdate the abolition by a number of years. I am sure that the cabinet secretary would want to consider that, although I suspect that it will not happen, because the reality is that decisions have to be made, and they are not always easy. We have talked this afternoon about the cuts in business rates as if we were talking about big business, but we are not. The businesses that are affected are the little one and two-person jobs in the high street and the local towns and streets throughout Scotland—the very people who are struggling to keep their heads above water and who, if they go under, will cost the state far more than they will through this small reduction in business rates. The council tax freeze is probably the single most popular policy that we have talked about over the past year, and it will be even more popular when we move from it to a local income tax. We can argue about police numbers, but more police are more police, regardless of how many more we are talking about, and in any case, it is more than the Labour Party was offering. I have a particular interest in rural affairs and the environment, as convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. It is not one of the big-spending areas, and a considerable percentage of the rural affairs and environment spend is pre-committed, so there is little flexibility. However, within that there is money for flood defences and investment in forestry, with a pretty ambitious commitment to increase the area of Scotland that is forested.

I am going to allow interventions, but I want to ensure that I will be able to get through what I have to say. I know that the waste issue has created some concern. There is money in the budget for recycling initiatives and moves towards zero-waste growth, and there is a change in terms of the strategic waste fund. It is interesting to note that the Howat report identified waste as one of the major areas within the rural affairs and environment budget that has potential for savings. I find it fascinating that, although that was identified in the Howat report, which was commissioned all those years ago by the previous Government, when this Government considers it the Labour Party objects strongly. The truth of the  matter is that if we do what the Labour Party wants us to do, it will cost local government a good deal more. I will come back to the flood money later, but there is a big problem with voting down the budget. Alex Neil is quite right about the impact of that—as it happens, I was in Australia when the budget was denied there. The impact was serious, and it is absolutely ridiculous not to take that on board. The big argument that has bedevilled the budget is ring fencing. Maybe the argument is more substantive because at issue is a big principle, but the whole debate has led to rather extravagant complaints, particularly by Labour MSPs, about the effect of the lack of ring fencing. In a number of cases they have grossly exaggerated situations to make a point, to the extent that the comments of the MSPs concerned could lead to serious and unnecessary alarm on the part of ordinary people. If we are to believe some of those claims, local councillors—including Labour councillors—must be among the most callous, indifferent and capricious individuals on the planet who, with no regard to their own future election prospects, will blow the budget on flower baskets instead of flood defences. What nonsense. It is little wonder that Wendy Alexander's leadership is leading to internal divisions within her party. I do not know about Labour MSPs, but I trust SNP councillors.

It would probably be helpful if I gave a little background to the motion. DARA Almondbank, which is in my constituency, is part of the wider Defence Aviation Repair Agency, whose principal centres are in south Wales, north Wales and Fleetlands near Portsmouth. DARA does what it says on the tin: it maintains, repairs and overhauls aircraft, including helicopters, for the Ministry of Defence, and has done so since the 1940s, albeit under different guises. The work is extremely technical, as members will imagine, and very highly skilled. Currently, DARA Almondbank employs about 350 people, including a number of apprentices. Many of the skills are not replicated anywhere else in the United Kingdom, much less in Scotland, so Almondbank is significant well beyond my constituency. Currently, DARA's rotary wing and components business, which includes Almondbank, is up for privatisation. The process has been going on for quite a while. To date, the only bidder for  Almondbank is Vector Aerospace. For some reason, the sale is being pushed by senior civil servants at the MOD, who see it as an alternative to managed decline. The presumption is that Vector—if the sale goes ahead—will be better able to secure commercial work, and therefore to safeguard jobs. However, DARA, and therefore Almondbank, is already permitted to contract for non-MOD work, and it has been very successful in doing so, for example Boeing is on Almondbank's customer list. It is not so long since some major investment was made in Almondbank. I last had a members' business debate on DARA in September 2003, only one month prior to which the new hydraulic test facility was officially opened. That £5 million investment was supposed to guarantee the future of the plant and its employees, but only weeks later it was clear that the uncertainty that had hung over the plant for many years was going to continue. It was magnified by the announcement not long after that privatisation was being viewed as the best way forward. We are now nearing the end of that process. I have had many meetings with local trade union representatives, with employees of DARA, with members of the local chamber of commerce and with officials from Perth and Kinross Council, all of whom have expressed concern. The council long ago prepared a local impact survey to assess Almondbank's importance to the surrounding area, and it has kept updating it because of the continued uncertainty. The most recent update was in 2006, although the council is now having to reconsider the survey, as a crucial point has now been reached. In 2006, Almondbank accounted for 6.4 per cent of total employment in the area, and DARA's presence contributed about £38.4 million to the local economy. More important, however, is the type of work that can be found at Almondbank. The economy of Perthshire, like that of many other areas of Scotland, is overly dependent on tourism and the service industry. I do not decry either of those areas of employment, but any one of us would want a wider variety of work to be available in our local areas. Tourism in particular is notoriously poorly paid and seasonal, and many of the jobs that are available in the service industry are equally low paid. It is not the general image of Perthshire—I am fed up saying this in the chamber, and I know that others have said it too—but Perth and Kinross wage rates are among the lowest in the UK. People generally find that difficult to accept or understand, but it is the truth, therefore the availability of well-paid, highly skilled technical jobs is vital for the area. People come to work at Almondbank from quite far afield—from all parts of  Perthshire and Kinross, Fife, Dundee, Stirling and even further. It is not just the fully trained jobs that are important. DARA Almondbank is enthusiastic about taking on apprentices, and its continued commitment to that is important locally. True, at the moment we are not discussing closure. The Westminster Government was meant to make an announcement on DARA's future before Christmas, but it has been delayed for reasons we know not—I cannot even begin to guess why. The single bidder for the Almondbank site, Vector Aerospace, is a very small Canadian company that would double in size should it succeed in the purchase—that is how small it is. If Vector ownership does not work out—frankly, given its size, that remains a pretty major question for all the employees—then what? What will happen to the defence work that still needs to be done? What will happen to the employees and who will protect them in the future? Many questions are still hanging over us. The end-to-end review of logistics, which was the subject of my 2003 debate on DARA Almondbank, recommended that helicopter work should be rolled back into DARA, therefore that Government review did not support what the current Government proposes. The trade unions are opposed to the sale and they have put a proposal to Baroness Taylor, who is the relevant minister. In an echo of the approach that the Government has taken to the Post Office, it has directed work away from DARA, thus bringing about the very situation that it wishes to use to justify privatisation. For example, that has included getting service personnel to do some of the work, on the basis that they are somehow a free resource, which of course is a mistaken way to view the matter. The joint trade unions—the Public and Commercial Services Union, Unite and Prospect—have proposed the creation of mobile repair teams to service helicopters at bases or at the front line; a change in funding from output funding to contracting for capability; and integrating service personnel into the business. The joint trade unions need to hear that they have the support of as many people as possible, which is what this debate is really about. That support needs to be communicated to the trade unions. The future of DARA Almondbank is important to me and my constituents, many of whom work there. The issue is at the forefront of Perth and Kinross Council's attention and Perthshire Chamber of Commerce maintains a watching brief. The three trade unions are jointly involved in proposing a different outcome from the one that the Government is considering. I want the Scottish Government at least to do what the Welsh Assembly Government has always done and give  full backing to the DARA workforce and to the joint trade union proposals. I am extremely pleased that the debate will be responded to by my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, who also has many constituents who work at DARA Almondbank.

Perth has been granted Cittaslow status—it was given the designation in March 2007. It is part of the job of any city that is given that status to help to publicise the whole movement. Will the minister therefore join me in looking forward to the event that will take place in Parliament in the spring, sponsored by Perth and Kinross Council among others, to help that publicity? I invite the minister to Perth to see the benefits of Cittaslow status. Indeed, I open that invitation to all other members, including you, Presiding Officer. The benefits of Cittaslow status become evident when you visit Perth.

Does the First Minister agree that the Defence Aviation Repair Agency's rotary wing and components business at Almondbank in my constituency is profoundly important for the military helicopter fleet, as well as providing more than 300 highly specialised and much-needed local jobs? Is he as concerned as I am at the likely imminent announcement of the sale of the Almondbank facility to a small Canadian company, with all that that implies? Will he join me in supporting proposals that have been submitted by the joint trade unions that would ensure the long-term viability and success of the business within the public sector? Will he accept my invitation to visit DARA Almondbank just as soon as his diary permits?

Like many members, I have recently visited the homes of individuals who have had central heating installed. Does the minister share the concern that I felt on a recent visit? Although installation was almost complete, Scottish Gas had written—on 13 November—to advise that installation would not proceed until February 2008. Does that not suggest a degree of confusion in Scottish Gas and render some of its figures unreliable?

Why exclude us?

It is undemocratic.

It depends on how democratic the member wants to be.

We have just heard nothing from the Labour Party—no ideas, no policy and no future. I agree with Cathy Jamieson on one thing: all of us can agree that poverty and hardship do not recognise borders. I know that because I lived in Australia for 16 years. That does not mean that I think that we should be electing members to the Canberra Parliament. That is the difference between us and the Labour Party. What have we here this morning? We have an uncosted commitment, not for the Government but for Parliament. That uncosted commitment did not appear in any manifesto of which I am aware, and it shows no understanding of the implications for the rest of the parliamentary budget. Does Wendy Alexander care? No, she does not. Today is not about moving anything forward except herself, preferably as far away from the rest of the news agenda as possible. The sad thing is that it could all have been so different. Wendy Alexander is turning consensus into its opposite while claiming to move the debate forward. Her so-called vision starts and ends in her own kailyard. Her motion shows that, rather than have something around which the whole Parliament could unite and that would resound across Scotland, she is much happier with her own silly games. I am sorry that both the Lib Dems and the Tories are colluding in this nonsense. As Nicola Sturgeon mentioned, Des Browne threatened Scotland only recently that Westminster could take back powers from Holyrood. We now appear to be in a situation in which all parties in the Parliament want to move on by giving the Parliament more powers—true, some of us might want more powers than others—after an election result in which the SNP was left only one seat ahead in minority Government. Just think what will be achieved when we come back in 2011 with a much-increased majority. Make no  mistake that that is what will happen. Members need only look at today's opinion poll if they do not believe me.

Those whose idea of consensus would ensure that the preferred option of the majority party is not included should look to themselves. In the meantime, we have this proposal in front of us—

I said that our party is a minority Government.

As I was about to say, the SNP might have been happy to sign up to the proposal and its sentiments, but that is not what any of the other three parties wanted. That would have spoiled the fun. To be honest, I doubt that the motion is much more than a bit of fun. If we were meant to take it seriously, strenuous attempts would have been made to reach agreement on a form of words to which everyone could sign up. Clearly, the possibility of that was discussed and disregarded in an attempt to be clever—too clever by half. Not for the first time, Wendy Alexander has outsmarted herself. Here is the truth: the SNP is ferociously ambitious for Scotland. We have always made that clear and, yes, we have also talked about increasing the powers of the Parliament short of independence. After all, was it not Jim Mather who proposed the idea of fiscal autonomy? Surely my memory is correct. The motion contains nothing new that has not already been canvassed by the SNP. There is no dithering or prevarication about what we want, and no hiding it. And—guess what—we are out there talking to the people of Scotland and asking them to join the debate. Frankly, the national conversation encompasses everything in the motion and sets no boundaries on the debate. As ever, Labour wants to allow discussion only on its own terms. When will it learn? Has Wendy Alexander even bothered to submit her views to the national conversation? I am curious. Has anyone on the Labour benches engaged with the discussion? Indeed, has anyone on any of the Opposition benches engaged with it? Tens of thousands of  ordinary Scots have done exactly that. There have been 43,734 hits on the home page, a staggering 245,000 hits on all national conversation-themed web pages, 20,935 call-ups of the white paper for reading online, and a further 6,999 downloads of the white paper. Has there ever been a Government consultation in Scotland as extensive as that? I wonder whether Wendy Alexander, Annabel Goldie and Nicol Stephen are part of that enthusiastic response. If so, they would have joined a variety of organisations across civic Scotland that have enthusiastically participated. All those people have taken the opportunity that has been offered and they have grabbed it. Perhaps they sense that, this time, the idea of a two-way conversation with Government is real. Wendy Alexander wants just another round of meetings with the usual suspects reading out their press releases and ultimately boring everyone into the ground. The last thing that she wants is for the debate to catch alight. She wants to exclude the preferred option of the largest party in Parliament and she leaves all the detailed questions unanswered. The SNP can certainly agree on moving things forward. We can agree on the need for more powers, on the need for a debate and on the need to ask the voters of Scotland. Annabel Goldie may assert that rejecting independence is not undemocratic, but excluding it from the debate is undemocratic and prejudges the outcome. She knows that. The SNP will not agree to a stunted debate on the basis of Wendy Alexander's "thus far, but no further" so-called vision. Vision? I suggest that she goes out and invests in a pair of specs. On the evidence of this morning, her vision is woefully short-sighted.

As I have indicated, I regret that I will have to leave the chamber at 17.45, but that might in fact encompass the whole debate. I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the debate. I attended the reception at lunch time today—I thank the sponsors—but I will show my age by saying that listening to the name sweet gale has left me with the Lou Reed refrain, "Sweet Jane" running through my head all day; that is about a very different plant with very different properties. I first came across sweet gale in a magazine article a couple of months ago—as a woman, I have to say that when we see a magazine article  about wonderful new advances in skin care, we read it. I read the article about sweet gale and puzzled all the way through, thinking, "I have never heard of this thing—what on earth is it?" At the end of the article, it said that sweet gale was bog myrtle and I had a laugh—I can see the ad man's problem in trying to sell to the world skin care products that are made of something called bog myrtle. It has duly become sweet gale, and that is fine, because it has turned out to be one of those ubiquitous Scottish plants that, nevertheless, has enormous economic potential for Scotland. We are accustomed to reading about the great resource of the Amazon basin, and the wonderful and varied things there that might provide all sorts of splendid biochemical products for the future. The danger is, however, that we overlook things that are right on our doorsteps—or perhaps, I should say, in our back gardens, as many members will have had occasion to curse plants such as bog myrtle in the past. It turns out that Scotland is full of equally effective plant life, and the problem now lies in taking those plants and turning the theory of how good they can become into practical production. I do not want the debate to concern only the Highlands, because bog myrtle grows throughout Scotland, even in areas that are partly urban. A lot of rural Scotland is not the Highlands, and there are areas that lie closer to urban centres which could be considered in relation to the issue. Bog myrtle is potentially of huge economic importance—we must not lose sight of the fact that Boots is already putting products made from it on its shelves. It is not something that could possibly be marketed in the future; it is being marketed and sold right now, and Boots cannot keep up with the demand. There is the possibility—in the supposed working of the market—for the situation to arise in which there is almost unlimited demand, because the producers cannot keep up with the demand even in the United Kingdom, much less roll out the products internationally. There is an enormous economic opportunity. I hope that Mike Russell will not take this suggestion amiss, but I would have liked Jim Mather, as the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, to be here as well, because it is equally important for him to take some of the issues on board. We are back to our old friend—how to get start-up capital, and how to get innovative development off the ground and moving. It is a matter of innovation, and I hope that that is at the heart of everything that we do. I echo the questions that were behind Peter Peacock's comments about whether we can find a place for non-arable crops in our various incentive schemes, in order to supply the enormous demand that exists for the product.

I listened carefully to the minister, but I have a slight concern. When communities the size of Crieff in my constituency discover that their tourist information centres are under threat, that raises many questions about the future of tourist information centres as a whole and is a matter of great concern. Crieff is not a small place and its tourist information centre is not small. Will the minister reconsider just a little his hands-off approach to tourist information centre closures, because they are a big problem for many rural constituencies?

The member is wasting time.

I must say how much I enjoyed John Swinney's statement, not just for what he said but for the sheer joy and enthusiasm with which he delivered it. It is fantastic to watch the cabinet secretary enjoying his job as much as he does. I was particularly interested to hear the good news about the amounts of money that will go into railways and buses, and the important statements about public transport. I also welcome the serious commitment in respect of new housing supply for Scotland: we all accept that that is a serious issue in our constituencies. I put in a plug for the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's upcoming  rural housing inquiry, which may well ask how much of the money will go to rural housing. I will concentrate on the cabinet secretary's welcome announcement on business rates, which he says will be abolished in this session. The reduction will start in the next financial year. I cannot begin to express how important that move is for encouraging small business growth and small business start-up. It is particularly important for the high streets of Scotland's towns and villages. Every penny that is not handed over in rates is another penny available to be spent locally, where it belongs. That is important for the huge swathes of Scotland outside the main urban centres. While no one can deny that the cities are a huge economic driver, there is a desperate need to bolster small businesses outwith the cities. Rural Scotland needs jobs and businesses, and the tools to deliver them. There is no lack of ideas, but quite small amounts of money can make or break those businesses, so the importance of that policy should not be underestimated. While I am on the issue of ideas, I was glad to see in the Government economic strategy a section on innovation. I was speaking at the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts conference in my constituency yesterday. While we are always in danger of embarking on what I call the tea towel history of Scotland, we know that we have a tremendous history of innovation. I enter the small caveat that many of the well-known names did not actually achieve their innovations in Scotland, although they were born here. I recognise that innovation is not just about things, but about ideas and innovative delivery. The challenge is not innovation for innovation's sake. That results in a kind of permanent revolution, such as that which occurred over the past eight years—the pilots that never came in to land and the constant reinvention of ideas that never actually get rolled out. What we heard today was ambition, self-confidence and passion, which are essential to create economic growth for Scotland. Members have received from the Policy Institute a small leaflet about the Faroe Islands. It talks about how culture, self-confidence and growth can engender economic success. That should say it all for Scotland. This Government is nothing if not ambitious. It is self-confident and it has passion. That is backed up by the two prizes for innovation and renewables that were discussed this afternoon. Innovation will make an enormous difference to the future of Scotland. The commitment to increase the level of research and development activity, and knowledge transfer, is as important as the clear commitment that the enterprise network will focus on  investment and innovation. I hope that rural Scotland will reap the benefit of what we have heard this afternoon. Underpinning all of that, however, is the recognition that some of the biggest rewards will be achievable only when we in Scotland can make all our decisions here. Business rates are at one level of the argument. We can and we are doing something about that. The other end of the argument is corporation tax. We need to be able to change that too, and that will not come without independence.

To ask the Deputy First Minister whether the Scottish Government has any plans to encourage the growth of town and village centres, in light of the challenges faced by high street businesses throughout Scotland. (S3F-253)

I thank the Deputy First Minister for her response. Is she aware of a recent report that indicates that between now and 2011 only one in 10 shops will open on Scotland's high streets—that is, 90 per cent of all planned retail developments will be out of town? She may know that I now have the dubious honour of representing Scotland's new "Tesco town"—Perth—but I also represent, of course, many small towns and villages whose high streets are under huge threat. Will she indicate how the Government can help to provide those town centres with the level playing field that they need in order to begin to turn things round? Will she take into consideration the huge advantage of the free parking that is available to out-of-town centres compared with our high streets? That situation not only creates an economic imbalance, but has environmental implications.

To ask the Scottish Government what effect improvements on the A9 will have on communities through which it runs. (S3O-1127)

I know that the improvements that the minister has talked about in respect of the whole of the A9 will be widely welcomed. I am grateful for his acknowledgement that dual carriageways have their own safety issues, particularly at junctions with local access roads where the junctions are not grade separated. He has rightly anticipated my concern about the number of accidents that occur on the A9 around the Auchterarder, Blackford and Aberuthven area, where we have a number of such junctions. What is the likely timescale for the potential improvements that he has indicated might be on the cards? The situation in the area is becoming difficult, particularly given that there is a railway station there too.

If Bill Butler wants rational debate, he needs to speak to his front bench about lodging rational motions. I do not see the point of lodging a motion if the lead  speaker does not even address its subject matter. Perhaps Wendy Alexander realised when she read the motion that it was complete rubbish, because she spent 13 minutes—she did not take her full 15 minutes—avoiding its subject matter. Bill Butler managed to avoid it for most of his speech as well. Jackie Baillie might have been a bit more honest with her motion if she had titled it, "How to make it as difficult as possible for the SNP Government to govern." That is what this is actually about. I can see it now: Jackie Baillie and her pals huddled over a Chinese meal in the west end of Glasgow, trying to come up with some spiffing wheezes to create maximum aggravation for cabinet secretaries. I do not blame them; it is what Oppositions do, and Labour is in opposition. It is tough, guys—we know, we did it for long enough—but let us not pretend that the motion is seriously about holding anybody to account. It is nothing but a panic response to try to stop the Government governing as effectively as it has been.

Here is the truth. Labour had eight years in Government, including when Tom McCabe—remind me, he was the finance minister, was he not?—said: "We have one of the most open budget scrutiny processes of any Parliament". In the same debate, he said: "The Scottish budget process is uniquely tailored to ensure that as many people as possible can contribute to the debate".— [ Official Report , 26 January 2006; c 22819, 22818.]  The previous Finance Committee's legacy paper is worth quoting at length. At point 40, suggestions were made about improving budget scrutiny. The committee suggested "that its successor committee approach the new Presiding Officer to engage in a dialogue initially with the Conveners' Group to look at the issues raised in this paper and to think about appropriate solutions." I am on the Conveners Group, and none of that has been raised. It is interesting that it has been brought to the chamber the week before we have the debate on the comprehensive spending review. What has changed over the past wee while? Oh yes, of course, Labour lost. Well, boo hoo to you. Somebody needs to remind the Lib Dems of that as well, particularly when they start demanding that civil servants be freed from their duty to support and promote the views of ministers. Why not just tear up the entire process of government while we are at it? Tavish Scott spent much of his speech wittering on about grubby little deals. Grubby little deals? The Lib Dems are past  masters at grubby little deals. It is pretty much a case of pots calling kettles black. We had eight long years during which there was no indication that the budget process procedure that is being suggested today would be a better method. Why? Because, of course, it is not; nor is it intended to be a better method. Furthermore, since May, no proper suggestions have been put to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. If the Opposition is so keen on its changes, we might have expected it to take them forward through the normal processes of the Parliament. Is that not what we do if we want to change how things are done in the Parliament? That is what the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee is for. If it was so desperately important to examine parliamentary procedures, why was no approach made to that committee? That none was made gives the game away. The motion is student debating society stuff and the tactic is to make more and more demands on the time and energy of ministers. What is the master plan here? Is it to tie up ministers so severely that they do not have time to do the governing bit? They would no doubt be attacked for that, too. Frankly, where is recognition of the committees' role in any of this? It is not even mentioned.

Where is the document from the Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party in respect of the motion? It does not exist. As the convener of a parliamentary committee—the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee—I want to speak about the committees. Richard Lochhead, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, came before our committee on 27 June to talk about his part in achieving the Government's priorities. He came before us again on 19 September to talk about foot-and-mouth disease. He will be back before us on 5 December in the context of our budget scrutiny. As always, other members are welcome to come to our meetings. If they cared enough, they would ask to come along. Three other MSPs did join us on 19 September. Interestingly, no one from the Labour Party came to that meeting, and nobody else showed up on 27 June.  The key point is that the parliamentary committees are just as important as parliamentary business in the chamber. Maybe Wendy Alexander does not believe that. Maybe she does not think that the committees would afford her the same grandstanding opportunities. That is what the motion and the debate are really all about—grandstanding. Well, Labour has had its fun this morning. Can we now get on with the serious business of governing? All I can say about today's effort is, "Nice try, but no cigar."

Will the member take an intervention?

I assume that the Presiding Officer will have been as dismayed as I was by Nanette Milne's expression of Conservative philistinism at the outset of her remarks, which I found rather unfortunate. It contrasted with some of the other speeches that we have heard today and on previous occasions. I was struck by comments that Sarah Boyack made in the debate on wildlife crime a few weeks ago. She said: "Biodiversity is good for our environment and our tourism industry and it is part of what defines our country—it is part of our culture."—[ Official Report , 4 October 2007; c 2499.] Not to put words into her mouth, I say that it is also part of who we are. Who we are is about a great deal else—it is about our land, our history, what we see around us in our towns and cities, the backdrop to our lives that we so often take for granted, the animals and birds that we are so proud of, the inventions, the sea and so on. I notice that, in its briefing, RSPB Scotland rose to the spirit of the motion by resorting to poetry. That was fantastic and I hope that its authors enjoyed producing it. Many of us could doubtless do the same. Sir Walter Scott's poetry enthused me when I was still a child and helped me to develop a crystal-clear identity as a Scot, even though I was 12,000 miles away from Scotland. Scott describes Scotland as a  "Land of brown heath and shaggy wood, Land of the mountain and the flood, Land of my sires!" Even when he was writing those words, they probably offered a fairly romanticised view but, nevertheless, as a writer, he had an enormous influence on how Scots saw themselves and how people in England, the rest of the UK and the rest of the world saw Scotland. For me, being Scottish came to be about the physical fabric of the land itself. Land is important, but there are other factors. I have mentioned Sir Walter Scott, who is obviously key. Other poets and writers are important, as is our music, some of which works best when one hears it outside, in the environment. The desk and floor in my office are littered with pieces of information—I guess that all members are in the same position—but if we want examples of the interaction between environment, history and culture, some of those pieces of information are highly relevant. For example, some members might have noticed the leaflets that the SCAPE Trust issued a week or two ago, which highlight the significant losses that will occur if we do not deal with the problem of coastal erosion. Those losses would result in the disappearance forever of ancient settlements and the interaction of environment with history in ways that we would not want to continue.

I draw the Presiding Officer's attention to his predecessor's willingness to add time on for interventions.

Closer to home for me is the Roman fort at Ardoch, which is just outside Braco in my constituency. I have mentioned it before and there continue to be problems with the site. An uncontrolled rabbit population poses dangers for ancient monuments because their tunnelling causes significant damage. That is another example of environment and history interacting in ways that we do not want.  However, there are many examples of positive interaction. Crieff's annual walking festival, which is based on the droving history of the area, accesses the beauty of the whole of Strathearn. Money is brought into the town from the combination of history and the landscape—one would not have the same impact without the other. It is also possible to do a William Soutar walk in Perth: the life of a locally born poet provides the inspiration for experiencing the city in a way that combines appreciation of literature and the environment. If all that is too high-flown, what about the artworks in the grounds of the community school of Auchterarder? With the help of national lottery money, play areas were designed by artists. The works that were produced are not surrounded by "Keep Out" notices; instead, the children play in, around and on them. Art has become part of the environment for a generation of children in Auchterarder. I could go on for another 30 minutes—

—but I have cut back my speech to fit the time available. I hope that we debate the issue again.

I give an unqualified welcome to the announcement of an end to the right to buy, which is a long overdue change of policy. I am sure that most of us hope that it will result in new council house building and more building by housing associations, although we must accept that that will not happen overnight. I think that the cabinet secretary will agree that most councils have built very little, if anything, in the past 30 years. What indications have there been as to how many councils will move to new build as a result of the policy? Have a variety of business models been considered or is that purely a matter for councils? What support does the cabinet secretary envisage councils such as Perth and Kinross  Council will need to move back to serious house building? It is only serious house building that will have an impact on Scotland's housing situation.

Deputy Presiding Officer, I advised your office that I would  be unable to stay for the entire debate, so I apologise in advance to members for my having to leave immediately after I speak. I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing tonight's member's business debate. She made a number of important points, not least about money. The minister will probably not be hugely surprised to hear that I will add my tuppenceworth to what she said. Like David Whitton and one or two others, I will concentrate on kinship care because I have constituency casework on the matter—I have worked with more than one individual. In particular, I have a long-running case involving a grandparent with whom I have been dealing since before Parliament started: indeed, I was dealing with the case during my previous existence as a member of the Westminster Parliament. On the face of it—this was certainly my view before I was involved in the matter—we might think that kinship care would be regarded as the best of all possible worlds and that everything that could be done to encourage it should and would be done. Sadly, my experience is that that is not the case. Councils have a discretionary power to support kinship carers, but it is applied inconsistently throughout Scotland. That is astonishing. Payments for kinship care can be considerably lower than payments for foster care. David Whitton talked about his local council. In my area, foster care payments range from £118.60 to £204.55 per week, depending on various factors, whereas kinship care payments range from £37.42 to £74.88. That scenario is not unusual in Scotland. Unsurprisingly, as I understand it, kinship care rates are falling compared with foster care rates, although we already think that foster care rates are too low. Councils need not link kinship care payments to foster care allowances: often, they do not. Not only are kinship carers paid considerably less, the payments that they receive are not linked to payments for foster care. I hope that the Minister for Children and Early Years will address the issue in the forthcoming national fostering and kinship care strategy. I understand that kinship care and funding are among the issues that were raised most frequently in submissions to the consultation on the strategy. That is probably evidence of how serious the issue is. Frankly, I am at a loss to understand why payments to kinship carers should be different from payments to foster carers. My approach might be simplistic, but I would have thought that family, in the old-fashioned sense of the word, is the best of all possible worlds for children. If a family placement can be found, that is best, because it will keep the child within the context of the background and identity that Robert Brown mentioned. However, the  difference in payments reflects something else: it seems to show that we do not value family ties and that they are less important. That is the only conclusion that we can draw from the current situation and in my view that is extremely unfortunate. I do not know why on earth the situation started in the first place. We need to examine the system and change it.

My constituency is half urban, half rural. That means that I get the best of both worlds when there is the best to offer and the worst of both worlds when the worst happens. For the rural part of the constituency, the past few months definitely fall into the latter category. Moving around the constituency, one has the evidence of one's own eyes: fields crowded with sheep eating the farmer out of feed, not to mention house and home.  My recent visit to the United Auctions mart in my constituency allowed me to have a more detailed discussion about the specific problems that faced farmers even after some of the restrictions were lifted. It has already been mentioned that the problems do not go away when the restrictions are lifted, but here is a case in point: I received an e-mail on Monday from a Perthshire farmer, who pointed out that the average price per lamb received in Perth at the beginning of the week means that a farm with 600 lambs to sell will get £7,200 less in income this year than last year while, at the same time, feed costs are increasing. How are such farmers expected to survive through the winter into the spring with that kind of income loss? Members who think that the word "farmer" somehow equates with the word "rich" need to remember that many of our farmers are already living on marginal incomes and this latest blow may well put a number of them out of business. That is not good for Scotland economically, environmentally or socially. Rural Scotland holds this Government in general and the cabinet secretary in particular in high regard, but the farmers who are most affected quite rightly want to know what further support they can be offered, especially in light of the stance that Hilary Benn has taken. To be frank, his dismissive attitude to Scotland's farmers beggars belief. If the Labour Party wanted any explanation for its continued failure to win electoral support in rural Scotland, it should look no further than his office. Benn's attitude was bad enough. I am tempted to quote from the front page of last Friday's Scottish Farmer but, to keep on the good side of the Presiding Officer, I will merely paraphrase. The report says that farmers' view of their meeting with Benn is that it ended with him telling them in effect to get lost—that is the polite way of putting it; the phrase that the report used included a four-letter word. Anyone who wants to read the actual expression can read the front page of The Scottish Farmer . That is what farmers thought that Hilary Benn was saying to them. The utter failure of Scottish Labour to support Scottish farmers was disgraceful. Not for the first time, I have to observe that Welsh Labour appears to have far more gumption than its counterpart in Scotland. Frankly, this issue is not about an SNP Government picking fights with Westminster; it is about Westminster picking a fight with Scotland's farmers. Labour—both in Westminster and in Scotland—gave every indication that it does not care if the whole of Scottish farming goes to the wall. Scotland's farmers have taken careful note of that attitude. On the compensation row, many have criticised the Scottish Government for making the first draft  of Hilary Benn's speech known to the public. The first draft contained a clear commitment of £8.5 million for Scotland's affected farmers. However, the speech as delivered contained no such commitment. Apparently, the Scottish Government was supposed to say nothing about that, despite being perfectly aware that something pretty significant must have occurred between Friday 5 October and Monday 8 October. I make no comment on what matter of significance took place that weekend, but I wish to make the point that it is expected in some quarters that, knowing about the change, the First Minister and the cabinet secretaries should have kept schtum. Should they really have done so? If they had, would they not have run the risk of being exposed in the future as not having properly represented Scotland's farmers? I have no doubt that the fact that they had been given prior knowledge of the draft speech containing the commitment but had said nothing when the speech did not contain the commitment would have been used ruthlessly by Westminster as evidence of Scottish Government acquiescence. They were absolutely right to go public. Maybe that drives a coach and horses through the cosy consensus that appears to have operated in the past. However, if that cosy consensus was not operating in Scotland's best interests, what else could the Scottish Government have done? The fault for all this lies south of the border. The source of the outbreak was a DEFRA laboratory. Speaking as a lawyer, I do not think that the UK Government is out of the compensation woods on this one. I welcome Richard Lochhead's announcement of an aid package today. I am sure that farmers would have wanted more—of course they would—but I welcome the announcement not because I think that this Government should have to pay but because it clearly shows that the Government can be counted on by farmers. I hope that the issue will not rest there. Further to my comments about Welsh Labour, I refer the Liberal Democrats to the comments of Roger Williams MP, their Welsh affairs spokesman, who also seems to have a little more gumption than his Scottish counterparts. He was crystal clear about where the blame lies, no weasel words about it. Liability lies fairly and squarely at DEFRA's door, and I fully expect that, on behalf of Scotland's voters, the Scottish Government will make every possible effort to get restitution from those who were at fault.

I apologise for my more prolonged absence from the chamber than I anticipated—I had an unavoidable meeting with my committee clerks to attend. I welcome the Solicitor General to his first major outing in the chamber, which serves to remind us that we are talking about real crime, not some lesser order of offence. Because of that, I believe that the minister's approach is the right one. As a number of people have said, this morning's Scotsman reveals the scale of the problem, which is staggering. It is worth putting some of the figures on the record. There has been a 33 per cent increase in the number of offences involving birds, a 300 per cent increase in the number of cases of cruelty to wild animals and a 250 per cent increase in the number of offences involving badgers. The number of offences involving deer is up by 275 per cent and the number of cases of hunting with dogs has gone up by 300 per cent. Salmon and freshwater fisheries crimes are up by 90 per cent and there has been a 220 per cent increase in other wildlife offences. Those figures are staggering. It is never easy to determine whether a rise in the number of prosecutions for a particular crime  is down to an increase in the crime, to more accurate reporting of the crime or to increased activity and vigilance on the part of the police or the public in respect of the crime. I hope that those issues will be investigated over the next few months. It was clear from the answers that I received to a series of questions that I asked on the subject last year, in response to a constituent's concern, that there is no nationally accepted system of recording wildlife and environment crime. I strongly suggest that that is one of the problems that will have to be addressed. There is no doubt that wildlife crime is a massive problem that should not be an issue just for people who are concerned about feathered friends and furry animals—although, frankly, that is enough for me. Those people who want hard-headed business arguments for taking wildlife crime seriously should look at the tourism industry. I gently suggest to John Scott that there is another side to the economic arguments that he made. A review of wildlife tourism in 2002 indicated that more than 250 businesses, with more than 3,000 employees, were involved in nature and wildlife tourism in Scotland. Given the rate at which the sector is growing, it is a safe bet that those five-year-old figures seriously underrepresent the present situation. Indeed, VisitScotland has said that wildlife tourism generated £210 million for the Scottish economy in 2006.

Indeed. I am providing some balance to Mr Scott's comments. A survey of visitors to the Highlands that was published in 2002 underlined the importance of wildlife to our tourism industry. Fifty-eight per cent of respondents said that they agreed or agreed strongly with the statement that the opportunity to see wildlife in the Highlands had been an important aspect of their visit. Scotland's wildlife is a hugely important resource, which we must take great care to protect. I echo some of Sarah Boyack's remarks. Birds and animals are important in and of themselves, but they are also part and parcel of how we in Scotland define ourselves and how others see us. We should never forget that. I have long been concerned about the killing of birds of prey, in particular, because the issue raises its head with worrying frequency in my constituency. Tayside Police has taken the issue seriously for many years. Arguments are made about the threat that sparrow-hawks pose to racing pigeons or that hen harriers pose to grouse stocks, but the most dangerous predator of all is  the two-legged wingless poisoner, which needs to become a good deal rarer. Sparrow-hawks are thought to take less than 1 per cent of released racing pigeons annually, and the taking of excess grouse by a hen harrier is simply the natural order of things—I am not sure how far we can go to interfere with that. I am the teeniest bit uncomfortable with how John Scott articulated his concerns, which sounded a little like special pleading. I point out to him that the burden of proof does not vary depending on the reason for the crime. The reason might be a mitigation, but that is not the same thing as the burden of proof. The use of deadly poisons such as carbofuran to kill birds of prey is unnatural and downright dangerous. Such behaviour is utterly irresponsible, because it is clear that the people who set traps give no thought to the implications of their actions for a curious child, for example. Carbofuran is an extremely dangerous chemical and is the poison of choice among people who seek to kill our birds of prey. It is clear that the fines that are levied against people who poison birds of prey are insufficient to create a deterrent. The fines do not reflect the serious implications of the illegal misuse of such a dangerous and potentially fatal substance. Fines should be punitive as a starting point. I hope that the HMIC investigation will give serious consideration to the issue. Badger baiting and dog fighting sound like things out of a Victorian novel, but such activities go on in our country. However, such wildlife crime is firmly underground and is despised by everyone in mainstream society. Other categories of wildlife crime have been excused, or have had a blind eye turned to them. The culture of silence must end. There are good signs that that will happen as a result of the new multi-agency approach, which I welcome. Silence is no longer acceptable. The laws that are needed are in place, but we must ensure that they are enforced vigorously enough to protect wildlife and act as a deterrent. We need to get that right and we need time to do so. I support the motion in the name of Michael Russell and look forward to the recommendations of the review.

I hope that the cabinet secretary is aware that Perth city centre experiences antisocial behaviour problems in the same way as do city centres throughout Scotland. Much of that is the result of excessive underage drinking, but such problems result not only from landlords selling alcohol to underage drinkers, but from their continuing to sell alcohol to drinkers who are clearly well inebriated. Is the cabinet secretary confident that the licensing enforcement measures are sufficiently robust to ensure that pub landlords who behave in that way are dealt with adequately?

Floods are not a new phenomenon—no doubt Noah would attest to that. What is perhaps new, however, is the frequency with which such events are occurring in places where only occasional flooding might have been expected over the decades and even centuries. When events that used to happen once in a lifetime begin to occur with greater frequency, expectations about the response change. The events are no longer viewed as acts of God; they are more likely to be regarded as failures to plan properly. Until now, the usual response to flooding has been wholly defensive. Like Canute, we seek somehow to hold back the water, with schemes that usually cost a lot of money, involve a lot of construction and—it must be said—are of varying effectiveness, as my colleague Keith Brown will no doubt say. The recently publicised flood risk maps were a scary example of how continuing with that approach will be more and more difficult, as 100,000 Scottish homes and 7,000 Scottish  businesses are now at risk. Humans have always built on flood plains because they are highly productive areas and are close to fast-flowing rivers and the sea, which were important avenues of communication, but the kind of building that we did in the past did not exacerbate the problems in flood-prone areas. That is not so now. For members who, like me, represent areas with serious flood problems, the debate is not academic. Scottish Environment LINK estimates the average annual cost of damage from flooding to be around £20 million. Well, the total cost of the flooding in Perth in one year—1993—was £39 million. In that flooding, 1,600 properties were affected. It cost £26 million to put the Perth flood prevention scheme in place, 50 per cent of which was provided by the then Scottish Executive. Perth and Kinross Council had to apply for borrowing consent for a sum of £21.3 million before work could even start, and that money came from the Scottish Executive challenge fund. That meant that the Perth scheme was up against other schemes that were also seeking funding. That is not to mention the years that it took to get the funding together and build the defences. That is a crazy way of doing things. The worst of it is that the rainfall that fell in Tewkesbury in July would have overwhelmed the new Perth defences. They are only recently built but are already potentially inadequate. That prompts the question of how far we can go and how much money we can spend on doing things the way that we have always done them if the net result is obsolescence only a few years down the line. Many other smaller floods take place frequently in my constituency and throughout Scotland. They do not get the publicity that the really big events get, but they are continual and affect many people regularly. I attended the flood summit that the cabinet secretary organised in Perth on 10 September. I am sorry that more members were not able to take up the opportunity to go to that summit, because it was timely and profoundly useful. The commendably open discussion highlighted the key problems that face us and the issues that we must now address. The potential scale of the events that we may now face became clear from those discussions. There is pretty much unanimous agreement that the Flood Prevention (Scotland) Act 1961 is no longer fit for purpose. Leaving aside the question of incorporating the European Union floods directive, I think that there are big issues of funding that seriously need to be addressed—and I suggest that they be addressed in a slightly more constructive fashion than Mike Rumbles proposes. The complete nonsense of using challenge funding for flood defences needs to be rectified.  Either flood defences are required or they are not and, if they are, they must be built. It is equally important that we widen the definition of flood management so that money is not only directed towards hard construction but is also applied to soft schemes, which are perhaps much more sustainable. I say to Mike Rumbles that we are all aware that it will cost more, but we will not know how much more until we know how best to tackle the problem. He is in danger of becoming the Victor Meldrew of the Scottish Parliament if he does not mend his ways.

Mike Rumbles raises the possibility that the Government is somehow going to axe funding for flooding. What a piece of nonsense that is. If he would only listen to himself, he would realise how ridiculous he is beginning to sound. Given the potential scale of the events and the flood risk maps to which I referred, serious questions must be asked about why planning and responses are left to local councils when the problem is arguably much greater and should be addressed at the catchment level. I appreciate that there is a danger of resorting to yet another level of bureaucracy, but there is no doubt that many local councils are now overwhelmed by the expectation of handling a problem of far greater scale than their local resources allow. The cabinet secretary is not short of suggestions from a number of lobbying organisations, and I hope that he will accept the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's suggestions when it concludes its inquiry into flooding and flood management. That inquiry was announced yesterday and there are 12 weeks for written evidence to be submitted. I urge all members to get local groups to submit evidence and perhaps even to submit evidence themselves. We are now into autumn and moving into the winter months, which are traditionally the months when Scotland is most vulnerable to high rainfall—although, on the evidence of this summer, we may have to change our perceptions of that. God forbid that we experience any more flooding this winter. However, the Parliament must move as fast as possible on the issue. We all want to minimise the potential for further damage on the scale that we saw in England in July.

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing the  debate, and I associate myself with much of what he said. There is a temptation to engage in arguments for and against the Beauly to Denny line itself. I have frequently expressed my concerns about the impact of the proposed pylons in my own constituency. They will replace an existing line, but they will replace the current pylons with pylons twice the size. The route through my constituency is via a designated tourist route—an area where a wind farm has already been rejected for a number of reasons connected with the fact that there is a tourist route. However, as Murdo Fraser said, tonight's debate is not so much about the pros and cons of the proposal as about the efficacy of the inquiry process. The truth is that, almost from the start, the conduct of the inquiry has caused problems. Not all opinions have been canvassed. It has been characterised by continual challenges to what people can speak to, what is reasonable and appropriate to be raised, what is ruled out because it has already been dealt with and other such questions. All that is against a background of no record being kept of the evidence that has previously been led, which would allow people to see what issues have already been raised. All that amounts to harassment of witnesses. I understand that it is not normal practice for an on-going record to be kept in such inquiries, but the conduct of this inquiry flags up some serious longer-term concerns about process. Murdo Fraser's motion mentions that there are some 17,000 objectors. That is a massive number of people and organisations objecting to the line, and is obviously why the inquiry is taking so long and moving throughout Scotland in the way that it is. Despite that, the balance of power is woefully out of kilter, and we are beginning to see that set of chickens coming home to roost. The rules are making it hardly worth while going along. Indeed, I have come to the conclusion that there will be little point in my own attendance to give evidence. It has been almost impossible to work out in advance what will and will not be admissible. In those circumstances, it seems a colossal waste of time to try to imagine our way round the process, which is effectively what we have to do. That is hardly an acceptable position to be in. The inquiry process may not be a matter for the minister; I am not clear whether he is in a position to respond on the process. However, I hope that he takes on board the deep dissatisfaction with the way in which the inquiry has proceeded. That dissatisfaction has been felt the length and breadth of Scotland, and it is particularly strong in my constituency. A degree of alienation has been engendered among individuals and groups, and that will continue if the process continues. I hope  that the minister will take note of the concerns raised and will consider carefully how to address them.

The anguish of the victims' families can barely be imagined. Will the Lord Advocate therefore agree with me that this case highlights the need for greater openness on the part of the Crown Office, something for which I have long called and which I hope she will consider in the light of this case? Does the Lord Advocate also agree that every criminal case comprises a series of judgment calls that are made during preparation and during the trial and which include any decision that is made by a judge or, indeed, a jury? Does she agree that, regardless of whether we agree with those  individual decisions, they cannot be micromanaged from outside the process by people with no training and a sketchy understanding of the system who have not sat through the trial, particularly when the decisions relate to evidence? Does the Lord Advocate agree that this parliamentary chamber cannot and must not be allowed to become a criminal court or, worse, a witch hunt?

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had regarding the preservation of Scotland's Roman heritage. (S3O-617)

I welcome the bid for world heritage status for the Antonine wall. However, will the minister reflect on the fact that  Scotland's Roman heritage extends further north than the Antonine wall? She will be unsurprised by my continued insistence that the Gask ridge should have been included in the original submission for world heritage status, but does she agree that we should consider adding it to the bid? Further, is she as concerned as I am about the disrepair into which some Roman sites in Scotland can fall? Again, she will be unsurprised to learn that I have Ardoch fort near Braco in my constituency at the forefront of my mind when I express that concern.

We have seen the pictures.

Does the member recognise that if wealthy landowners know that all that they have to do is go to court to seek a declarator, which organisations will simply not be able to contest because the costs of contesting it will be so enormous, that will lead to an extremely unbalanced situation with regard to the way in which the legislation works?

I ought to declare a personal interest, as I spend virtually all my allocated holiday time with a pair of walking boots on, actually walking—indeed, this summer I did the great glen way—so access issues are always at the forefront of my mind, even when I am trying not to be concerned with work. I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing the debate. It is good that we are having the discussion. She may remember that, when the initial judgment was made in the Kinfauns case, I raised it with the First Minister because of my concerns, which were expressed quite openly at the time. In my view, the judgment gives cause for concern, and people are right to express it. There is a tendency to forget that the contentious area at the heart of the case was only 4 acres of woodland, and that there was no argument about the other 8 acres of the total enclosed area of 12 acres. Personally, I am surprised that it can be argued that 8 acres is insufficient to provide privacy. Like other members, I suspect, I have to make do with considerably less than 8 acres to provide for my own household privacy. That area seems quite large. Even allowing for some differential need, as we probably must, the concept of privacy surely cannot be infinitely elastic. It is clear that some planning and development control issues need to be addressed. Planning departments have been able to take on board the new culture that ought now to be in place following the passing of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003. As a member whose constituency mailbag is chock-a-block with letters voicing objections to planning proposals and decisions, I am well aware that planners are something of a law unto themselves; other members might have a similar experience. Clearer guidance to planners might be required. I hope that the minister will reflect on that in his winding-up speech. However, the more general questions and concerns about planning probably need to be addressed separately from those concerning the legislation on land reform, as I suspect that they go further and deeper than the contents of the 2003 act. There are problems with the potential cost implications of contesting declarator actions, judging by the final expenses bill in the Kinfauns case. I agree with Sarah Boyack. If clarity is a public good in such circumstances, a serious look needs to be taken at that aspect of the case for  the sake of the public good. The Ramblers Association made a reasonable suggestion about protective costs orders, which the minister might wish to discuss with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. I would not want that suggestion to be ruled out of order without any consideration. There is a huge issue of costs, and we do not want cases not to be brought for want of a proper decision. I am conscious of the forward work programme to June 2008 that has been developed by the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, of which I am convener. For a number of reasons, we have decided not to scrutinise the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 during that immediate period. The 2003 act concerns more than just access. Significant issues are emerging regarding the community buyout sections of the act, both those concerning the community right to buy and those concerning the crofting community right to buy. A major buyout is proceeding in my constituency; I refer to the Comrie Development Trust's purchase of the Ministry of Defence property at Cultybraggan, a former prisoner of war camp, which includes a handy bunker—I have always thought that I could come up with plenty of good uses for that. The deal has just been done. My close involvement with that buyout has highlighted to me the need to review some aspects of the relevant sections of the 2003 act. As I have said many times in the chamber over the past eight years, I have long been a critic of the piecemeal approach to legislation. I have never much cared for miscellaneous provisions bills. We eventually end up at the consolidation bill stage, by which point, in my experience, no one really knows what on earth is going on, and people lose track of what a piece of legislation means. So far, there has been one disappointing access case. We have no idea what the result of the Snowie case in Stirlingshire will be, nor when it will come. The Kinfauns case does not bind the sheriff in the Snowie case. This is where there is an issue about how elastic the privacy concept can be allowed to be. If the Snowie application, which seeks 40 acres of land for privacy, is successful, and if other cases follow, a review of the 2003 act's access provisions will clearly be necessary. I am strongly of the feeling that that should take the form of proper post-legislative scrutiny, which should encompass the whole act. I confidently expect that that will happen in the lifetime of the present Government; I am pretty sure that it will happen during the lifetime of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee this session.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the phone call that I received on the Friday night that the outbreak was made public. The Perth show had opened on that Friday and was to continue on the Saturday, so the impact on my constituency was immediate. I also commend the people who organised Perth show for doing the enormous amount of work that was necessary in the middle of the show to comply with the various newly imposed restrictions. We have heard how well things were handled, but the outbreak was a stark reminder of the consequences of foot-and-mouth disease and other diseases for the agricultural sector. Although the source of the recent outbreak seems to have been lab based, which is pretty shocking, the importance of very strict controls was highlighted. Is the cabinet secretary aware of the serious concern about the potential for contaminated imports, whether they come into the country legally from countries such as Brazil, for example, where the regulatory regime is seen to be inadequate, or whether they are illegal? Has any analysis of the extent of that problem been done in Scotland? Is the cabinet secretary pursuing that matter with the relevant authorities given this summer's stark reminder of how badly things can go wrong?

Well, that has been a right glass-half-empty response from the Opposition. I do not know whether it seriously imagined that somehow everything was going to be delivered by this SNP Government overnight. Not even we believe that we are that strong and powerful. I remind all members that a parliamentary session lasts four years. We have done more in a few months than the previous Administration did in almost a decade. I listened with some astonishment to Cathy Jamieson listing the many problems that she says we are not tackling. I am astonished that her face was not bright red and her neck shiny bright brass—the implication of what she said was that the problems were of her Government's making and she was asking us to clean up its mess. We are going to do our best to clean up as much of that mess as we can. I welcome the new Government's programme enormously. Many pieces of legislation were passed over the past eight years. Most of it could be criticised, because it was all enabling legislation. Personally, I say thank you very much—the previous Government has enabled us to govern without having constantly to pass more legislation. If members of the previous Administration do not like that, they need to remember that that is what they chose to do.

Indeed we did. Now, we are using that legislation to govern in the way that we wish. The Opposition should not be moaning and whingeing about that. We are able to take matters forward in a way that the Opposition never did. It enabled, but it did not do; we are now going to do. The Government has already achieved something quite remarkable. In a few short months, it has succeeded in uniting all the parties represented in the chamber around a call to increase the powers of the Parliament. That would have been unthinkable a year ago. We might not all agree on the precise nature and extent of the increased powers, but the fact that we are all agreed on the principle is a major step forward. I believe that Scots feel that Scotland has taken a step forward—and it is a step with a spring in it. Manifest throughout civic Scotland and among individual voters is the feeling that a change for the better has taken place. Change is in the air—make no mistake about it. It is not change for the sake of it, but change for the betterment of Scotland. That is what the SNP has always been about, and it is what the SNP is delivering. It is about the kind of Scotland that we want to see, not "the best small country in the world". Small countries are already among the very best in the world; we should be aiming for no less than being the best, regardless of size, because we have unlimited ambition. That unlimited ambition is manifest in some of the key things that have been announced this afternoon. I refer to the council tax freeze, and the consultation on taking that policy forward and tackling that unfair tax, which will be profoundly welcomed by many people in Scotland. The issue of small business rates has been raised with me in my constituency. People are eagerly looking forward to tackling it, and I hope that the Administration will publish an impact analysis showing the enormous benefit of doing so. If we do that, it will make a huge difference to many communities throughout Scotland. There are many other things about today's announcements that are to be hugely welcomed and will make an enormous difference to Scotland. So far, the Opposition response, after eight years of combined inactivity, is absolutely astonishing. I look forward to making real change for Scotland.

The First Minister spoke of governing on the basis of principle and moving with mainstream opinion. No doubt he is aware that, during the past several years, health board consultation in Scotland became a euphemism for managing opposition away. Does he agree that the previous Executive's failure to address the serious alienation that was felt by the majority in the face of changes to the health service was leading directly to a scunner factor amongst voters that leaked into all aspects of public life? Will he confirm that, whatever the outcome of the consultation on the proposed local health care bill, the key problem of alienation will be tackled directly and that everything will be done to reverse the damage of the previous eight years?

Sometimes it seems to me that the only questions that need to be asked in politics are whether there is a problem, whether there is a solution and whether we have the power to deliver the solution. We are discussing such questions today. Once such questions are answered, it is simply a matter of priorities. It is clear that there is a problem. Concerns have been expressed not only by the communities that live and work by and near the Firth of Forth, but by many organisations—not least of which is SNH—whose principal focus of interest is the care of the wider environment. The second aspect to the proposal, which has been referred to repeatedly today, is the extent to which it has highlighted the deficiency of the current arrangements with respect to the scope of ministerial intervention. Obviously, one response to the environmental concerns would be to rule out transfers if they are planned to take place too near areas of environmental and/or economic sensitivity, but we cannot do that. In any case, we would not do that, because we are talking about part of the economy of local areas. Alternatively, we could build in robust measures that would ensure strict compliance and provide the maximum possible safeguards, but the devolved and reserved split makes that difficult. We could try to ensure that decisions are taken democratically—they could be made subject to scrutiny—but I am particularly concerned about that because, despite comments that I have heard today, I have real questions about Forth Ports Authority, which is a public  limited company. To whom is it accountable? It is a private company with a regulatory role; there is seemingly no oversight. Ultimately, Forth Ports makes a profit from the decisions that it takes. I cannot see how that is the best way to proceed. It is difficult to see how Forth Ports would ever want to take decisions that would adversely affect its bottom line. Indeed, there are other concerns about the way in which Forth Ports conducts its business. It imposes huge variations on the charges that are levied on different harbours around Scotland—my principal concern is Perth—with the intention, I suspect, of moving shipping business to its own ports. However, I will take up that matter separately with the cabinet secretary. Right now, a proposal with potentially far-reaching consequences for one of the busiest waterways in Scotland seems subject to little in the way of control. It is clear that Westminster, if it so wished, could use merchant shipping legislation to block ship-to-ship oil transfers anywhere round the UK that it chose and could, therefore, react to this concerted Scottish concern. Apparently, it chooses not to do so. It is not exactly a ringing endorsement of Westminster democracy that it should so flagrantly ignore the cross-party and widespread concerns of the people of this country. Meantime, in this Parliament, we have to address the deficiencies in our powers and consider what can be done through the devolved settlement to effect some meaningful intervention and ensure compliance with the habitats directive, which is currently not possible. The mechanism that is proposed today might not be the whole answer, but it will at least insert a more strategic check into the process than is currently the case. It is widely welcomed by various environmental organisations and I hope that it is welcomed by the communities that live and work in the Firth of Forth area. With reference to my friend Michael Rumbles's comments, it seems extraordinary to me that the clamour for speedy action should be responded to on his part with a call for us all to slow down. With reference to Sarah Boyack's comments about the proposed marine bill, I too would like to know whether the marine bill will contain provisions that will impact on the area of policy concerned with ship-to-ship oil transfers. It would be interesting to know whether we could do anything through the bill that would bear on the situation.

I am in my last paragraph. I question the assumption among members that the marine bill will somehow resolve all the  devolved and reserved issues. I do not see how that could be the case. I have a much simpler solution to resolving those devolved and reserved issues.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to ensure that NHS employees are receiving all the benefits that they are entitled to through agenda for change. (S3O-399)

I thank the cabinet secretary and apologise for the technical nature of my question. In circumstances where a member of health board staff is subject to protection arrangements that were set up prior to their assimilation into agenda for change, does the minister agree that it is contrary to the detail and the spirit of national and local policies on protection for any increase in basic earnings that arise as a consequence of that assimilation to be offset against the protection, as is happening in Tayside NHS Board, thus resulting in individuals getting no benefit from agenda for change?

The cabinet secretary referred to flood management. Will he publish the public consultation on the definition of sustainable flood management, which, I believe, is still awaited? Does he agree that the problems that are already being experienced in many parts of Scotland, including my constituency, are a manifestation of climate change? Does he also agree that there is a need to move away from short-term, reactive defensive measures, such as the controversial Milnathort scheme, and toward longer-term, more sustainable measures? If so, does he agree that the grant funding arrangements that favour the former rather than the latter must be revisited in any future developments?

What will be the Government's response to the decision in Perth sheriff court on Tuesday 13 June, approving an exemption from the right to roam that is enshrined in the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003? I appreciate that the First Minister is unlikely to have read the entire judgment, but given that he, like me, represents an area that contains many large estates, does he share my concern that, if the judgment is sound and similar decisions follow, the 2003 act might need to be revisited?

First, I want to welcome in advance my colleague Gil Paterson back to the Parliament. He is due to speak later in the debate, but those of us who were here in the Parliament's first years will recall his long-standing interest in tackling sexual  violence. When he speaks on this matter, he speaks from the heart, and I am sure that we all welcome the fact that his voice is back in the chamber. For obvious reasons, media interest in sex offenders tends to focus on paedophiles. That is understandable—after all, Sarah's law, Mark's law and Megan's law arose out of child abductions and murders—and the point has been emphasised with the high profile given to the current case of Maddy McCann. We all hope that, even now, she will be found safe and well. Our desire to protect our children at all costs is totally understandable and no one should apologise for having such a reaction. Much of our concern in that respect focuses on so-called stranger danger, and the proposals for naming and shaming have been triggered by that fear. However, as Kenny MacAskill has reminded us, we still underestimate the extent to which child sex abuse takes place in families. Such a response is very human, because it can be impossible to accept that brothers, fathers, uncles and nephews can be offenders. Paradoxically, our children can be most at risk when we believe them to be at their safest. That is nothing new. If we speak to older people, we find that child sex abuse was well known—if unacknowledged—decades ago. People who were born in the early years of the 20 th century were just as likely to be perpetrators or victims as those who are being born now, but because of under-reporting—or, indeed, because of a failure to take the matter seriously or to acknowledge its occurrence openly—we cannot know for sure the true incidence of such offences at that time. Nevertheless, as I understand it, the current prevalence of sexual violence towards children is no greater than it was decades ago. Echoing some of what Bill Aitken said, I think that we need to remember that. As with domestic violence towards women, society—and, perhaps more telling, the mass media—has come rather late to the view that such abuse happens; that it can happen even in the so-called best of families; that it is wrong; and that, if it cannot be prevented, perpetrators should be dealt with severely. Our response to the issue has changed and must continue to change; indeed, the cabinet secretary's remarks this afternoon reflect the need for such change to continue to be part and parcel of what we do as legislators. As Tricia Marwick reminded us, not all sex offenders offend against children. Some are seriously dangerous men who pose a threat to adult women and, sometimes, adult men. They are not paedophiles, but they can be every bit as dangerous. I am pleased by the cabinet secretary's comment that such offenders will be  included in the new approach that has been proposed today. There is, however, one group of offenders that might be more difficult to deal with. I will cite an example from my constituency—and I will do so carefully. As the case is still kind of on-going, I will stick only to what is already in the public domain. Yesterday's Courier carried a report about a man called Robert Basterfield, who has been convicted of two stalking offences against women. He was put on probation on 21 December last year, with monthly reviews. He is seriously dangerous because he simply does not accept that he is not entitled to behave as he does towards women. Such is the concern about his behaviour that the chief constable of Tayside Police, John Vine, has applied for a sexual offences protection order that would ban him for 10 years from being alone with any woman without her consent. That application has yet to be decided. Leaving aside my personal feeling that if someone is so dangerous that women need that level of protection from him he is perhaps dangerous enough to be taken out of society for the same period of 10 years, there are still questions to be answered. If a protection order is granted that effectively interdicts an individual in the manner suggested, unless there is widespread publicity—including pictures—how will any woman know that the individual is so constrained, even if he is not underground? Short of cutting pictures out of the newspaper and sticking them up everywhere, it seems that the majority of women will never be any the wiser. I accept that this is not easy. None of us will be able to ensure that images of individuals—whether they offend against children or adults—are in everyone's minds all the time. I echo the tone of comments made by other members. Personally, I would rather not have to think about the matter all the time. Although I recognise that no early-warning justice system can be perfect, will the minister comment in his closing speech on how those who are subject to protection orders will be dealt with under the new regime?

The minister will be aware of the Scottish biomass support scheme, which is now closed, with all the money having been committed. Many companies with excellent schemes were disappointed, not least one or two in my constituency. Is he aware that there is concern in parts of the industry that a number of the schemes to which money was already awarded will not go ahead? If that turns out to be the case, will he explain what will happen if there is an underspend on that SBSS funding? Will the funding go back into biomass schemes?

Does the minister accept that, notwithstanding the statutory position, the import of the many letters that I have received from various constabularies around Scotland is that, in the main, the police are not carrying out the duty? In the two very large cases—Strathclyde and Lothian and the Borders—the fire and rescue services do so, seemingly without reference to the police. In other areas where the police force does respond, its response has been that no one is trained in the task and that they do not actually carry out the duty.

Perhaps rescue from broken podiums might be more appropriate. I make it clear from the outset that the phrase "persons trapped in moving water" is the terminology that fire and rescue services use. It distinguishes the incidents that I am discussing from those that take place during flooding. Sustaining the differentiation might not always be possible—after all, flood waters can become moving waters very quickly—but for funding and training, the distinction is important. I will take a few minutes to outline how I became involved in the issue. On 16 January, I had a meeting in my constituency with members of the Motion family about the death of Graham Motion on 23 July 2006 in the River Tay at Perth. On that day, the first representative of the emergency services to arrive at the scene after the 999 call was placed was a single police officer who could not help. The second to arrive was the Scottish Ambulance Service. By the time that Tayside Fire and Rescue arrived, it was too late, even for properly trained staff, which I understand those who were present were not. Following the incident, the family spoke to police officers and firefighters and learned that the emergency services have little training to deal with such occurrences, which is why they decided to come to me. Some members of Graham Motion's family are here this evening—at least, they were supposed to be here. They have begun a water safety campaign—Safe-Tay—and I commend their courage in trying to make sense of Graham's death by focusing on what can be changed for the better.  As a result of the family's discussions, I lodged written questions to try to understand the extent of the problem. Subsequently, I wrote directly to police and fire services throughout Scotland to see whether their approach is consistent. Most of the responses arrived in mid to late March and, for obvious reasons, I have not had as much time as I might have wished to reply to specific points, but I still intend to do so. It has been clear from the outset that provision of the service varies considerably throughout Scotland. Obviously, my first port of call was Tayside Fire and Rescue and Tayside Police. Tayside Police helped by providing me with information about incidents in which it was involved. However, it advised me that it is often contacted a considerable time after an incident takes place. It has throw-lines, a dinghy based in Perth and people who are trained to use the craft, and three officers who are trained in swift-water rescue. It also calls on the fire service. Tayside Fire and Rescue is clear that it has no statutory duty relating to rescues from moving water—as opposed to flood rescues, which are covered under article 5 of the Fire (Additional Function) (Scotland) Order 2005. Curiously, that view is not repeated in the letter that I received from Strathclyde Fire and Rescue; neither is there any mention of police responsibility in that letter. Instead, I am advised of Strathclyde Fire and Rescue's attendance at 251 incidents in the past five years. It responds to water rescue incidents within the force boundaries, although it is a declared resource only from the Erskine bridge to the tidal weir. Lothian and Borders Police also mentions having throw-lines and nine trained officers. In contrast, Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service writes of "teams specifically trained and strategically located to carry out specialised water rescue" in Edinburgh, Bathgate and Galashiels, and identifies sums of money that are allocated to water rescue training from the general training budget. Grampian Fire and Rescue Service emphasises that it has no statutory duty to undertake such rescues—as opposed to those that arise during flooding incidents—and that it has no plans to take on the primary role in responding. Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service has three trained officers but no response team. Northern Constabulary provides no specific training and would have to rely on the coastguard, although the coastguard is not always the appropriate service. Dumfries and Galloway Fire and Rescue Service has no trained staff, and neither does Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary—instead, it is Nith  Inshore Rescue that responds. Fife Constabulary has no officer trained to deal with moving water incidents and would call on the fire service or the coastguard. Fife Fire and Rescue has two such officers but no operational capability. The minister may be feeling slightly battered by all that information, but I hope that he understands the point that I am making. The decisions about who responds, who is trained and how much training is required vary considerably from area to area. No force seems to have specific budget headings for the kind of water rescue training that is being debated. I believe that the time is right for the situation to be reviewed. In Perth, there has been an increase in the use of the bridge over the Tay for suicide attempts as well as for what might be called recreational dooking—as dangerous as it is, there has been an increase in such activity. The number of incidents is increasing, and the ability to assess the situation throughout Scotland is impaired by the lack of agreement on the basis on which such incidents should be recorded and the issue of who should record them. In some cases, the services were unable to tell me how many incidents there had been in the past five years. Tayside Fire and Rescue officers have had it made clear to them in writing that they are not to go into the water. In the incident on 6 March, that is what Tam Brown did. He is the fire officer to whom the minister referred in responding to my parliamentary question last week. Tam Brown was untrained and going against his instructions. In doing so—in working outside his operational remit—he was laying himself open to disciplinary action, even if none transpired. But he saved a life. It is not right that we expect such a rescue to take place when officers of whatever emergency service is involved do not have the training to effect a proper rescue. Clarity is required. If, as seems to be the case, there is no statutory duty on any force to conduct the rescue, as opposed to co-ordinate it, which is a different matter, it is left entirely to the chief constable or the chief fire officer to assume the responsibility—or not. People in different parts of the country get different responses because of different levels of training and funding. In this debate, I am looking to the minister for a recognition of the confusion and lack of clarity that exists and an agreement that the situation needs to be reviewed so that there is a clearer steer as to where the true responsibility lies, because such clarity simply does not exist at present.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether consideration will be given to reviewing the current arrangements for the rescue of persons from moving water. (S3O-3)

The situation that the minister describes is not borne out in practice. The phrase, "persons trapped in moving water" is used by the fire service to describe drowning incidents, of which there are an increasing number, including in the River Tay at Perth. Is the minister aware that no emergency service is specifically charged with the duty to carry out such rescues, which has resulted in inconsistent practice in Scotland and the threat of disciplinary action against officers who carry out rescues? In the circumstances, will he agree that that situation cannot continue, for the sake of community and individual safety, and in fairness to fire officers who carry out those rescues?

One of the most welcome aspects of winning an election is that the SNP now gets the opportunity to show that it can make a real difference to Scotland and to the way in which we are governed. Throughout the election campaign, we regularly highlighted our intention to slim down government, and a start has been made already, with a smaller ministerial team than before. Listening to the comments that were made by various members when the motions on Cabinet  and ministerial appointments were being debated, I noticed that people seemed to be surprised that what we had been saying was what we meant. I suggest that everyone should get used to that happening because it is going to happen more often. What else have we been saying? The notion of slimmed-down government is not just about reducing the number of ministers; it is also about taking a long, hard look at the processes of government and working out how they can be streamlined to far better effect. The fact that something has aye been does not mean that it always will be. Frankly, I think that Scotland has been held back by the aye-been attitude. It is long past time for change. That change will be welcome.

When I have discussed the specifics of the issue with the cabinet secretary, I will give the member my views. One thing that the change that I am talking about will mean is that the vast array of agencies, quangos, non-departmental public bodies and so on will be up for serious review. I hesitate to use the phrase "bonfire of the quangos" because it has never yet amounted to more than a damp squib. However, perhaps the cabinet secretary could indicate whether he intends, for example, to continue with plans to merge the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Natural Heritage, which was talked about during the campaign. If he intends to do that, does he have a timescale in mind and can he guarantee that the merger will reduce bureaucracy? I believe that cutting back on the proliferation of bodies that seem to do jobs that are slightly different variations on a similar theme will go down well with the public. Arguably, many functions can be taken back into central Government. Equally, we have robust local authorities in Scotland that might also be able to take on some of the functions of the various agencies. In particular, I would like the cabinet secretary to talk about his plans for Communities Scotland, whether he intends to consult local authorities before any transfer of functions takes place and whether he has a timetable for the completion of the changeover—if that is what is envisaged by the new Government, as I hope it is. I ought to add the caveat that I hope that, should such further devolution of power to local  authorities take place—whether it involves Communities Scotland or any other body—there will be a concomitant adjustment in the financial settlement. During the past eight years, we have heard a constant refrain that, although the Government is willing to push more powers the way of local authorities, it is somewhat less willing to ensure that sufficient money is available to enable them to carry out those functions. One of the biggest challenges facing us—and it is one that we all share, whether we are in government or in opposition—is the need to ensure that the image and standing of this Parliament are raised considerably. There might be significant proposals to be made about how some parliamentary reforms will bring this institution closer to the people whom it serves—that is for a different debate. However, yesterday, the First Minister made it clear that the results of the election, in and of themselves, demand a different way of working in this place. That, in turn, demands a different response from members across the chamber. Frankly, we might have to get used to the lack of diktat from the front bench. That means that former ministers will have to reprogramme their brains to accept that new reality—and, indeed, some of us who are now on the Government benches might have to reprogramme our brains to remember that it is we who have the ministers. Alex Salmond said that the five subject debates that would follow on from yesterday's statement—of which this is the first—would provide members with an opportunity to contribute to and influence the Government's programme. Having said that, we could probably do without bedtime stories from Wendy Alexander—the fact that she was not up to a big workload does not mean that John Swinney is not. Pinching other parties' good manifesto commitments is not new. In the past eight years, it has been done continually—mostly by Labour nicking our good manifesto ideas. What is new is the open acknowledgement of the source of those good ideas. There needs to be more of that openness. My final comments are on the Howat review. It has taken two years and a change of Government to get the review out into the open, which is a shameful example of the worst way in which to govern. I have not yet seen the review, but I agree with Derek Brownlee that it would be useful to have a debate on the review alone. However, the issue is germane to today's debate, as the review was set up to consider the performance and outcome of programmes and to identify those that did not match partnership priorities. The cabinet secretary commented that the new smaller Government fits into what Howat found and that  the concerns about the "crowded public sector landscape" confirm the SNP's concerns, which is, no doubt, why the outgoing Administration did not want to reveal the results of the review. Equally, we can no doubt expect continued openness of a kind that is unparalleled in the history of the Parliament.

How many times over the past eight years did the Governments that Wendy Alexander was occasionally part of consult any Opposition party about the structure of their Cabinet responsibilities?

I welcome my very good friend and colleague to his new role in the Parliament. In view of the adverse impact on social inclusion that is likely to be occasioned by any widespread closure of post offices, will the minister join me in condemning the politically motivated delay in the announcement by the secretary of state, which ensured that it was made after 3 May? I wonder why that was. The minister has talked about the development of co-location, on which there has been much discussion this afternoon. Has he given, or will he give, active consideration to the Scottish Government services, as well as local government services, that could be delivered through the post office network?

It is with delight that I am in a position to welcome everything that the First Minister said today. Indeed, so will my constituents, particularly those who run small businesses, who will welcome the Government's early indication that it will deal with business rates. That policy will have a massively positive impact on the high streets of Scotland's towns and villages. Is the First Minister in a position to expand on what the timetable will be for the removal or reduction of business rates? In particular, can he indicate when those many small  businesses may plan the reinvestment of the sums that they currently pay in rates?

Under protest.  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Roseanna Cunningham (Perth) (SNP)  The following member took the oath:  Margaret Curran (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab)  The following members made a solemn affirmation:  Nigel Don (North East Scotland) (SNP) Bob Doris (SNP) (Glasgow)  The following members took the oath:  Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab) Fergus Ewing (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP)  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP)  The following members took the oath:  Patricia Ferguson (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab) Alex Fergusson (Galloway and Upper Nithsdale) (Con) Ross Finnie (West of Scotland) (LD)  The following members made a solemn affirmation:  Joe FitzPatrick (Dundee West) (SNP) George Foulkes (Lothians) (Lab)  The following member took the oath:  Murdo Fraser (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Kenneth Gibson (Cunninghame North) (SNP)  The following member made a solemn affirmation and repeated it in Gaelic:  Rob Gibson (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)

They have failed.

I congratulate Mark Ruskell on securing the debate. Given the bill that Parliament passed this afternoon, it is particularly appropriate that we continue to talk about the railways and the extent to which they are beginning to be seen by ordinary people as profoundly important in their transport options. Presiding Officer, you will not be surprised to learn that I will concentrate on Perthshire, because it is a key central point of connection for much of Scotland's transport—not just railways but roads; everything tends to run through Perth. However, Perthshire's major connectivity does not seem to be acknowledged in its transport infrastructure. I know that the minister has commented on that in the past. We in Perthshire are particularly concerned about the railway links. There is a bigger issue to do with railways—including the frequency and speed of trains—that is not really part of tonight's debate, although I am sure that we will come back to it another time. Blackford and Greenloaning are examples of places where we are failing to acknowledge the enormous demand that is being expressed by communities. There does not seem to be any response to that demand from the various authorities that are charged with dealing with it. The main railway station in my constituency is Perth, which is massively important, and there is a station at Gleneagles, which Mark Ruskell mentioned. However, Dunblane station is also important to Perthshire. Many folk in my constituency travel to Dunblane to access trains that run at far greater frequency than do those from either Gleneagles or Perth. That is putting a massive pressure on Dunblane, which cannot cope with the demand, which would be infinitely alleviated if Blackford and Greenloaning were reopened and trains began further back up the line. That idea needs to be considered. What concerns me about the TACTRAN document to which Mark Ruskell referred—and about which I could go into a great amount of detail—is that it does not link the undercapacity of the park-and-ride facility at Dunblane railway station with the fact that more frequent train services run from the town and that anyone who lives north of Dunblane is bound to want to travel there to access them. Moreover, it does not contain the kind of methodology that provides statistics that are useful enough to use in our arguments. I am sorry that our speaking time is so brief. I will have to end now, but this debate will run and run. We will certainly return to it after 3 May.

No, Presiding Officer. I pressed my request-to-speak button earlier, when trying to get in during question time.

Although Perthshire might not immediately spring to mind in a debate on housing problems, the area is experiencing very significant difficulties, proof of which is the Executive's agreement to suspend the right to buy in certain parts of Perth and Kinross. The minister has already referred to that pretty desperate measure, which has been used to lock into place some protection for existing affordable housing stock in the area. In Perth and Kinross, pressured area status covers 21 letting areas, nine of which are in my constituency. I think that we just might be starting to see the inevitable end of a policy—right to buy—that many of us warned would lead to the current problems. However, I am not going to indulge in a ritual bout of Maggie-bashing because, no matter which party has been in power, there have been serious housing problems for decades. This has been a dispiriting debate. For once, I find myself in agreement with Frances Curran—I hope that nobody who has a serious housing problem is watching the debate. I do not want to pretend that there have been no attempts to rectify the situation. The homelessness legislation is a case in point, and there is no doubt that there have been improvements over the years. The difficulty is that solving one problem simply led to others. My surgeries are full of people who are in despair because their position on the housing list is so low that there is no realistic likelihood that they will ever get a house in the social rented sector. All MSPs hear about that problem. People know that, unless they can show an extraordinary need that will bounce them up the list, they have no hope of getting a house. Much of what we do is an attempt to get them extra points on the list. We hear stories about people who find ways of declaring themselves homeless so that they will move up the list, and about young people and families who are placed in wholly unsatisfactory temporary accommodation. In Perth and Kinross, the number of such people increased from 212 in 2003-04 to 759 in 2005-06. People are on the list for years. The social rented sector is now, in effect, emergency housing. Most others need not apply. Why? There are simply not enough houses to go round. In Perth and Kinross, there are 7,888 council houses of various sizes, including sheltered accommodation. There are 4,179 people on the waiting list and a further 907 are waiting for a transfer. In 2004-05, there were only 569 vacancies, which went to the statutory homeless, transfers and some people from the waiting list. That is a turnover rate of 6.5 per cent, which  clearly cannot satisfy the demand. In 2005-06, a total of 130 affordable houses for rent or sale at low cost were completed in the Perth and Kinross area. The net result is a lot of unhappy people who struggle to find independence for themselves. I have looked at the detailed local figures. By far the biggest problem is with the supply of one and two-bedroom houses. My guess is that that pattern will manifest itself throughout Scotland as families get smaller and as more people live on their own. What is happening in the marketplace? That is the other side of this very depressing coin. Perthshire has among the lowest wages in the country, so turning to owner occupation is not an option unless affordable houses are built that are within the price range of the low paid. Are developers interested in building low-cost homes for sale? Are they hell. Perthshire is full of developments of three, four and five-bedroom houses at prices upwards of £300,000. I have no idea who buys them. I certainly could not afford them and, as everyone knows, politicians do not exactly count as the low paid. Furthermore, I have no idea where all the wannabe downsizing baby boomers will downsize to in 10, 15, or 20 years' time, so I can see yet another problem developing already. Can we get in front of that problem rather than let it overwhelm us later? There are no council houses to rent unless someone is classified as homeless or has such serious medical problems that they jump the queue; and there are no affordable houses to buy, apart from the very council houses that, if they were sold, would exacerbate the problem. In addition to that reality, we now have pressured area status in significant parts of the council area in which I live. There is some good news, of course. Some £900,000 that was raised through a reduction in council tax discounts on long-term empty and second homes is being used to buy land that will be earmarked for affordable housing development, but it is nowhere near enough. The consequences for my part of the world can be seen in its skewed demographics. There is a high level of out-migration among those who are most likely to be economically active. Young people leave in droves to go to university and college and are unable to come back even if they want to. Others, frankly, contribute to the problems of the inner-city areas that other members represent. I presume that the folk who leave my area and cannot move back to it end up in MSPs' surgeries in Edinburgh and Glasgow. The only way out of the problem is to build more houses. Despite Margo MacDonald's continual interventions, I do not care who builds affordable houses as long as they are built. They must be built both for rent and for sale, and they must be of  the size that is in the greatest demand. That is not happening anywhere. Perhaps it is time to follow the example of countries where the state builds houses for sale as well as for rent at the affordable end of the market and organises the provision of the cheap long-term mortgages that are required. Until that happens, debates such as this one will be meaningless.

Obviously, the bill has potentially far-reaching effects. As I said during the stage 1 debate, the Health Committee had a considerable number of difficulties with the bill. Many members were ambivalent about the bill throughout the committee's consideration of it. That is evidenced in the substantial recommendations that were made at the end of stage 1 following the work that we did, and in the changes that were made at stage 2. We went out to meet groups of people who would be directly affected by the bill—it was clear that many of those who it is intended will be protected by the bill have significant concerns about the implications of the legislation. In our view, that was unprecedented; we had not come across that before. There has also been a sharp difference of opinion between people who represent the elderly and those who represent some of the other significant groups that are encompassed within the definition of "adults at risk". The bill confers the right to enter someone's property, even against their will, as well as the right to remove them from their own homes or to remove a third party from the home. That was, for obvious reasons, a particular cause for concern to everybody. The division of opinion on the bill has been, to a greater or lesser extent, expressed throughout our consideration of the bill, and was the principal reason for the committee's concerns. That division of opinion continues today. We have all had the e-mail from Inclusion Scotland and will have heard Enable Scotland express this morning its continuing concerns about what is being enacted. Coincidentally, I happened to be meeting a group of wheelchair users from my part of the world today—they repeated the concerns that other disabled groups expressed to us. The bill raises fundamental questions about the limits to state intervention as set against the individual's right to personal autonomy. People want to retain their autonomy regardless of their circumstances. As I said, the minister took on board most of, if not all, the committee's recommendations. I say to the minister that I still have reservations about the lack of full appeal provisions. No doubt one or the other of us will be found to be right in due course. His extensive concessions at stage 2 were extremely welcome, but to my mind we are in effect giving him the benefit of the doubt at this stage. Some things need to be recognised. First, the bill is called the Adult Support and Protection  (Scotland) Bill: the emphasis has, for obvious reasons, been on the punitive measures in the bill, but real support must be put in place if the bill is to work properly. That means everything from support for carers right through to making advocacy services available. We must not merely say that people have the right to go to them—we must actively make them available. Secondly, I do not think that the serious disaffection of disability groups can be ignored. I hope that the minister will agree that, although there is no requirement to have a representative from disability groups on the adult protection committees, it may nevertheless be politic for local APCs to ensure that there is such a representative on the committee, because the difference of opinion between disability groups and groups that represent the elderly suggests that there may be some real problems if disability groups are not represented on those committees. Thirdly, although we heard in the briefing today that punitive measures would be used "rarely, if ever", I remind the minister and the rest of Parliament that when representatives from Scottish Borders Council gave evidence, they suggested otherwise. They talked about using the measures once or twice a year in the Borders alone. If we multiply that to get a figure for throughout Scotland every year, it does not count as "rarely, if ever" in my book. I hope that the minister will agree that practice will have to be monitored very carefully indeed. Once again, I thank all the members of my committee for their participation and all their hard work. I also thank the clerks and various officials for all the work that was done in the background, and I thank the witnesses who gave us evidence. I hope that the concerns that have been expressed throughout consideration of the bill and today turn out to be totally unfounded.

I am looking a little puzzled because we were originally told that we would have less than five minutes, so five minutes seems quite generous. Most members are only too well aware that the public are concerned about the perceived centralisation of health services. It is an unfortunate fact of life that although the removal of services happens relatively quickly, any promised roll-out of compensatory services seems to take much longer. I am a veteran of the Perthshire campaign to retain consultant-led maternity services at the Perth royal infirmary, which was at its height when Susan Deacon was the Minister for Health and Community Care. There was no end of public involvement—which, in general, was viewed as an infernal nuisance by the health board officials—but at the end of four years of consultation, the outcome was exactly the one that the health board wanted in the first place, despite the opinions that the people of Perthshire had expressed clearly and frequently. I sat at a meeting at which a health board official publicly stated, using almost these very words, "It doesn't matter if everyone in Perthshire wants to retain consultant-led maternity services—it is not going to happen." That was during the consultation process. It might be a coincidence that the debate is being held just two weeks after the Parliament voted against Bill Butler's member's bill on direct elections to health boards, but we have some way  to go before we can convince people that they are being listened to and are having their views taken into account. The Executive motion contains a great deal with which I agree, and the SNP's amendment reflects the extent of the consensus, but our amendment specifically acknowledges the difference between core acute services and the more specialist services. It is when core acute services are to be affected that tension really arises. Contrary to what is sometimes said, most of the people to whom I speak do not expect a hospital at the end of every street. Nor do they expect that highly specialised areas of medicine should, or even could, be available in every locality. Frankly, it is insulting to ordinary people to suggest that they do not understand the difference between the two kinds of health care. What people expect is that certain core services will be made available as locally as possible. They include in those core services the provision of maternity and accident and emergency services, about which there has been a lot of controversy.

It is a pity that Duncan McNeil did not intervene on Shona Robison with that question. As he may well imagine, my comments will be more narrowly focused on my constituency. It is important that we take people's views on board. Unfortunately, people do not feel that that has happened so far. It is also important to make the decision-making process much more transparent. For example, when decisions are made about how many prescribing chemists are appropriate for a community, what criteria are used and what weight, if any, is given to local opinion? If pharmacists are going to play the more central role in the delivery of health services that all of us agree is appropriate, the number of pharmacies that are available in a local area will become more and more important. I can see the beginnings of a problem that needs to be sorted out before it becomes a major irritation. I may take up the matter separately with the Minister for Health and Community Care, because there is a specific issue that needs to be dealt with. The minister will remember that I raised with him the number of minor illness and illness units in Perthshire and, more specifically, the lack of such a unit in Auchterarder, despite the existence of St Margaret's, the excellent local community hospital. He made a welcome comment when he said that  he appreciated the point about "pressures elsewhere in the system, which I want NHS Tayside to monitor closely. I want NHS boards always to review the provision of services, so that we can allow change to occur as appropriate to community needs."— [ Official Report , 1 February 2007, c 31740-31741.]  I should point out that the "extensive public involvement exercise" that the minister quoted NHS Tayside as having undertaken did not include any direct consultation with the people of Auchterarder and its catchment area on the potential for an MIIU at St Margaret's. Without such consultation, it is understandable that health board officials do not realise that the seven miles from Auchterarder to Crieff—the location of the nearest MIIU—are along unlit, winding roads that would never be the first driving choice of anyone seeking help. Given that the bus service between Auchterarder and Crieff is of the Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays variety, public transport does not fill the gap. The bus service does not exist on Sundays. Even on the days when there is a bus service, the timetable ends around 5pm. From the other areas that would use an Auchterarder MIIU, there is simply no direct public transport provision to Crieff—none at all. In making those comments, I am aware that I have focused on my area, but the same issues and problems will apply in many areas of Scotland. I appreciate the difficult challenges in all of this, but they are part and parcel of what must be taken into consideration if the desire to make the NHS local—a desire that we all share—is not to founder in the implementation. Too often, it does.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied that NHS Tayside made the correct decision in respect of the number and location of minor injury and illness units in its area. (S2O-11854)

For obvious reasons, my interest lies in the provision in Perthshire, which has MIIUs in Blairgowrie, Pitlochry and Crieff. Auchterarder, which has a community hospital, is denied such a unit, despite having a growing population. Is the minister aware that that has resulted in patients in Auchterarder and its surrounding areas increasing pressure on the accident and emergency facilities at Perth royal infirmary and probably also at Stirling? Does he agree that the success of MIIUs depends on their being available to natural communities? Will he consider whether the network should be extended?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. This relates directly to a matter of some debate, particularly in the closing speeches. I have now had clear advice from the clerks and should advise the minister that an amendment at stage 2 to reduce the percentage of directly elected members on a health board below 51 per cent would indeed be competent. That is perhaps more a point of information, but it is important in the context of the debate.

Does the minister accept that, frequently in the Parliament, amendments are agreed to at stage 2 that make bills different, and that bills can become even more different at stage 3? The Executive lodges such amendments all the time.

It is not the first time that a committee convener has had to speak to a stage 1 report after everything has been said umpteen times. It is a very odd procedure indeed to have the stage 1 report presented after the horse has bolted. That is a deliberate mixing of metaphors. It is an issue that we must address. I thank everybody involved in bringing the report together—the witnesses, the clerks and committee members—for all their work throughout the process, and of course Bill Butler for introducing the bill in the first place. It is fair to say that all members of the Health Committee understood precisely why Bill Butler introduced the bill. Regardless of views about the general principles, or indeed about some of the specifics, we were absolutely clear about the general levels of voter discontent with health board decisions, which were often expressed vociferously in long-running campaigns. Many of those giving evidence acknowledged that problem regardless of their final position on the bill's proposals. Of those opposed to the bill, sympathy  was expressed by, among others, the BMA, the RCN and the boards themselves. Hand in hand with the issue of public discontent came the question of accountability, or, one should more correctly say, lack of accountability. Those currently part of the status quo do not accept that criticism; those not part of the status quo see the lack more clearly. For a concise summary of the main reasons for the complaints about the current method of working, I direct members to paragraph 26 of the report, which I will not read out here. Suffice to say that none of those criticisms or comments will be at all unusual to the vast majority of us here today, nor are they unknown to the current establishment. The question is, what should the response be? For the committee's part, it felt that Bill Butler's proposals provided a useful starting point for a response, which is why we rejected the arguments of those opposed to the bill. In a nutshell, we say that it is not enough to recognise the huge gulf in perception that exists, then effectively say that everyone else is out of step, bar the professionals. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities offered a compromise of sorts by suggesting that the existing role of councillors on boards could be beefed up, but a degree of scepticism was expressed as to how effective that would be, given that it is not clear that the existing role of those councillors is to provide any sort of real democratic representation. A more serious concern of those opposed to the bill is the worry that the NHS's role as a truly national service may be compromised by the addition of locally elected board members. It was said that that would lead to inconsistency of policy and programme implementation. Professor Stevely of NHS Ayrshire and Arran and Professor Arbuthnott at NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde spoke in surprisingly negative and emotive terms about risk, about endangering the NHS and about interfering with the local delivery of services. The minister himself has talked about the risk of fragmentation; his comments today in that regard were profoundly negative. For those of us who have long had concerns about so-called postcode prescribing, and are already aware of considerable differences in service delivery from one board area to another, that argument seems rather odd. More specific arguments were also canvassed. Those included concerns about voter turnout—though some of the comments about that and the level of turnout below which an election has no validity would seem to carry some more general warning regarding the continued validity of any election. In any case, Bill Butler himself was able to counter those arguments with his own statistics suggesting that, on single issues, the voters are considerably more engaged than we might think.  There were other, more technical issues that concerned the committee and that were raised directly with Bill Butler. It is fair to say that the committee was sceptical as to the usefulness of an electoral area where that encompassed the whole of a health board area. There are one or two areas where that might not be a problem, but for most of us there were concerns about heavily populated urban areas always being able to outvote the more widespread and sparsely populated rural areas. We were also surprised at the lack of any reference to remuneration in the bill, not because we think it a popular argument to make—far from it—but the truth is that people should not be put out of pocket if they are prepared to put themselves forward and get elected. The committee did not come to a view on the perfect proportion of directly-elected members per board either. In our view, there is still a debate to be had about that. The proper place for that debate is at stage 2. The committee—with one named exception—therefore took the view that it approved the general principles of the bill, for the following reasons: we have sympathy with the arguments about public involvement, consultations and decision making and agree that change is needed; and the NHS is already no stranger to politics, so the addition of non-party political members will not change that dramatically.

An interesting argument might be had at stage 2 about what is and is not within the scope of the bill. There are ways around the concerns about departing from a national service—I was just coming on to that point when the minister intervened. It was also suggested that, because the proposed electoral system may lead to its own undemocratic representation, board areas should be subdivided to arrive at smaller electoral areas. There should also be a debate about the suitable proportion of directly elected members on any given board, and directly elected members should be paid or compensated for any expenses or loss of earnings that they might incur. As all its concerns could be considered at stage 2, the Health Committee commends the bill to Parliament.

Understandably, the member is mostly focused on central region, but is she aware that the interest of schools in home smart goes far beyond it? Indeed, a primary school in my constituency—Balnacraig school in Perth—has won a prize in the competition. Does she agree that that school should also be commended?

The minister referred to the use of fixed penalty notices in the Tayside police area—they are in use in my constituency, in the city of Perth. Is the minister aware that there is a certain amount of evidence that, although the notices are effective against what might be called one-off offenders—the people who perhaps come out of a pub on a Friday night a bit overrefreshed, shall we say—they are somewhat less effective when used against persistent offenders, who often do not have the money to pay or will not pay? Regrettably, when such offenders do not pay, no action is taken against them by the local procurator fiscal. Will the minister ensure that the process is followed through completely in any future roll-out?

It is less than three months since we last debated Trident in the Parliament. In September we were debating in anticipation of a Government decision on renewal. Today's debate is taking place in the context of a white paper that clearly signposts the Government's intentions and of the desperate need for a debate throughout the UK on the need for Trident to be replaced. None of the sentiments that I expressed in the debate on 28 September are inappropriate in this debate, so I hope that all members will take those comments as read. I endorse everything that Nicola Sturgeon said in her opening remarks, but I might have been slightly more scathing about what I see as an international example of men with mid-life crises worrying about whether theirs is bigger than the others'. Today I want to look at a slightly different issue. I hope that all members have read the most recent publication by Greenpeace, which makes a very telling point. It highlights the narrow definition of national security that is always referred to in debates such as this. Perhaps the concept of national security should be subjected to rather more detailed scrutiny than it is usually given. For various reasons, including the global stand-off between the west and the communist world and the various targeting strategies of the principal players, during the cold war it might have seemed obvious what national security meant for us, although I think that that was debatable even then. However, what does it mean now? No one can answer that question. In a much-publicised war on terror, it is not easy to see what the nuclear strategy is, other than to try to ensure that nuclear weapons do not fall into the hands of those who may misuse them. That involves value judgments about which are right and proper regimes to have their fingers on the buttons and which are not, and cannot address the issue of the weapons' possible use by individuals or terrorist cells.  Recently, debate has centred on what even some authorities in the United States argue is the major challenge to world security—the threat of climate change. How do either of the changed realities in which we live mesh with the intention to move to a new generation of nuclear weapons? How do either of them justify spending what on some estimates may amount to £76 billion, if they are not the basis of our definition of national security? The dangerous perception is that the continued brandishing of nuclear weapons will really be about access to resources in the future, with the rich west and its client states relying on such weapons as the big stick by which to ensure that scarce resources remain available to the west. What is happening in the middle east could be well described as oil wars, with the USA's main interest being in a continued supply of oil, instead of in addressing the issue of scarcity of non-renewable resources. In that context, nuclear weapons become a way of ignoring the reality of climate change or, at least, of allowing the west to ignore that reality. If we accept that climate change is a threat that we will all have to face, what are we doing to address it? We know that that will cost money. Why, at a time when we are facing a cost that we all recognise will need to be borne, do we appear to have up to £76 billion available for this dubious deterrent? Maureen Macmillan told us that the Labour Government is calling for a national debate, but she went on to express the view that that debate should take place within the walls of the House of Commons. I can tell her from experience that that kind of national debate is no debate at all. It is only right and proper that the Parliament should make a contribution to the debate and, more to the point, should encourage a debate throughout Scotland. Ultimately, members either believe that it is okay to have weapons of mass destruction or they do not. If they do not, they should vote with the SNP at 5 pm.

The minister may be aware that some weeks ago Richard Baker and I co-hosted a dinner with Psoriasis Scotland. At that event it was impressed on all of us how seriously the condition affects people's normal day-to-day living. I was made very aware of the need for early diagnosis, especially at GP level, because only with early diagnosis can effective treatment be put in place that will have an impact. Can the minister say more about how he hopes GPs will be made more aware of and able to assess and pick up the disease in its early stages?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has received the consultants report referred to by the Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning in his answer to question S2O-11145 on 23 November 2006 regarding delivery of broadband access to those who are currently excluded from this technology. (S2O-11346)

I thank the minister for his response and look forward to getting further details of the report. Does he understand my constituents' frustration at their continuing lack of access to broadband? Is he aware that some people who live no more than 9 miles from Perth are unable to make a broadband connection? One constituent so affected lives less than 3 miles from Perth. Those are hardly remote rural communities. Does the minister accept that, as a result of that problem, there are considerable barriers to the development of rural businesses? Can he indicate a timescale for resolving the problem?

I cannot answer Phil Gallie off the top of my head, but I know that only  one or two other countries have done so. I do not know what debates are going on elsewhere. I was talking about debate in the chamber. All of us need to remember that debate is only debate if there is more than one side of an argument. Many people inside and outside the Parliament have suggested that there should have been no debate about adoption by same-sex couples, but that would have been a ridiculous position in which to have found ourselves. Thirdly, if we are not allowed to have such debates, that is tantamount to saying that the right of free speech does not apply—or, more to the point, that it applies only in circumstances in which people agree with one another's opinions.

I have to finish. There are arguments for and against adoption by same-sex couples and I have some sympathy with what I have heard from some of the members who will not vote for my amendments. However, as I said at the outset, I was doing what I believed to be right. If I do not have the right to do what I believe to be right, what is the Parliament about? I will conclude by reading from an e-mail that I received this morning from someone who wrote: "I have two adopted children in their 20s, still coping with adoption issues. In adoption the interests of the children are paramount. They have to cope with rejection—starting when their chums taunt, 'That's not your real Mummy and Daddy.' Thank God mine don't also have to cope with their parental sexuality. I am comfortable with same sex legal partnerships—not my issue at all. But, just as adults over 38 are rejected as potential foster parents because the children would struggle with having older parents, so the interests of the child must rule out same-sex parents." We already discriminate. All that I am saying is that I think that the rights of the children mean that we should not take the step that is proposed in the bill.

When I hear some members applaud my courage, if nothing else, I am sharply reminded of that famous "Yes Minister" sketch in which the politician's courage in pursuing a certain course of action is commended by civil servants who want to get the politician to do something else entirely. In today's debate, I have been told that I have courage by members on both sides of the argument. At the outset, I said that these amendments were about my view of what is in the best interests of children. I am sorry that quite a lot of the debate—whether inside or outside the chamber—has not been about that. I believe that what I have proposed is in the best interests of children, although I accept that other people have different views. I notice that no one has referred directly to the evidence on what is in the best interests of children, which I quoted earlier. This morning, I was told that about 60 per cent of adoptions break down. We are talking about situations that are highly unstable even as things stand. Throughout the debate, I have tried to keep my language and tone as calm and rational as possible. Notwithstanding the whispering campaign—or, in the case of Patrick Harvie, not so much a whispering campaign as a shouting campaign—the idea that somehow I am being a puppet for someone else is ridiculous. Anyone who examines my voting record on such matters will realise that that cannot be the case. I said that some folk had suggested that I should have said nothing but, frankly, that is an extraordinary suggestion to make. First, as I have had occasion to say in connection with other bills, committees are not rubber stamps for Executive legislation, but neither is the Parliament a rubber stamp for committee deliberations. The fact that an issue has been dealt with in committee does not mean that there can be no debate on it in the Parliament as a whole. Secondly, if the Parliament had had no debate on adoption by same-sex couples, we would have woefully misrepresented the views of voters, which cannot be right.

I echo what Karen Gillon said—that there is no such thing as an absolute right to adopt for anyone, no matter what their circumstances are. Many heterosexual couples and single people are turned down for a wide variety of reasons. I presume that, if the bill is passed unamended, many same-sex couples will also be refused, for a wide variety of reasons. Much of the debate that has raged over the past week has been based on the premise that this is something to do with gay rights. It is not. I do not believe that it has anything to do with gay rights. It is about what is in the best interests of the  children—although, clearly, there is a difference of opinion as to what that might be. Is that difference of opinion not to be reflected in the chamber? The truth is that including same-sex couples in the category of those who can apply to adopt gives many people serious cause for concern. Indeed, if the results of the Executive's consultation exercise are an accurate reflection of the view in the country, that must include a majority of Scots. I share those concerns, and I said so during the stage 1 debate on 13 September. I know that that came as something of a shock to people, as I do not suppose that I was ever in the category of the usual suspects. However, because I did not feel that what the bill proposed was right, I had a choice to make. I could have said nothing. Some people have suggested that that is what I should have done. That would certainly have been the easy way out. However, I believe that families matter. It is society's networks of families that are its strength—I assume that that is a given. The traditional family pattern is still what prevails throughout society in Europe, Africa, Asia and the Americas. It is under stress, to be sure, but it still provides the basis for the upbringing of the vast majority of children, and society is the poorer when it breaks down, as we frequently debate in the chamber under different headings.

The amendments do not remove any existing protection; they simply reinstate the current scenario, to which I understand that the member objects. In the early stages of the bill, the Education Committee noted that there was little evidence, one way or the other, in respect of same-sex adoption because of the lack of available research. It took that to mean that there should be no bar on same-sex adoption. I take it to mean that we should tread cautiously. Frankly, I feel reinforced in that view when even the Institute for Public Policy Research—not known for its right-wing approach on issues—has recently made it clear that all the evidence shows that "children who grow up in an 'intact, two-parent family' with both biological parents do better on a wide range of outcomes" than those who do not. A Child Trends research brief from 2002, which may be where some of the  IPPR's information comes from, summarises the position as follows: "research clearly demonstrates that family structure matters for children, and the family structure that helps children the most is a family headed by two biological parents in a low-conflict marriage." Those may be challenging assertions for some people but, frankly, if that is where the evidence takes us, I have to ask the question: do not children who are placed for adoption have the same right as those who have not lost their parents to have the chance to be taken into a family that accords with the traditional form?

I say with the greatest respect to Iain Smith that that is not the logic of my argument. He is arguing on the basis of false comparisons. We can all trade worst-case scenarios. I am trying to argue for the best case. We already know that age limits apply to adoption and fostering. Perhaps that is age discrimination, but I presume that we set those limits on the basis of what we believe to be in the child's best interests. That is all that I am concerned about. The language that I have used is deliberate, because I do not believe that people must believe in God to be persuaded by hundreds of thousands of years of human biology. We are what we are. I am heartened by the many messages of support that I have received. I note from The Scotsman yesterday that that includes support from no less than Professor John Haldane.

My colleague Linda Fabiani says, "Who is he?" She knows perfectly well who he is. I do not expect everyone to agree with what I have said; I am simply doing what I believe to be the right thing. I move amendment 94.

I congratulate my colleague John Swinney on securing tonight's debate. On 22 September in Birnam, he and I sat at a packed meeting with sub-postmasters from across Perthshire and further afield, at which a number of these issues were discussed. I apologise to him and to other members, because I will need to leave the chamber early, as I have two other diary engagements to attend tonight. As those of us who represent parts of rural Scotland know, there are already huge pressures on rural Scotland, where the rural post office is often at the heart of the community. Rural post offices are an invaluable way of disseminating public information and all local news—some might say that they are the best way of catching up with the local gossip—and they enable Government services to be delivered locally. They do that the length and breadth of the country. Rural post offices become involved in some weird and wonderful combinations in order to survive. Some of them double up as tourist information centres—I have one of those in my constituency—but they are more usually combined with a general store. The footfall that is created by the need to access the post office's services can generate that little bit of extra business that makes the shop viable. If folk no longer visit the post office or have no post office that they can visit, they are less likely to use the shop and the shop becomes one more amenity that the community loses. It is not as if rural Scotland is so well served by public transport options that getting to the next available shop and post office is easy. If the post office closes, the community's heartbeat stops.  The Government should do everything possible to ensure that rural post offices continue to thrive, but instead it seems to be doing all that it can to pull the rug out from under their feet. As John Swinney's motion makes clear, the withdrawal of the DTI's rural post office subsidy in a year and a half's time means that there is a real danger that up to 1,000 post offices could be lost to rural Scotland. That means that 1,000 communities across the country will have the heart ripped out of them. The hardest hit in those communities will be the most vulnerable and those who depend on their local post office the most—old folk, people on benefits and families on low incomes. The people who run our rural post offices are utterly disillusioned and very angry, and rightly so. They feel that the Government does not want anything to do with post offices. Although the Government has said that it supports them, its actions have had precisely the opposite effect. Every change that has been introduced has made it harder for people to use their post office and made it more difficult for the post office to make money. That depressing downward spiral must be stopped.

No. Christine Grahame is not on the committee.

It is often said that the committee system is the heart and soul of what happens in the Scottish Parliament, combining as it does the functions of select and standing committees in the rather different system at Westminster. Our legislative scrutiny is front loaded—hence the fairly lengthy and detailed process involved before the stage 1 debate can take place. The equivalent stage in Westminster involves a debate on general principles as a first step, followed by an amendment procedure that does not really allow for discussion of the principles of the bill. It is worth emphasising that the committee stage of bills in the Scottish Parliament is not intended to be a rubber-stamping exercise. The purpose of our front-loaded scrutiny, as opposed to the approach in the other place, is to ensure that flaws in draft bills are identified and drawn to the attention of ministers and the Parliament, so that the Parliament can pass legislation that works in the way in which it was intended to work. If that does not happen, the law of unintended consequences haunts every piece of legislation. That is particularly important in the context of the bill, which will have far-reaching effects. It is fair to say that the bill caused the Health Committee considerable difficulties, to which I will refer. Members who read the stage 1 report—I concede that probably few members outside the Health Committee have done so—will quickly have realised that there was a good deal of ambivalence about the bill, which is evidenced in  the committee's substantive recommendations for change. Members will see from paragraph 52 of the report that committee members went to meet people who would be directly affected by the bill, including groups of older people in Fife, a group of people who have mental illness in Edinburgh, and a group of people with learning difficulties in Glasgow. I thank Age Concern, SAMH and Enable for helping to organise those meetings. The meetings were essential, because we had learned that a number of the groups that the bill is intended to protect had significant concerns about the bill's implications. When new legislation is enacted to provide protections for people, we do not expect to find such opposition. In some cases, there was outright opposition. Members need only scan through the Official Report of the evidence-taking session of 19 September to begin to see the problem. Broadly speaking, there was a clear difference of opinion between witnesses representing groups dealing with the elderly and witnesses representing some of the other significant groups of people who are included under the definition of adults at risk in section 3 as "adults who, because they are affected by disability, mental disorder, illness, infirmity or ageing, are— (a) unable to protect themselves from abuse, or (b) more vulnerable to being abused than persons who are not so affected." Leaving aside the fact that that is potentially the entire population at some time or another of their lives, members need to remember that we are talking about people with full capacity. The bill includes the right to enter someone's property even against their will, as well as the right to remove them from their own homes or to remove a third party from the home. That was a particular cause for concern. I direct members' attention to the sharp divisions of opinion between different representative bodies on the power to override consent, which is contained in section 32. A discussion of the evidence is contained in paragraphs 163 to 182 of the Health Committee's report. Members will note that paragraphs 173 and 174 cover the most vocal opposition from Kevin Morris, on behalf of National Union of Students Scotland disabled students. He castigated the bill as "patronising". He said: "The bill will take back a lot of what we have worked long and hard for for disabled people."—[ Official Report, Health Committee , 19 September 2006; c 3040.] Capability Scotland reported that its clients thought that the bill was fine—until they realised that they were included in the definition, at which point they became somewhat less enthusiastic. Andrew Reid of Inclusion Scotland indicated that  disabled people should not be getting treated differently from able-bodied individuals. Other groups such as Age Concern Scotland and the National Autistic Society Scotland were more positive. However, the division of opinion was expressed throughout the committee's proceedings, to a greater or lesser extent, and it was the principal reason for the committee having such difficulty coming to a final view. Ultimately, however, the committee had to come to a view. Parts 2 and 3 were deemed generally pretty uncontroversial and gave the committee little concern. We are content with the provisions there. However, we had significant reservations about part 1, in particular the new powers in sections 3 to 38. The bill raises fundamental questions about the limits to state intervention, as set against the individual's right to personal autonomy—the right to be wrong; the right to be different. We took the view that, on balance, the bill has the potential to fill a gap, although we had difficulty pinpointing what that gap was. I am still not entirely clear about that. We welcomed some provisions. However, we felt that key definitions were seriously flawed. There were also concerns about the relationship between the powers under the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Bill and the powers contained in existing legislation. Which would take precedence? Our main concerns and recommendations can be grouped as follows. First, they are to do with the definition of adults at risk in section 3, which we considered to be inadequate. It should not be so all-encompassing and should not effectively discriminate against particular groups. The definition should be capable of being operationally effective. We were particularly concerned that such a central provision should not be amendable by subordinate legislation. Indeed, that echoes what the Subordinate Legislation Committee had to say on the matter. The term "abuse" is discussed in paragraphs 111 to 121 of the committee's report. We felt that it was an unhelpful term. During evidence taking, it became crystal clear that it was expected to encompass not just specific acts of commission but also inadvertent actions and actions that might broadly be categorised as being carried out with the best of intentions, albeit misplaced. The term also covers neglect and self-neglect. The committee was of the view that the terms "abuse" and "abuser" might inhibit complaints rather than encouraging concerns to be raised, particularly if the so-called abuser is a carer who is unable to cope with the situation in which they find themselves. The committee therefore recommends that the term "abuse" be replaced with phrasing that is less emotive and value laden, such as "at risk of serious harm".  On the interrelation between the bill and existing legislation, the committee felt that the bill should contain the same rights to advocacy services as exist under the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 and that it should be clearly indicated that advance statements similar to those covered by the provisions of the 2003 act should not be able to be overridden by the powers under the bill. There was a concern that there would be a bit of what one might call legislation shopping, with officials deciding to apply the principles of one bill because it did not provide the same protection as the other. Council officers' entering premises was also discussed by the committee. Apparently, as it stands, any council official can enter premises to undertake an assessment. The committee feels that the bill should be a tad more specific in that regard. The committee considered appeals against orders. There is no appeal against an assessment order: the removal of an individual who is deemed to be at risk so as to assess the situation. That may just happen in the course of a day—we accept that; however, we are not convinced that it is appropriate for people to be removed from their homes against their will without a right of appeal. No such right of appeal is currently provided for in the bill. I do not accept that the fact that there is a seven-day limit on such orders bars an appeal. The courts are accustomed to immediate hearings—for example, interim interdict procedures can be triggered literally overnight. The courts are well capable of dealing with that kind of scenario. The overriding of consent was perhaps the single most controversial aspect of the bill to be discussed by the committee. We believe that it should be an absolute last resort, to be used only when all other options have demonstrably failed. However, much of the case-study evidence unfortunately suggested that intervention would be contemplated in situations in which it was not a last resort. The reciprocity and resources argument has been mentioned and was discussed in the Finance Committee's report. We believe that, if someone is to be removed from their home, there is an obligation to place them in equivalent and appropriate care and accommodation. The committee believes that that should be stated in the bill, although it is mindful of the concern surrounding the availability of resources—including financial resources—to implement the bill properly. All those concerns have been raised directly with the minister, who has said that he is willing to narrow the definition of "adults at risk" to make it clear that it will not necessarily relate to all people  with disabilities. He has also said that he will reconsider the use of the term "abuse", to reflect our concern that it is unnecessarily stigmatising to those causing unintentional harm. The minister has said that he accepts the importance of advocacy. I may have missed it, but I hope that he said that that will be stated in the bill. He has also stated that he would accept the primacy of an advance statement, and I hope that that will be stated in the bill. He has said that he will clarify that protection orders will genuinely be used only when they are absolutely necessary. I ask him to clarify, in his closing speech, that that means after all other measures have failed. Finally, he has said that he will seek to limit the definition of "council officer" to those who are at least competent in terms of their qualifications and experience. Those assurances from the minister go some way to alleviating the committee's concerns, although he has not accepted all our recommendations. I thank all members of the committee for their participation, and I thank the clerks for all the hard work that was done in the background. I also thank all those who gave evidence on the bill. For obvious reasons, some of them had a more difficult time than others in the process, and I hope that we made it as positive an experience as possible. No doubt, we will engage in further dialogue in respect of the various issues that have been raised, but for the present I can say that the committee will endorse the principles of the bill.

I, too, congratulate Elaine Murray on giving us the opportunity to debate Farepak and the aftermath of its collapse. The extensive coverage of those events leaves a question hanging in the air. With a few honourable exceptions, the totally unregulated nature of Farepak and similar businesses has gone completely unreported and unrecognised. Treatment of the subject has been confined largely to columns in the business and financial pages of the papers, such as Lesley Campbell's in the Daily Record . In fairness, we should acknowledge that she had been writing about the issue long before October. I concede that the form of saving in question was largely unknown to me. As we say in Scotland, "Ah ken noo." All of us have learned a lesson about what families have to cope with in their lives. I have no doubt that the regulation issues will be closely scrutinised at Westminster. Cries of "Too much red tape!" usually emanate from certain business quarters, but it is a fair bet that most of them will keep quiet this time. Sooner or later, legislation will be introduced to bring such firms under a regulatory umbrella and the DTI will no doubt proceed with its investigation. I find it unbelievable that people in my constituency were allowed to make payments to Farepak on Friday 13 October. None of that will help people who are out of pocket. I have already heard of people who have resorted to moneylenders to get them through the next few months; I feared as much. The discussion of a charitable fund reminds us of the impact that the collapse must be having right now. Investigations and possible future regulation are all very well, but they will not help the people who are struggling in the run-up to Christmas. Regardless of how generous the public are—I note in passing that Sir Clive Thompson has shown no generosity so far or, for that matter, any evidence of shame—we know that many families face an extremely bleak Christmas. As I have said, some people have already resorted to using moneylenders. It is a disaster waiting to happen. As I made clear recently at First Minister's questions, I have major concerns about the response of various public bodies to what is an all-too-predictable outcome for many people. Today, I have written to all the housing bodies that operate in my constituency to ask them what action they can take to identify people who have lost money because of Farepak and whether they can provide any form of support that will help to ensure that their tenants do not get into even worse financial  difficulties than they are in at present. Early intervention can help to prevent financial problems from spiralling out of control. I very much hope that organisations will adopt a proactive stance to help their tenants avoid such problems. Along with other members, I met representatives of HBOS today to discuss their part in the debacle. I am sure that the DTI investigation will come to a view on that company's actions, but in the meantime I have some advice for it: any planned so-called champagne reception at Edinburgh Castle in December should be cancelled. At the very least, HBOS should increase its £2 million contribution to the charitable fund by however much that reception would have cost.

To ask the Scottish Executive what factors currently inhibit growth in Scotland's rural communities. (S2O-11067)

I am particularly interested in that issue. The minister must be aware that there are serious concerns about what might be called the missing generation in many rural communities. The demographic shift he mentioned means that inward migration is generally of economically inactive people and outward migration is of the generation aged between 18 and 34, who are effectively driven out of rural communities in Scotland because of a lack of jobs and affordable housing. Does the minister share my concern about that? If so, will he suggest how that trend can be reversed?

I anticipated that the member would do that. If Mr Wallace cares to think carefully about that debate, he will remember that the SNP was talking about a human rights commission that would have subsumed the various other human rights bodies that are now in place. The human rights commission that we were discussing is nothing like the one that is being discussed now.

I am listening to what the minister says. Will he consider expanding his comments to indicate what resources will be made available to communities to support them in all this?

I thank all those members who have chosen to attend this evening's debate and, in particular, those members from other parties who have given the motion the cross-party support that it requires to be debated in the chamber. I could have contented myself with a motion that raised simply a constituency issue but, although its focus is on developments within or bordering on my constituency, the motion raises issues that are relevant in areas throughout Scotland that, like Perthshire, have proved to be particular favourites with prospective wind farm developers. In the interests of precision and clarity, I should point out that, since the motion was drafted, two of the six inquiries that it mentions as being due to go ahead—for wind farms at Green Knowes and Knowehead—have been cancelled. The Knowehead wind farm will not go ahead because the initial application was rejected by the council and, when the developers appealed to the Scottish ministers, the appeal was rejected. In the case of Green Knowes, two applications were made. When the first application was refused, the developers appealed to ministers and the appeal was allowed by the reporter. Therefore, the second application for the same site was withdrawn. Those of us who represent areas in which many wind farm applications have been made know well that strong views have been expressed within our communities in opposition to—and, perhaps less frequently, in support of—just about every proposed development. However, the motion is  not about the pros and cons of wind power or wind farms or the whys and wherefores of any individual application, although I and others will no doubt refer to particular proposals by way of example. The root of the problem lies in the Scottish Executive's failure at the outset to provide a coherent strategy and appropriate national guidelines for the development of wind farms. The need for such guidelines has been highlighted by me and others in this chamber and elsewhere. Strategic guidelines would have been of huge assistance to developers in selecting potential sites, to local authorities in assessing applications and to local communities. I know that the Executive has now accepted that, as it turns out, such a strategy would be useful. In a previous members' business debate in November 2003, the then Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Lewis Macdonald, stated: "I want to answer the key point that the national planning policy framework is not adequate to its purpose." He claimed that the framework allows the Executive to meet its aspirations and "to maintain the high quality of the Scottish environment. NPPG 6 requires the planning system to make positive provision for energy policy 'while at the same time: meeting the international and national statutory obligations to protect designated areas, species and habitats ... from inappropriate forms of development; and minimising the effects on local communities.' Cumulative impacts on developments must also be taken into account. In our view, those guiding principles strike the right balance."— [ Official Report , 6 November 2003; c 3123.]  The experience of communities within my constituency proves otherwise. The balance has been tipped far too far away from communities in favour of well-resourced developers. Without coherent and cohesive national guidelines on the development of wind farms, developers seem to have been putting in applications for almost every hilltop in certain areas. That has left those communities with the sense that they are the Yukon of the wind-based gold rush. I have no doubt that such communities would have felt a lot less under siege if national guidelines had been in place and if the number of unacceptable applications had been weeded out at an earlier stage. At a time when climate change urgently needs to be addressed, the Executive has succeeded in making wind power, which is a clean, green alternative to carbon-based generation, extremely unpopular in large swathes of Scotland. The motion for tonight's debate is about recognising  the difficulties that local communities face when they suddenly find themselves immersed in technical detail and bureaucratic procedure. We need to ensure that there is fairness within the system and a full and considered appreciation of all the relevant issues. Scottish Natural Heritage and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency took the decision that, although they objected to each of the developments in the Ochils, they would make written submissions for each of the site-specific sessions and participate only in the final conjoined session. Frankly, that is unacceptable. The views of those bodies carry weight and authority. Each application needs to be considered on its individual merits as well as—indeed, more than—on its place within a slew of other applications. If SEPA and/or SNH have concerns about a particular application, they should be prepared—and even, I suggest, compelled—to turn up to make the case. The communities of the Ochils will do so; they will be financially and organisationally stretched, but they will do their best. You can bet your life that the developers will have expert witnesses present, with all the resources that they need. As one constituent put it to me: "What price having publicly funded organisations such as Scottish Natural Heritage and Scottish Environment Protection Agency when they cannot offer ordinary citizens appropriate assistance in objecting to the large business interests which wish to promote developments seen by many as not only being against national and local interests but of no real benefit to Scotland." SNH and SEPA are the people's expert witnesses and we need them to be present and correct, not posted missing in action. I refer the minister and the chamber to national planning policy guideline 6, on renewable energy developments. I have already referred to the document when citing Lewis Macdonald and will expand a little on that quote. Under the heading "Guiding Principle", the document states: "The Scottish Ministers wish to see the planning system play its full part by making positive provision for such developments" by "meeting the international and national statutory obligations to protect designated areas, species and habitats of natural heritage interest and the historic environment from inappropriate forms of development" and "minimising the effects on local communities." NPPG 14, on natural heritage, states that SNH is obliged "to seek to ensure that anything done in relation to the natural heritage, whether by SNH or anyone else, is undertaken in a sustainable manner."  The statements that I have quoted suggest to me that by not appearing at public inquiries, SEPA and SNH are not fulfilling the role that they are supposed to perform. It is up to the minister to sort that out. In a parliamentary answer on 8 June, Rhona Brankin told us that in her view both organisations have adequate resources to make representations to public local inquiries. If that is true, she, the minister and the rest of the Executive must now insist and ensure that SNH, SEPA and Historic Scotland provide witnesses to all pertinent public inquiries. In addition to the six applications referred to in the motion, there is a possible new application for Tillyrie, near Milnathort. [ Interruption. ] I have been told that it is pronounced "Till-rye". There is another for Burnfoot hill in the Clackmannanshire Council area, which is likely to go to an inquiry in the new year. The inquiry for the Beauly to Denny power line is also coming up. There is a feeling that the Ochils are under siege, and councils and objectors cannot keep up with the sustained pressure.

That is a good sign. I hope that from now on they will extend the same approach to wind farm inquiries. The situation with wind farm applications in the Ochils should act as a warning to those of us with constituency interests in the proposed upgrade of the Beauly to Denny power line. SNH, SEPA and Historic Scotland must attend each inquiry meeting. Relying on written submissions simply will not do. Local communities should not be left with the feeling that they are on their own, reliant on whatever expertise happens to be available within their own number and facing the corporate might that can be arrayed against them. There are no limits on the number of applications that can be submitted by different developers, but the same small band of planners and community organisations has to respond to them. That is a democratic deficit, and the imbalance is worsened when official bodies, which should lend their knowledge and expertise, choose to duck out. Communities across Scotland deserve to know that the Executive will stand up for them. Tonight I want to hear from the minister exactly what the Executive intends to do to redress the democratic deficit and to ensure that there is a level playing field.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive will ensure that an assessment is made of the social and economic impact of the collapse of the hamper firm, Farepak, particularly on those in our communities who will be worst hit, and what measures can be taken by the Executive to mitigate their loss. (S2F-2494)

I think that the First Minister will agree that the misery that thousands will experience in the run-up to Christmas is an absolute disgrace. I welcome, as I am sure that everyone else does, the DTI investigation, because if there has been wrongdoing it must be uncovered. I look forward to the results of the conversations that the First Minister will have in respect of the impact. Does the First Minister agree that there is an absolute necessity to get in front of the problem before it becomes manifest in rent arrears, missed council tax payments and increasing debt, not to mention losses in the high street? Can we in this Parliament at least impress on organisations such as councils, housing associations and banks the need to start working with individuals from the outset in order to help them deal with the problem that has developed, so that it can be better handled by everybody?

The minister will be aware that it is mainly old rural railway stations that have little or no disabled access, including Gleneagles station in my constituency, where there is none. Can the minister assure us that, in future discussions about possible station closures, lack of disabled access will not be used as a justification or an excuse for closing a railway station when alternative investment should have been made?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it intends to take to address the rising incidence of breaches of bail conditions and what guidance it issues regarding the granting of bail to accused individuals with a record of repeat offending, particularly bail breaches. (S2O-10653)

The minister will be aware that in Tayside the number of bail breaches has rocketed from 244 in 1997 to 1,885 in 2004—the most recent figures. I am sure that there have been similar increases throughout Scotland. The numbers include people involved in high-profile cases, such as the one involving my constituent Robert Basterfield, about whom Tayside police are so concerned that they are seeking a sexual offences prevention order, which will subsist for a minimum of five years. I do not expect the minister to discuss the details of that case, but does she think that the time is now right to consider a three-strikes-and-you're-out policy for bail breaches? Perhaps the policy should be known as a three-bail-breaches-and-you're-in—in custody, that is—policy.

It is just a little more than 50 years since we entered the nuclear age and, in those 50 years, the world has become more rather than less committed to nuclear weapons. Two such weapons were exploded in anger half a century ago but, luckily, although vast amounts of money have been spent buying and stockpiling nuclear weapons, we have held back from using them again—so far. If we are not using nuclear weapons, why do we continue to buy them? If we continue to buy and stockpile them, why do we believe that we can continue to tell others that they should not do the same? Fifty years ago, only one country had them, but how many have them now? In truth, who knows? Currently, the United States of America, the United Kingdom, France, Russia and China are the official nuclear weapon states because they have all signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, while India, Pakistan and Israel are unofficial nuclear weapon states because they have not signed the treaty—and that list should now probably include North Korea. To put it crudely, the previous justification for spending money on nuclear weapons was: if we did not, they would and they might use them, so we better have them too because that might put them off. It was a small club that only a few could afford to join. The bombs got bigger, better and more expensive. They could kill more or, better still, kill lots and perhaps leave buildings standing. If deterrence was the justification, it was a dangerous one. After all, any state could make the same argument and, if one concedes the logic, one can hardly say that it should apply only to those and such as those. However, that is, in effect, exactly what we have been saying. That was then; where are we now? The UK Government invested heavily in Trident as a replacement for the old Polaris and what changed? The protest songs and banners had to,  but little else did. Trident has already cost the UK dear. The strategic defence review of 2004 estimated that the total cost of acquiring the Trident system was about £12.5 billion, almost all of which had already been spent by 2004. It also stated that the running cost of the Trident submarine force would average some £280 million a year over its lifetime and the then annual cost of the warhead and fissile material programme was some £400 million. About one third of that programme was directly related to Trident, while almost a third was related to costs that arose from previous nuclear weapons. Until recently, the estimated cost of Trident's replacement was £15 billion to £25 billion. Apparently, the annual maintenance costs over the weapons system's expected 30-year lifespan were left out of the calculation of that figure. If we factor those in, it seems that the son of Trident will cost the UK something in the region of £76 billion. We never used Polaris, we never used Trident and we will never use the son of Trident, but it looks like we will buy it, despite being signed up to the non-proliferation treaty.

I apply that logic to buying shoes that then sit in the wardrobe and never get worn. I consider it a waste of money. I want to know why we are contemplating spending such vast amounts of money on the son of Trident when we will not use it. Other members will talk about the better uses to which that money could be put, and they will be right to do so. If the Government can afford £76 billion for missiles, it can afford a few bob for job creation and diversification. Opposition to nuclear weapons in general, and to Trident and its replacement in particular, goes far beyond any financial considerations. At its heart, the argument is a moral and ethical one. That is why the Scottish National Party motion is shorn of any sub-clauses that might cloud the issue. If members believe nuclear weapons to be wrong, they must vote for the motion, but I see from the amendments that Labour and the Liberal Democrats appear to be in favour of nuclear weapons. I say to Jackie Baillie in particular that it seems craven and cowardly to state the obvious point that nuclear weapons are a reserved matter, with the implied criticism that we should not be debating the issue despite her call for "the widest possible debate" in the country. If Jack McConnell really wants to end the cringe factor in Scottish  life, he would do well to start with his own back benchers. With respect to those who try to have it every which way, there is no place to hide on the matter. Either the Parliament is part of the national debate or it is not, and that national debate is profoundly moral. Whom do we contemplate using the weapons against? It is surely not enough to say that we must have them as a deterrent. During the cold war, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was the target of choice. Which nation or nations now fulfil that role for the UK, or is an independent UK nuclear capability simply to be seen as part and parcel of the USA's nuclear capability at one remove? Recent international events might lead us to that conclusion, so is our target really whoever the USA decides is its target? Are we to spend £76 billion on weapons that really only exist to fit into the USA's strategic interests? Alternatively, are we really going to spend that much money to obtain a bargaining chip to use against Iran's future disarmament—assuming that Iran goes on to become another of the unofficial nuclear states—all the time arguing that Iran has no right to nuclear weapons but we do? During the cold war, there was a deterrence doctrine known as mutually assured destruction—or MAD for short—and learning about it was like slipping into some perverse Alice-in-Wonderland world. The acronym gave away the truth of the matter. When we brandish weapons whose only purpose is mass and indiscriminate slaughter, we give up all right to preach to others about the morality of the choices that they make. I ask the Parliament to keep faith with the marchers on the long walk for peace. In particular, I ask the Labour members who had the unbelievable effrontery to go out and greet the marchers last week to keep faith with them. I ask the Parliament to keep faith with the church leaders who are calling for us to turn our faces away from Trident. I ask that we keep faith with our consciences, and I ask the Parliament to support the motion. I move, That the Parliament believes that there is no justification for the renewal or replacement of the Trident nuclear weapons system.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to evaluate the impact of Transport Scotland's decisions on the community and economic life of towns and villages whose main streets form part of the trunk road network. (S2O-10558)

Is the minister aware that Transport Scotland's guidelines on signage on trunk roads, which are restrictive, to avoid distracting people who are driving at high speed, are also being applied in communities such as Crieff, where the trunk road becomes a 30mph high street? Is the minister aware that Transport Scotland has refused permission to hang banners for a walking festival in October, which were made with an Executive grant? Does he agree that the inflexibility will impact negatively on similar communities throughout Scotland and that, in the circumstances, other communities would be best advised to pursue a don't ask, don't tell policy?

As convener of the Health Committee, I thank my fellow committee members, who have worked on this inquiry over the past year; the whole of the clerking team, some of whom have been in the chamber listening to this afternoon's debate; and the organisations and individuals who have helped us over the year by providing written and oral evidence. We owe everyone a huge debt of thanks. Understandably, coverage of the report—and the content of today's debate—has focused mostly on personal care. However, I want to mention other aspects of the report before I return to that matter. First, the committee believes that the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 has achieved its primary purpose of creating a better regulatory regime and we want that to continue. That is not to say that no concerns have been raised or complaints made. That is what post-legislative scrutiny is for. We have recommended that agreements between local authorities and the care commission should be made mandatory, given that, at the moment, only eight of the 32 authorities have them. A duty should be placed on them to share information. I am disappointed that the Executive has thus far rejected that recommendation; doing so simply gives a green light to the local authorities that do not want to be as co-operative as they might be on this matter. I realise that some might have certain distinct and separate concerns that should be monitored by them, not the care commission, but there is no reason why such aspects cannot be included and acknowledged in any agreement. As Kate Maclean and many other members have pointed out, we are concerned about the basis of the care commission's funding. The  Executive's response on this issue needs to be better than simply saying, "It was a policy decision." After all, as Kate Maclean said, the Executive must explain why such a decision did not apply to the Food Standards Agency—and does not apply to the child care strand of the care commission's work. The committee was not convinced and remains disappointed by the Executive's response. The Executive accepted the committee's recommendation that the care commission registration system be simplified to avoid multiple registrations, and I am interested to know how that will be implemented. Irene Oldfather rightly raised the question whether the outcome of care commission investigations would be published. The committee recommended that that should happen, and used the work of the Scottish public services ombudsman as an example of good practice in that respect. We urge the minister to say to the care commission that such outcomes should be published in future. I thank Helen Eadie for focusing on direct payments and I am glad that the Executive broadly supports the committee's recommendation that there should be more publicity about their availability. In fact, our discussion of the issue highlighted some of the most compelling reasons why such an approach is a far better way of dealing with people who require care. For a start, it empowers individuals. That said, as my colleague Shona Robison pointed out, research conducted for the committee indicated that the approach had encountered resistance from professionals, who felt that it disempowered them. That slightly worrying discovery shows that there is something of a misunderstanding about the purpose of direct payments. The point is that we need to empower individuals, not the professionals. Perhaps that highlights a cultural issue that needs to be worked on. As far as free personal care is concerned, I want to reiterate what many members have said: overall, the policy has been and continues to be a success. Of course, that does not mean that it has stopped being controversial. We have to take all that on the chin. I would like to highlight a small point made in paragraphs 21 and 22 of our report. We are saddened that nobody has actually researched where money has been saved because of the introduction of personal care for the elderly. The opportunity benefits to the NHS that have emerged as a result of the introduction of the policy have been highlighted, and those will not be the only benefits. We always put things on the cost side of the balance and never on the other side to highlight the benefits that have arisen. Some of  those benefits are financial. They may not appear in the specific budgets that we are discussing, but there are overall benefits. The minister has talked about the current Executive review, and I am glad that it will be concluded as soon as he has said and published early in the new year. I might argue, however, that the Parliament has, in a sense, already done that job through the Health Committee, and I wonder why we need to continue replicating that work. We have now had detailed research from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation and the Health Committee, both of which are in broad agreement, and I would expect that any objective work that the Executive does will come to much the same conclusions. Why spend the money when we have already done that? Personal care is certainly a success when people get it, but the complaints are frequently about the length of time that people have to wait for it. A number of members have raised that important issue.

I look forward to it. A number of members referred in passing to delayed discharges. I have had a recent constituency case of an elderly man being kept in hospital pending a care package being put in place and I am beginning to be a little concerned that the dreaded bed blocking might reappear if we do not address some of the waiting times issues that are beginning to emerge. The Executive has only noted the committee's main recommendations on free personal care—the issues about rationing, waiting lists and the preparation of meals. Because of the on-going review it is reserving judgment on those matters, but I reiterate that we have already addressed many of those issues. Many of the problems arise from confusion about what the guidance has actually meant. John Swinney referred specifically to that problem, and it is interesting that the £85 million gap that he identified in January 2006 relates to the gap of almost £80 million evidenced by the statistics received from local authorities by the Health Committee. I am sure that that is more than just a coincidence. The Executive accepts the committee's recommendation to carry out a thorough review of long-term funding, which is welcome, but I want to hear that demographic trends will be brought into that. A major problem is developing in some areas because of the demographics, and I agree with  Euan Robson and Mike Rumbles, who referred specifically to the considerable differences that appear to be developing between what COSLA says and what many of its member organisations have to say. Mike Rumbles referred to the invidious position in which councils find themselves. Perth and Kinross Council has recently transferred money from elsewhere in its budget to bridge the gap, which means that other parts of the budget are being raided—robbing Peter to pay Paul—and we do not want to see that happening any more than is necessary. I refer briefly to statistics and to the freedom of information requests that were made to all councils. The statistics were published last Friday and were picked up by the media today, and Rob Gibson referred to them in his speech. I have looked through all the information received by the committee and can advise that, as regards timescale, most of the information came in over the July to August period, so it is current. I understand that, in some quarters, it is being said either that the figures are outdated or, in the case of one council, that the waiting times put next to its name are nonsense. That surprises me, as all the information that has appeared in the published statistics comes directly from the councils themselves. That suggests to me that there may be one or two more problems that councils need to address, besides the delivery of personal care, if their internal information-gathering mechanisms are not particularly good. Members have talked about meal preparation. The committee read the minister's guidance that was issued on 25 May, but I have to say that not a single member was any the wiser. Given the continuing differences in interpretation, we are clearly not alone. A number of those issues must be clarified urgently. We cannot wait for the review. I reiterate how welcome the policy has been. I accept the minister's warm words, but I am sorry that he could not accept more of our recommendations. I also regret that, despite the importance of the issue under discussion, more members did not see fit to join us in the chamber for the debate.

I associate myself with Karen Whitefield's concerns and suspect that her constituents' problems are being replicated throughout Scotland. Is the minister aware that there are still serious difficulties with people getting their bus passes in the first place? As recently as this week, I spoke to an 80-year-old constituent of mine who has still failed to get a concessionary bus pass after four attempts. On at least two occasions, her pass was returned with a picture of a man on it, despite the fact that she sent in her own picture. Will the minister take serious steps to ensure that the card agency that issues the cards does its job properly?

Will the member give way?

There is much in the bill to recommend it; this afternoon we have heard many comments that reinforce that. No one can object to improving adoption and fostering services in Scotland. It is clear that much of the bill has widespread support. Some agencies obviously do not think that it goes far enough. I was particularly drawn to the Children 1 st briefing, which makes a plea for far greater involvement of the wider and extended family before decisions on adoption are made. I also note that Children 1 st wants amendments to be made to the bill to ensure that a child's views are taken into account no matter what his or her age is. Both those points are very sensible.

I accept that, but I will come on to other aspects of section 9 later. The Children 1 st briefing gives some very considered views on the bill, and analogous proposals are presented by the Scottish Independent Advocacy Alliance, which suggests a mechanism whereby the various views of children and others could be heard, including in the proceedings that directly affect them. Perhaps some of those issues will be taken on board at stage 2. The suggested changes are important and helpful and would make the bill better, so I hope that the minister will give them careful consideration. Notwithstanding the good that is in the bill, I am afraid that I will not support it this evening. I hate to break the cosy consensus, but my reason for refusing to support the bill is the deep unease that I feel at the provisions in section 31. We cannot wish those concerns away. Those of us who, like me, know families in which adoption has taken place will know how incredibly positive the experience is and how life affirming it can be. However, it is not without its difficulties. Even in situations in which children have been placed for adoption, decisions can be reversed and people can end up in protracted legal proceedings—I have seen both those things happen—and upset and stress can be experienced. Parenting is no easy feat. I have signally avoided its difficulties, but I am in awe of those who take on the responsibility. In my view, parenting is so important that it seems inconceivable that we would introduce yet another potential difficulty into the adoption mix by extending the provision to gay couples. I know that that is not a politically correct argument to make.

That will always be a matter of judgment. I am sure that Margaret Smith will accept that hers is a very different scenario, in that the children involved are her own children rather than children who have been adopted into the family.  I know that it is not politically correct—I was trying to make that point—but I cannot see how, to be frank, overturning tens of thousands of years of nature's design will move us forward in society. I am curious as to the committee's findings at paragraph 48, which states: "The Committee notes the very small volume of research that has been conducted in this area and the absence of any objective evidence that indicates that there should be a bar on eligibility to adopt." It is interesting that a very small amount of research has been conducted. In this chamber, I have argued frequently in favour of the precautionary principle—many times and in many different debates—so I am somewhat surprised that the precautionary principle is not held equally to apply in this case if it is felt that there is such an absence of evidence.

No, I must press on. I have taken two interventions so far. I will see how far I can get. People will argue that the interests of the child must be paramount—certainly, they must be. I see no reason for loading on to children—many of whom will be far too young to express a preference one way or another—yet another issue to deal with on top of that with which they are already struggling, which is the loss of their natural parents or, in the case of some children who are placed for adoption nowadays, the singularly difficult backgrounds from which they have come. The issue might be seen to be of more importance to some groups in society than to others, but I note the provisions of section 9(4)(b) on consideration of the child's religious persuasion, racial origin and cultural and linguistic background. I ask the minister to confirm that those considerations will apply even to children who are in state care. Will such children also be able to say, "No, I don't want that for me. That is not the kind of life that I want to live"? Will agencies truly be mindful of the section when decisions about adopting are made, or will diversity be used as a smokescreen for riding roughshod over the deeply held views of many people? I note that the committee is confident that the faith-based adoption agencies, of which there are two in Scotland, will not be forced to provide services to couples who might otherwise be eligible under the legislation. That has been reiterated today and remarks on that were welcome. I also welcome the minister's comments on the future of any DTI plans. However, I wish that the minister would not set his face against a prima facie opt-out. I am not sure why he has  done that, especially in the current climate, in which the provision of reassurance in the bill might have been considered to be needed. As I have just asked, can people who have faith backgrounds be reassured that their beliefs and values will be reflected in the choices that are made for their children, in the sad event of their being orphaned, even if those choices are being made by people other than faith-based societies? It was with no small degree of apprehension that I decided to speak up today. Of late, a tendency has developed to mock and decry those who stray from the mainstream of political correctness. I voted for the repeal of section 28 and had no problem with civil partnerships, but I have a problem with the bill. Although I am worried about having spoken up today, I have done so sure in the knowledge that I represent the views of the vast majority of people in Scotland on this issue. Someone must represent their views in Parliament, if the Executive will not. I urge any member who has the slightest doubt about the impact of this aspect of the legislation to follow their conscience and to refuse to vote for the bill.

I, too, congratulate Pauline McNeill on securing the debate and endorse much of what Mike Rumbles said about experience on his patch, which mirrors what I have experienced. The absence of Tories speaks volumes about their complete lack of commitment to public transport in Scotland. We should make that plain to the rest of Scotland outside the chamber. I agree with much of Pauline McNeill's motion, although I thought it obvious that she had not been to Perth bus station recently when I read what it said about significant investment in better terminuses. I hope that she will visit Perth bus station if she thinks that there has been wonderful investment in it. Much has been promised, but there is rarely anything suggested in the way of delivery. Many people come to complain to me and other members about service changes, reductions in the frequency of services and timetable and route changes. My particular bugbear is the removal of a number of express pick-ups to roundabouts in the middle of nowhere that people need a car to reach, which is an interesting development in  many rural areas and is clearly an issue. The result is that the very people one might think ought to be serviced by buses in the first place are excluded as passengers. That must be addressed. Everybody warmly welcomed concessionary passes, but there are issues relating to them. People thought that they would have hop on, hop off bus services, which they are not getting, and that has led to complaints. I listened to Patrick Harvie's complaints about Glasgow buses. He ought to come to rural Perthshire. People in huge chunks of my constituency have no buses to complain about in the first place. I could travel by bus from Crieff to Perth once every hour, but if I wanted to travel from Crieff to Auchterarder, leaving aside school buses, I could do so only on a Tuesday, Thursday or Saturday, and not on a Monday, Wednesday or Friday. Many rural bus services are similar. Even when a service exists, it is so infrequent that it is not much use to people. There is little integration of such services, not only with other bus services, but with rail services. A person can arrive at a railway station and have a 45-minute wait until the next train arrives, which is crazy. Public transport is letting people down massively throughout Scotland. I agree with Pauline McNeill. We must re-address many issues to do with the delivery of public transport and bigger issues to do with how public transport will work in an integrated way for Scotland in the future, which it is not currently doing.

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions have taken place with NHS boards regarding transport difficulties of staff, patients, families and visitors in travelling to and from hospitals. (S2O-10338)

I speak as a veteran of many discussions with NHS Tayside, in which transport difficulties are raised but never resolved. Given the recent controversies about car parking charges in several health board areas in Scotland and the transport difficulties that arise from the centralisation of services—some of which have been mentioned—does the minister agree that it is time for him to get together with the Minister for Transport to ensure that the lack of adequate transport throughout Scotland, particularly as a result of increasingly centralised hospital services, is accorded the priority it deserves?

I congratulate Cathy Peattie on bringing the subject to the Parliament for debate. I offer apologies on behalf of John Swinney, who has done a great deal of work with various carers organisations. He would have been here tonight had it not been for an unbreakable engagement. Like every member, I can add to the organisations that are named in Cathy Peattie's motion others in my constituency, such as the Perth and Kinross Association of Voluntary  Service and the Princess Royal Trust for Carers, which runs a carers centre in Perth. However, what none of us can do is provide a roll call of the many individuals who care for family, friends and neighbours without reward, without recognition and, too often, without any official help at all. Carers are as diverse as the needs of the people for whom they care. They include people who look after elderly patients or partners with Alzheimer's disease, parents of disabled children and young carers who do much more than we would ever expect young children to have to do. To the description "unpaid carers", I would add the phrase "unrecognised carers". Carers are often unrecognised even by themselves; I know, because that happened to me. People often take on the role without realising that that is what they are doing. That results in many of them never accessing the limited help that is available unless others are vigilant on their behalf. Carers' problems are many. Capability Scotland has a substantial presence in my constituency as its Upper Springlands complex is just outside Perth. Capability Scotland's research has shown that the parents of a disabled child are often denied the right to work because of a lack of suitable and affordable child care. Almost half the participants in its research said that they do not work because they care for their disabled child. The research also indicated that 70 per cent of the parents who work rely on family members to provide child care—half of them do so because of the lack of suitable or affordable child care. The motion is right to applaud Scotland's secret social service of carers, but we must do far more than applaud them. We must acknowledge the difficulties that they face and start to address them. At the end of last year, I attended an event in the Gateway centre in Perth, which was attended by representatives of a wide range of voluntary sector organisations. The event considered issues associated with voluntary sector funding. There was real concern about the future. Most of the organisations recognised that local authorities are under increasing pressure and, given that they depend to a huge extent on local authorities for their funding, they are very concerned about what the future holds. As a result, many of those who were present expressed a desire for funding to be dealt with directly by the Executive. I know that the Executive is resisting that and trying to push the situation the other way. Frankly, there is a feeling that the Executive is dragging its feet on the issue. The Health Committee will soon deal with petition PE954, which calls on the Scottish Executive to implement fully the 22 recommendations of the care 21 report, "The Future of Unpaid Care in Scotland".  The 2001 census, to which Cathy Peattie referred, showed that a staggering 480,000 adults and more than 16,500 children and young people provide unpaid care in Scotland. The number of carers now tops 600,000. The reality of their lives is that carers would not have it any other way, but they are saving society a massive amount of money—£5 billion a year—and they deserve greater respect and more practical help in training, respite and support. In that regard, and following on from the Health Committee's care inquiry report, I point to the need for a much more proactive approach to, for example, the issue of direct payments to ensure that, now that family members can access such payments, there is a much greater take-up than there is currently. We need to be proactive on such issues. It is not enough to sit back and wait for carers to come to us; we must go to them. That is the only way in which we will make their lives better.

The minister will be aware how controversial landfill sites are with local communities, especially because of the negative environmental impact that they can have. There is such a case in my constituency, near Abernethy, with the Binn farm landfill site. Does he agree that, until successful  diversion schemes are in place, the regulatory role of the Scottish Environment Protection Agency is absolutely vital? Does he, therefore, share my concern at the apparent reluctance of SEPA to act when there are repeated infractions, as in the case of the aforementioned landfill site?

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment its Environment and Rural Affairs Department has made of how significant the environmental impact of the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative has been. (S2O-9829)

Is the minister aware of the Energy Saving Trust's research for the Department of Trade and Industry that shows that domestic renewables could meet 113 per cent of total domestic electricity demand by 2050? If he is, does he agree that the recent uncertainty about grant availability for domestic renewables schemes has not been helpful? What pressure can he bring to bear to ensure that, in the interests of joined-up government, such uncertainty does not happen again?

Recent written questions to the minister indicate that traffic  flows on long stretches of road in my constituency are counted by a single traffic counter. That would not seem to allow the minister to establish the frequency and extent of commuter traffic between significant settlements, for example along the Perth to Stirling stretch of the A9. If he cannot do that, how can he decide on future public transport requirements? It will, of course, be necessary to do so if we are to reduce emissions in future.

Will the minister give way?

When Ted Brocklebank started talking about mouldering wildernesses, I wondered whether he had been peeking over the wall into my garden, but perhaps not. Unlike my garden, the rest of my constituency is full of sites and buildings that track the development of Scottish culture and society. They run the gamut from pagan standing stones to Celtic crosses; from St John's kirk, where John Knox fuelled the fire of the reformation, to the ecumenical St Mary's monastery on Kinnoull hill, which probably has John Knox spinning in his grave; from Roman forts to General Wade's roads; from the bloody memories of Sheriffmuir to Innerpeffray, where the calm of the oldest library in the country exists; from the 10 th century round tower of Abernethy—an early millennium project in the east of my constituency—to the remains of the Pictish fort of Dundurn at St Fillans in the west of my constituency.

I do not think so, but no doubt my constituents will tell me if they feel that I have. Scotland's history is painted in bold colours throughout my constituency. Perth is one of Scotland's ancient cities and Perthshire is arguably the place where our nation came into being. The historic environment plays a huge role in the economic life of the whole county and, as the minister acknowledged, of the whole of Scotland. It is important to Perthshire and to me that the Executive gets this policy right. I will address some key issues on the general questions of the identification, designation, protection and management of the historic environment and then consider the specific issues that relate to two important sites in my constituency. In section 3 of SHEP 1, the Scottish Executive lays out its "vision and policies" for the historic environment and stresses that Scottish ministers cannot undertake those on their own. It looks to Historic Scotland to work with a wide range of bodies and organisations to play  "a crucial role in conserving the fabric of the historic environment and allowing and promoting public access and enjoyment". That is an essential point that must not be allowed to be just empty rhetoric. Much of Scotland's historic environment is in private hands, whether it belongs to individuals or institutions of one kind or another. Not only must there be close co-operation; there must be recognition that unless a private owner has an unlimited disposable income, it is likely that the building or monument will simply not be looked after properly. The saga of St Peter's seminary in Cardross springs to mind. If we decide that it is in the public interest for a part of our heritage to be preserved, then we have to accept that public money must play a role in its preservation. By the same token, we must be far more realistic than the authorities seem to be at the moment in our approach to listing properties. The present system often means that the private owner of a listed property either is left spending vast amounts on its upkeep or, rather more likely, leaves it to rot and decay. We heard about one rather graphic example of that in Newburgh. One site in my constituency that is in real danger of decay is the Roman fort at Gask, which is in the hands of an extremely rich landowner with whom I have had a run-in or two over the years over the management of his lands. Rabbits cause a serious threat to the Roman site, which is literally being undermined. It is an example of a site where there have been genuine difficulties in Historic Scotland "working together to a common purpose with individuals and businesses." I urge the minister to ensure that the Roman fort at Gask is preserved. In the by-going, I press once more the case for the Gask ridge to be included along with the Antonine wall, which my colleague Michael Matheson mentioned, as a world heritage site. Although it is not part of the Antonine wall, it is the site of what was the oldest and northernmost linear defence system in the entire Roman empire and so is of true global significance. In section 3.2 of SHEP 1, we see listed the criteria on which Scottish ministers intend to judge the importance of proposals to protect and manage the historic environment. I know of a project in my constituency that ticks each of the boxes but which is still struggling to secure the necessary funding to take forward an exciting development. The plan is for the crypt at St Mary's monastery on Kinnoull hill, built in the 1860s by Perth's most famous architect, Andrew Heiton, to be redeveloped as a social and cultural facility and as a portal to Kinnoull hill, which is open to all the  citizens of Perth and, indeed, the whole of Scotland. It would act as a gateway both to the network of paths that is being developed on Kinnoull hill and to the very tranquil gardens of St Mary's itself, where the intention is to provide routes that are suitable for disabled access. However, if funding is not forthcoming, there will be no alternative use for the crypt. Indeed, there will be no use at all for the crypt, which would be sad. On behalf of my constituents, I hope that the minister will do all that she can to help to bring the plans to fruition. My two examples pose real challenges. In the first case, the owner could probably make the required investment, but will not do so; in the second, the owners of the site—a religious order—do not have the finances to spare on such a building. I imagine that the same challenges are replicated throughout Scotland. If they are not addressed, we will not make progress.

To ask the Scottish Executive what input the Minister for Health and Community Care has had to Cabinet discussions about the health implications of the proposed Beauly to Denny transmission line. (S2O-9604)

That is a rather disappointing response. New concerns are being expressed about the health implications of overhead power lines, which were made public only yesterday and of which I hope the minister is aware, and the likely recommendation of the stakeholder advisory group on extremely low frequency electric and magnetic fields, which advises the United Kingdom Government, is that planning guidelines be changed to ensure that domestic residences are not built within 230ft of power lines or in locations where inhabitants would be exposed to certain strengths of electromagnetic fields—I hope that the equivalent position would apply when a new line is being proposed. In light of those developments, will the Minister for Health and Community Care now make clear his own position on the proposed Beauly to Denny power line, particularly in connection with its route and the possible health implications for nearby communities, especially where there are children?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. A matter has arisen in connection with the voting rights of committee substitutes when there is a vacant position on a committee. You will be aware that the Health Committee met yesterday, comprising only eight members, following the resignation of Mike Rumbles. No replacement for Mr Rumbles had been nominated at that point. The guidance that I was given as convener was that the previously named substitute committee member was barred from voting under the standing orders because the principal position had become vacant. Unnamed individuals have made comments to the press, questioning the validity of that ruling and, by that means, the legitimacy of the decision that was taken by the Health Committee yesterday. As I do not wish that to continue, I seek a ruling from you on the issue.

During Wednesday's time for reflection, the Rev Martin Johnstone pointed out that 87 per cent of the media's coverage of young people was negative, but the same might be said about their coverage of older people. That possibly says more about our media than about either young people or older people. The coverage of older people always relates to issues such as pension black holes, bedblocking, resources and how older people place a burden on health provision, yet when we hear of a death—such as Margaret's—our immediate reaction is, "So young?" I digress briefly, but I believe that it is appropriate to pay tribute to Margaret Ewing in this debate for her work over many years in raising awareness of fuel poverty and of its impact on older people in particular. The prism through which older people are viewed is particularly negative, but that perception must change. When I asked my assistant to pull together for me information about innovative ideas for living among older people, her default response was to hand me a lot of stuff about residential care, as if that is what it is going to be all about the minute we hit 60. We have only to look around us in the Parliament to know that that cannot be so. I was hoping to be told that I was too young to take part in the debate, but the truth of the matter is that age does not mean what it used to, which is  a matter for rejoicing instead of doom and gloom. I spoke to a lady in my constituency two years ago who, having retired, went to art college, won awards for her work, went on to win a Churchill fellowship, spent nine months studying embroidery in Japan, came back and set up an exhibition in Perth gallery. She began a new career post retirement that came completely out of the blue. We can all point to such individuals. That is not to say that there are not issues that need to be dealt with. The short consultation document touches on a number of important areas that need to be addressed. However, I am not taking the gloom and doom route this afternoon. I acknowledge that there are challenges and difficulties: the Health Committee care inquiry is considering personal care for the elderly, so I could hardly be in ignorance of them. We should be particularly concerned to ensure that people are not pointlessly prevented from contributing across the board in all areas of life because of something as trivial as the date on their birth certificate. That will involve tackling prejudices in wider society. It will also mean acknowledging that if someone is over 50 or 60 that does not put them into a homogenised group that can be dealt with as if everybody over a certain age had the same needs and priorities. There is an ocean of difference between 60 and 90. It is the same difference as between 30 and 60 and we would not dream of putting 30-year-olds and 60-year-olds into the same age bracket. We need to find a way to acknowledge and embed such diversity into any strategy. In the modern world—Karen Whitefield touched on this—the 60-year-old will have more in common with the 40-year-old than with the 90-year-old. That is just the way our life is now. We should all come clean on this. Until only about 50 years ago, older people would never have been questioned in society; they got respect automatically. We all point to the age that Churchill was when he became Prime Minister. There was never a question about his age. I cannot help thinking that the social change that swept away all that respect happened to coincide with the very baby boom generation—us—that now faces old age. Curiously, we demand from others that which we often denied our own parents and grandparents. That is a salutary lesson for us all. My constituency has a higher than average age profile and it is getting older—that includes me. There are lots of local initiatives, as there are in many other parts of Scotland, most of which are aimed at involving older people themselves in the development of a strategy. That is all to be welcomed. I commend Scotland's Futures Forum for the work that it is undertaking. It is important to go beyond the ideas that are  contained in the consultation and the forum's work. Once I had disabused my assistant of the likelihood that everyone who hits 60 is in imminent need of a walking stick and residential care, I had to explain that I was really looking for examples from throughout the world of where older people have created for themselves new ways of living, which I think that we should consider. I will take a minute or two to talk about co-housing, which is an interesting innovation. The idea was born in Denmark—I have to make a political point and say that that is a small country, which is a full member of the European Union and is independent. Groups of people in Denmark who were dissatisfied with existing housing and communities began to band together to plan their own communities that were more environmentally friendly and sustainable. Each co-housing community was planned in its context and was flexible to the needs and values of its residents and the characteristics of the site. The housing varied from flats to clustered detached houses. Some communities were multi-generational and involved older people in the care of children, which allowed them to remain connected socially—which is often not the case in our communities. Inappropriate housing can leave older people feeling isolated and almost like prisoners in their own home. Co-housing, done well, can prevent older people from becoming cut off and help deal with crime, poverty, joblessness and lack of educational opportunity. That sort of community will meet older people's needs for housing that is easier to maintain, provides more security and contact with neighbours and offers common activities and mutual help without suggesting that elderly people have been put out to pasture. The idea is imaginative, innovative and is the kind of initiative that we need to import. As we face up to the requirement of providing for older people, we should challenge perceptions, including an individual's assumptions about what they are capable of, and we should offer real lifestyle choices while recognising that, as they get into their later years, older people increasingly need—and deserve—help and assistance. I hope that, when we debate a strategy in the longer term, the innovative practices from other parts of the world will be judged to be capable of being brought into Scotland and that, instead of older people feeling that they have a long, dark tunnel in front of them, they can begin to see that they have real choices and that their lives can change, even when they are older.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment has been made of the length of time it will take to remove development obstacles in Perthshire created by problems with water and drainage infrastructure. (S2O-9249)

Considering the number of times that this issue has been raised, that is a disappointing answer. It has consistently been raised over the years, most recently by me in a letter last month. Of course, the issue has been overtaken by the recent row and Professor Alexander's departure. Still, however, we wait for reassurances. Developers in my constituency are still waiting. I have to ask why the minister is not yet in a position to put a timescale on the lifting of embargoes. The direct result of the problem will be that construction industry jobs will be lost. That is a serious possibility in my constituency. Can the minister put a timescale on the lifting of the embargoes?

To ask the Scottish Executive what meetings its Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Department has had regarding the implications of the market testing of the Defence Aviation Repair Agency establishment at Almondbank. (S2O-9091)

I thank the minister for his response—I think—although my question was directed towards the implications of the market testing, which is moving on, slightly. I am astonished that there have been no meetings, given that local parliamentarians are meeting DARA chiefs and that the local council is concerned on an all-party basis about the future of the establishment and wants to reassure the workforce that the jobs will be saved for Scotland. I would have thought that the Executive would be taking a slightly more proactive approach. Would the minister care to elucidate?

I apologise to members for having to leave the debate early, at 5.45 pm. The route of the line runs through my constituency, just as it runs through the constituencies of many other members. It comes down through the Sma' glen, which is marked as the tourist route to Pitlochry, runs to the east of Crieff, skirts around Braco and then enters the Stirling constituency. It impacts significantly on the geographical centre of my constituency.  Health issues are frequently raised in connection with mobile phone masts, terrestrial trunked radio masts and power lines. However, it is fair to say that the strongest adverse health evidence that exists—the Draper report—relates to power lines. Because of that report, in particular, this debate may be seen as slightly different from others. The seriousness of the issue is evidenced by the fact that the stakeholder advisory group was set up by the Westminster Parliament. Westminster's recognition of the health issues that have been raised is important. I am sorry that there was so little Scottish representation on the group. Many aspects of the power line could be debated. Dennis Canavan has discussed a few of them. I appreciate the fact that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care is in the chamber today, but he could have been accompanied by at least one other of his colleagues. I am sure that I am not the only member to have addressed packed public meetings on the issue, and the controversy is by no means confined to Stirling. The campaign groups cannot be set against one another, because they are as one on the issue. There is a compelling case for a public inquiry. That case has been discussed by my colleague Bruce Crawford, whom I congratulate on securing the debate. However, I hope that efforts and proposals to mitigate the power line's possible adverse health effects will form part of that process and will not—as so often happens in the planning process—simply be set to one side and excluded from consideration. I want briefly to address the issue of undergrounding, which I appreciate has both technical and financial implications. Although I realise that the minister responding to the debate might not be able to do so, it would be helpful to have some details about undergrounding, because evidence, particularly from Canada, suggests that the costs of such an approach are nowhere near as high as has been suggested in the debate. I also know that, 18 months ago, Powergen UK received consent to run an undersea cable from Durham to Norway. I realise that that example is not exactly analogous, but it suggests that technical problems can be overcome if people want to do so. That political issue must be addressed. There is very little point in ignoring the serious concerns raised by many people the length and breadth of Scotland. I very much hope that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will not do that, because these people are really worried about the potential implications of the project and—to be frank—are bewildered that it could go ahead without a strategic environmental assessment being carried out in the first place. I  hope that the same thing does not happen in future.

The bill concerns organ donation, transplantation, post-mortem examination and research. For obvious reasons, the debate centred mainly on donation and transplantation provisions. This morning's debate has shown broad consent and support from all parties for the bill's proposals. The legislation is necessary because of advances in technology and medical science and widespread concern following the revelations about past practices at Alder Hey children's hospital, Bristol  royal infirmary and other hospitals. We cannot gloss over those concerns or the serious nature of what occurred in those cases. At the Health Committee, such cases were forcibly presented in evidence as examples of presumed consent that had gone badly wrong and as a warning of what can happen if one presumes too much. That is why the committee took the view that it did. The main debate has centred on presumed consent—on opting in or opting out. In evidence that the committee heard on post-mortem donations, it was clear that—despite the organ donor register, opt-outs and authorisations—the process would stall if relatives were in serious and evident distress. The professionals told us that, notwithstanding the existence of an organ donor card, they would not be happy to proceed if relatives were in serious distress. We learned that, even in Spain, which purports to operate an opt-out system, the same thing happens. The Parliament was right to reject John Farquhar Munro's amendments. No matter what one thinks of the arguments, it would be quite wrong procedurally to introduce such a radical change to our system by means of amendments at stage 3. I note Ken Macintosh's comments about presumed consent. Given the concerns about introducing such a provision at stage 3, I wonder whether presumed consent would be a suitable subject for a standalone debate in the chamber, at some point, simply to allow the arguments to be rehearsed in more detail. It would be interesting to see the outcome of such a debate. One or two issues were raised to do with live donation and anomalies such as domino transplants. Members have noted that such concerns have been addressed. It is a testament to the Parliament's legislative process that anomalies were picked up and addressed at the committee stage and did not find their way into legislation—which might very well have happened in the past in another place. Concerns were raised about complicated authorisation forms, which have now been considerably simplified. The legislative process has been extremely useful. However, Shona Robison, Janis Hughes and Mike Rumbles are absolutely right when they talk about the urgent need for publicity and education. That, of course, will require resources. On the issue of presumed consent, I think that it was John Farquhar Munro who talked about the likelihood that the majority of people who are not currently on the organ donor register would not actually object to their organs being used. That may be true, but the answer lies not in moving towards presumed consent, but in encouraging  more authorisation. With the greatest of respect to members, that will entail more than just advertising. We will have to go out to where people are and take the campaign to places such as the supermarkets and the high streets. I hope that the minister will come back to Parliament with some outreach proposals along those lines. If the proponents of presumed consent stood outside supermarkets and actually asked people to sign up and give their authorisation there and then, we could test the assumptions about how many of the silent majority are relaxed about giving their agreement, and how many of them are just saying that they are relaxed while hiding their concerns. We have to be very careful about making assumptions. If the proponents of presumed consent are right, people will be happy to sign up there and then when they are offered the cards. There is a challenge for the minister. Let us proceed with such a campaign. Although I am closing the debate for the SNP, I have had a long and close involvement in the passage of this bill as convener of the Health Committee. I thank once again all those who helped the committee during its discussions on the bill. In particular, I thank the clerks—especially for making written sense of our various verbal discussions—and all those who came to give evidence. Of course, I also thank the committee members themselves. It has been a bill of moral, medical and legal complexity. I give a particular mention to the people whose concerns over some of the issues have been driven by deep personal and emotional connections. Chief among those people were the parents groups that were set up after the scandal over the retention of children's organs. For those people, the continuing debate must sometimes be very difficult indeed. With those thanks to all involved, I commend the bill to Parliament.

I congratulate Andrew Welsh on securing the debate. We should be aware of some of the background to today's debate. We are discussing the problem of water charges, but a broader crisis is emerging for village and community halls throughout Scotland, which is a result of the drying up of sources of funding and withdrawal by the Scottish Executive of the capital grant scheme. That is creating difficulties for the future of many community and village halls. Halls will face all sorts of challenges over the next few years; one of the big challenges for many will be the need to bring them up to scratch in terms of access for disabled people. We want to achieve that as far as possible, but the reality is that the cost of that is often prohibitive for small community-led ventures. Maintenance and insurance costs increase all the time, but essential modernisation and repairs are important and must be paid for. Halls are vital to communities. In my constituency, challenges and increasing problems confront Crieff community hall, Madderty village hall, the Bridge of Earn institute, Glenfarg village hall and Forgandenny village hall. When the problem that Andrew Welsh has brought before us today is added to their situations, the scale of the difficulty that confronts many small communities across Scotland becomes clear. They fear that their local halls might have to close because they cannot be sustained in the longer term. If rural halls areas are closed, it will be a tragedy for the social cohesion of the communities. People who are not connected with rural areas do not understand the extent to which the local hall is a lynchpin of many communities.  The dearth of MSPs of all parties who have attended this debate—which Fergus Ewing noted—suggests that the extent to which halls are fundamental to communities throughout the country is not appreciated by members of the Scottish Parliament. That is the only lesson that I can take from the low attendance. The problems relating to water charges are but one part of an enormous crisis that faces village and community halls across Scotland. I do not want to diminish the issue of water charges, but the crisis is not only to do with them. Andrew Welsh knows that the problem is about more than just water charges. He chose to highlight that issue today, but there is a greater issue about the social inclusion of people who live in rural areas, who need places that act as a focus for their communities. If the halls close, the guts will be taken out of many communities. I, for one, do not want that to happen.

As usual, Duncan McNeil was passionate, but his Labour Party colleagues in Wales were equally passionate and used precisely the same language to argue in support of the abolition of prescription charges. The gulf between the two positions is quite extraordinary. There were major areas of agreement in the committee on many aspects of the bill. Those areas have already been mentioned. For reasons that have been discussed, there was unanimity that the status quo was not an option. About 50 per cent of the population are eligible to receive free prescriptions and those who make up that 50 per cent receive about 92 per cent of prescriptions that are issued. Most people on low incomes are exempt, but by no means all of them are. Incapacity benefit, for example, is not an automatic qualification for free prescriptions, so some people who receive that benefit pay for their prescriptions. That is a major irony because, notwithstanding the current debate, I presume that a person will not receive incapacity benefit unless they have long-standing ill health that means that they are likely to be more reliant on prescriptions. People who suffer from certain chronic ailments receive free prescriptions while those who suffer from other ailments do not. Diabetics receive free prescriptions, but asthmatics do not. The people who receive any free prescriptions get all their prescriptions free, even if those prescriptions are not related to their exempting condition. It is worrying that anecdotal evidence suggests that some people have to choose between prescriptions because they cannot afford them all. Furthermore, it is a major failure that the existence of pre-payment is not widely known. That involves a lot of money for people who have very little money. There was unanimity about the paucity of evidence. Duncan McNeil argued about the lack of evidence on one side, but there was a lack of evidence on both sides, so the committee had serious difficulties in that respect. Procedurally, stage 1 is the phase of a bill's consideration during which evidence is gathered—which suggests that there is evidence to gather. Consideration would have been easy had there been a lack of evidence on only one side of the argument, but that was not  the case. I mentioned anecdotal evidence—we received anecdotal evidence from all sides. Absent from the Executive's evidence was any mention of the international comparators that it clearly knows about, and that the Minister for Health and Community Care clearly knew about when he came before the committee. I am aggrieved that evidence that the Executive is now putting forward to support its case was deliberately held back from the committee. Presiding Officer, I suggest that that is an unacceptable way of doing things. We were left with a lot of "Yes it is", "No it isn't" evidence, none of which seemed to be based on any factual reports or surveys. Citizens Advice Scotland was the exception; its evidence included a survey of clients in England and Wales, which suggested clearly that people are making choices about which prescriptions to take and which not to take. The committee had high hopes of our Welsh visit and it was indeed informative, but not from an evidence point of view, because the Welsh members had no evidence either. It was clear that they had simply taken a political decision and were implementing it, albeit that abolition is to be phased in over four years. I think that I am right in saying that the committee was unanimous in its view that if the bill were to be passed, abolition in Scotland should also be phased in, along the same lines as in Wales. The Health Committee was also unanimous that the Finance Committee's concerns were well founded and that the financial information that was given by Colin Fox was insufficient. It was clear that the only figure regarding costs that was not in dispute was the current income from prescription charges of about £45 million a year. That was the only incontrovertible bit of financial information that we got. That income would disappear on the abolition of charges. Whether there would be other costs from increased uptake because prescriptions had become free, or benefits in longer-term savings because people were now taking all their medication instead of picking and choosing, was extremely difficult to quantify. I am sorry that Colin Fox did no more work on that aspect of the bill. Comparisons are available. Charges were abolished in the UK in the late 60s and early 70s and Italy has abolished prescription charges. Both comparisons are interesting, but carry health warnings: Italy has a different health culture and the late 60s were a very long time ago. The Welsh Assembly has been undertaking monitoring exercises for some time, but has not yet reported, so the information is not yet available to us.  Again, I say that I am sorry that the Executive saw fit to conceal other evidence on which it based its arguments.

The Executive concealed international comparator evidence, which it did not make available to the committee. This morning, the Executive—coincidentally—published its plans to review the prescriptions system, which was promised for the week beginning 23 January. I am sorry that if I had read the Daily Record this morning I would have had rather longer to consider what the consultation paper said. I cannot agree with the assertion that was made in that paper that the case against abolition was strengthened by the evidence that was presented to the committee. That was not the view of the majority of the committee and I hope that it will not be the view of Parliament. Parliament is rightly proud of its committee system; I hope that members will bear that in mind as they consider the difference of opinion between the Executive and the committee. It has been important to emphasise the areas of agreement because of the unusually narrow majority on the committee. I am not sure that there has previously been such a split view of a bill. However, I do not believe that that narrow majority detracts from the validity of the report's conclusions. In truth, the committee did what the Welsh Assembly did: in the absence of incontrovertible evidence one way or the other, it made a political decision. That is what we are here to do and I do not shrink from that. I ask Parliament to approve the general principles of the bill.

Given that the minister says that he is presenting evidence to us and that he has known about it for eight months, I respectfully ask why that evidence was not put before the Health Committee during its stage 1 deliberations. [ Interruption. ]

Some members have been debating this matter for longer than the Parliament has existed. In 1998, I had a member's debate in the House of Commons that called for the provision of synthetic factor VIII to haemophiliacs in Scotland. I sought that debate because I had a constituent who, along with others, had taken the stand of refusing treatment until synthetic factor VIII was made available. Obviously, people were concerned about infection and felt that the synthetic form would provide protection for them. The refusal of treatment speaks volumes for the strength of feeling that there was in the wake of the cases of HIV and hepatitis C virus among people with haemophilia. A few days before the debate, the Department of Health and the Scottish Office announced that certain blood products, including factor VIII, were to be banned. Of course, recombinant factor VIII is now available. I suppose that, if I had been slightly more cynical and opportunist, I might have claimed that victory for myself, but it was really for those who had refused treatment—that was probably what brought about the move. It was unavoidable that the advent of the Scottish Parliament would be met by serious continued campaigning by and on behalf of the people who were affected. I do not want to rehearse the entire history of the problem, as most members have a fair awareness of the difficulties that are experienced, particularly by those who suffer from hepatitis C. The motion rightly refers to the work of the Health and Community Care Committee in the first parliamentary session and the work that the Health Committee continues to do on the matter. The Executive published a report in October 2000, but the Health and Community Care Committee had by then undertaken extensive petition consideration since 1999. That work culminated in the committee's 2001 report on the issue, to which several members have referred. The Health Committee has revisited the subject recently. Earlier this year, we agreed to take evidence on the case for an independent public inquiry into the infection of patients with hepatitis C through treatment by the NHS. We attempted to  hold an evidence session on 10 May, but it had to be postponed because a petition for judicial review was lodged that morning with the Court of Session. As the minister said that he would find it difficult to give evidence and the committee was concerned about the sub judice aspect, all consideration of the subject was postponed until the various legal issues were clarified. I am glad to say that we can now proceed and will take evidence on Tuesday 31 January. Of course, I cannot pre-empt any final views that the committee may take as a result of that meeting, but I can say that I wish that the Health Committee had been allowed time to complete its work before we debated the issue in the Parliament, as members of all views would then have been in a stronger position to debate the matter. I have a couple of personal points to make. As I understand it, only about 568 people were infected with hepatitis C through blood products in Scotland, so when it comes to paying out compensation, we are not dealing with a great number of people. Since the campaign started, several of those affected have either died or become seriously ill. Because of the small number of people who are involved and the seriousness of the illness that they have contracted, the establishment appears hard-hearted on the issue of accepting liability. Liability is the big problem. Actually, though, the problem is the system of fault-based compensation that prevails in this country in respect of all medical negligence cases. Back in 2001, the Health and Community Care Committee called for a review of the current system with a view to outlining alternatives. I could not agree more with that call and I am sorry that we have not moved further down that road, whether in relation to the hepatitis C issue or to other hard-fought cases of medical negligence. I believe strongly that an argument can be made for a shift to a system of no-fault liability in medical cases. That already happens in New Zealand, and the last time I looked its world had not come to an end. I know that it is not within the minister's remit to consider shifting over to a system of no-fault liability, but it is time that we began to consider that across the board. We would get away from the kind of problem that we are striking in this case, which is that people want to lay blame, which is perhaps not the right way to address it.

Does the minister agree that ASBOs on conviction are  an extremely useful tool and way of using the new regime? He will be aware that in some parts of Scotland, for example Dumfries and Galloway, ASBOs are already being used extensively. Has he any specific plans to encourage their much wider use?

What a disappointing response from the First Minister. Does he not acknowledge the incredulity of ordinary members of the public—whom he would no doubt categorise as being mean minded as well—that it is principally the Scottish taxpayer who is picking up the cost of a party to which, in effect, they were not invited, and the cost of which was felt disproportionately by small businesses, especially those in the Strathearn area? He said that Her Majesty's Government would refuse to do anything for those people who have been left out of pocket by the G8, but will he commit to doing something for them?

I apologise for my slightly breathless arrival. The minister will be aware of plans to establish a Gaelic digital television channel. I welcome the recent announcement of funds for that, but does he acknowledge that large swathes of Scotland  still cannot receive digital television cheaply or easily? What steps does he intend to take to ensure affordable access to a channel that is intended to start broadcasting next autumn, although digital switchover for much of Scotland, including large Gaelic-speaking areas, is not scheduled until 2009?

I am sure that I speak for the rest of the Scottish National Party group in associating myself with the First Minister's warm wishes to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton for his future. I also want to associate myself with Lord James on the substance of his question to the First Minister on the regiments. In an exchange at First Minister's question time last year, the First Minister said: "We will defend those identities strongly."— [ Official Report , 28 October 2004; c 11305.]  In view of the recent announcement, has the First Minister seen the comments by Lieutenant General Sir Alistair Irwin, who drew up the blueprint for the merger and is now speaking of his "despair" and utmost "dismay" at the decision that has been announced. He makes the clear comment that, in effect, the distinctive nature of the regiments will be banished from the streets of Scotland. No more will Perthshire see the red hackle, because the Black Watch will not be permitted to use it in ceremonial dress. Does the First Minister believe that that decision in any way defends the distinctive nature of our historic regiments? If he does not, what will he say to the Secretary of State for Defence and to Westminster to get them to reverse the decision?

Is the First Minister saying that Lieutenant General Sir Alistair Irwin is flat-out wrong when he writes that "in the future when the Battalion parades ceremonially anywhere in your constituency the Red Hackle will not be worn"?

I echo Janis Hughes's frustration at the fact that often in these debates, by the time we speak, what we want to say has already been said. I hope that members will take the stage 1 report as read. Rather than doing yet another Cook's tour, I will focus on two major themes. The first concerns what the bill is not about. As has been said, it is not about presumed consent. At stage 1, I was struck by the evidence of Dr Calum MacKellar from the Scottish Council on Human Bioethics. We have heard a lot about Alder Hey today; Dr MacKellar highlighted that what had happened at Alder Hey was, if nothing else, a form of presumed consent gone badly wrong. In that and in subsequent high-profile cases, it was patently obvious that consent was a very emotive issue that could not simply be swept aside. Some people, including a minority of committee members and the BMA, would have preferred it if the Executive had opted for the presumed consent route. However, I note that the Royal College of Nursing does not share that view. I understand the logic of the proponents of presumed consent, but my view is that a moral imperative does not necessarily mandate a legal imperative, which is what we would be doing if we went down that road. Proving a negative is notoriously more difficult than proving a positive. Even in the context of the bill, committee members discussed the possibility of setting up a non-donation register, as Nanette Milne mentioned. That would have been an absolute necessity with presumed consent. I carry an organ donor card. I want my organs to be used to help others in the event of my death—perhaps that declaration is a form of authorisation under the bill. I have made that known to those closest to me, who will be asked to make a decision if that time comes. I would absolutely hate it if I thought that they would be bound by that when my distress was over but theirs was just beginning. At a time when many people tell us in various surveys that they have no objection to donation, the lack of people registering to donate is a big issue. The same people tell us that they do not object to increased taxes, but are not so keen to vote for them when it comes to the crunch. Perhaps we should be a little careful about distinguishing between what people tell us and what they really feel.  The capacity to authorise provoked an interesting debate. We need to keep firmly in mind the fact that there are two distinct issues: live donation and post-mortem donation. The bill defines a child as a person under the age of 16. A child cannot authorise live donation but, if they are over 12, they can authorise post-mortem donation. Sheila McLean of the review group suggested that the qualifying age for live donations should perhaps have been 12 rather than 16. Most committee members were instinctively opposed to that, principally because it was felt that young people might be pressured too easily, particularly in a closed and emotional family situation. As a result, we felt that the bill was right to protect those children. Members have already referred to two specific issues that arose during our stage 1 consideration. Under section 15, it is an offence to remove "an organ, part of an organ, or any tissue which is not regenerative tissue, from the body of a living child intending that it be used for transplantation". Given that live liver transplants are possible partly because of the organ's regenerative properties, one might have thought that the bill would have allowed for under-16s to donate a portion of their liver. As the public announcement came too late for the committee to take any evidence on the matter, I, on the committee's behalf, raised it with the minister, who clarified in writing that "Children under the age of 16 would simply not be eligible for consideration as donors". Indeed, he has restated that position this afternoon. In that instance, the distinction between organ and tissue is clearly important. However, the only reference to definitions of tissue and organ in the interpretation section of the bill is that "'tissue' includes bone marrow". John Forsythe of the Scottish transplant group suggested that we would all be "comfortable with ... a piece of skin ... being transplanted".—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 8 September 2005; c 2103.] If so, such definitions and distinctions must be clarified. After all, because the skin is itself an organ, under the minister's interpretation, an under-16 could not provide skin for transplantation, however small the piece in question. I am not sure that that is really the intention. Another anomaly arises in the context of domino transplants, which took some committee members a little time to sort out. In such situations, a heart-lung transplant from patient A to patient B results in a spare healthy heart from patient B being available for a possible onward transplant into  patient C. The committee did not think that it made sense that, in such a rare situation, patient B could not authorise the use of the spare heart if he or she was under 16. The alternative is simply to put the heart in the bin, so I am glad that the minister has stated that he intends to sort out the matter at stage 2. Such a situation would have been astonishing. The bill's implications are such that we will need a massive education and publicity drive to ensure that everyone is aware both of the changes that it will make and of what will not change. One of my local papers, the Perthshire Advertiser , has been running a responsible, public-spirited campaign to encourage people to carry an organ donor card. I applaud the paper for that and hope that its work bears fruit. However, everyone must be clear that organ donors who are already on the register do not have to re-authorise. I welcome the minister's clear statement of intent in that respect. As one member has pointed out, concerns have been expressed about the additional distress that could be caused by the detail of the forms that parents who have just lost a child are required to fill in. The forms are complicated—indeed, they are probably a little too complicated to be presented to people at such a harrowing time. I hope that the minister will have another look at the issue and take on board the committee's other recommendations. I thank all the committee members for their work at stage 1 and all the witnesses, including the minister, from whom we heard, particularly those who represented parents groups—they must have found it difficult to give evidence on such an emotive subject. My special thanks go to members of the clerking team, who have done sterling work throughout the process. I commend the bill to the Parliament.

The minister will recall that the committee had some discussion about the problem of domino transplants in relation to children who are under 16. The irony is that under the proposed rules, a spare heart could not be authorised for onward use for a third party. Will the minister comment on that?

First, I acknowledge that broadcasting is a reserved matter. However, both the BBC and Digital UK Ltd are widely seeking views and it is our duty to make our views clear and to represent our constituents in the process. I thank the members who have signed my motion and the members who are staying for the debate. I know that Help the Aged has welcomed the debate and I am glad of the support. Members will have received its briefing, which outlines concerns about the consequences that the switch-over might have for the vulnerable elderly. The points that the organisation raises are important and need to be addressed. Access to television is hugely important to many people. It is a source of information and entertainment to the elderly, the low paid and the disabled. Many of the Scottish Executive's campaigns are promulgated through television. Before the switch-over goes ahead, the Government must ensure that no one is left behind by the digital revolution. The root of the debate is probably the single biggest development in broadcasting since the introduction of colour pictures. Of course, several issues are connected with such an important development; my motion focuses on only one. As everybody here is no doubt aware, there are two methods of broadcasting television signals—analogue and digital. The two systems are broadcasting simultaneously, but as long as the analogue signal is maintained, the digital signal cannot be broadcast in full and at full power throughout the country. Until the analogue system, which has served us since the 1930s, is switched off, we cannot have 100 per cent digital coverage. I should declare an interest in the subject of my  debate, as I am one of the many people who cannot access digital TV at present, so I am looking forward to the switch-over. I am no luddite. I fully recognise the improvements that digital TV can bring to coverage and reception quality and I can certainly see the possibilities that digital TV offers for a far wider variety of programming—all the promises about more localised community television, a dedicated Gaelic channel and all the rest of it. Already, people who are lucky enough to live in the right place can pick up a set-top box for 30 quid in the supermarket, plug it into their telly and—hey presto—access a host of channels, with new ones seeming to be advertised almost every week. It is an affordable one-off payment and there you go. However, people must be lucky enough to live in the right place. As I said, I—like many others in Perthshire and throughout Scotland—cannot receive digital TV through my aerial. Buying a set-top box will not fix that for me. To do that I would have to get cable or satellite TV. Those options are much costlier and far more disruptive to install. Like all channels, the BBC is investing heavily in digital TV. I am aware of eight channels that it has: apart from BBC 1 and BBC 2, there are BBC 3, BBC 4, CBBC, CBeebies, BBC News 24 and BBC Parliament. I am told of those channels but, of course, as I have no access, I cannot be certain. The commercial channels also seem to be in almost permanent launch mode. I learn from my friends in set-top-box land that Channel 4 has recently quadrupled its presence on Freeview with More4, E4 and E4+1. So why am I picking on the poor old BBC? The licence fee, that is why. Without digital, we can see only BBC 1 and BBC 2, but we are paying for all eight channels—as well as those that will come in future, including BBC jam, an educational service that will apparently be launched early in 2006. Not only do we all pay the same licence fee regardless of whether we can use a set-top box or not, but the BBC has made no secret of the fact that it is seeking to increase the licence fee by more than inflation to pay for all those services. As part of the charter review process, the BBC has been explicitly making the case for the television licence fee to be increased by 2.3 per cent above inflation each year from 2007 to 2014, to help it to fund the digital programming and digital infrastructure that the Government wants it to provide. My constituents, and many others in a similar position, are being taken for a ride by the BBC. That is why I want the introduction of no see, no fee—a discounted licence payable by those who cannot cheaply and easily access the public service broadcasting that is paid for through their licence fee.  Such a set-up would surely be temporary. Switch-over is planned to start in the Border Television region in 2008, with the Grampian Television and Scottish Television regions changing over in 2010. It would be a temporary set-up, but a fair one. As things stand, the BBC wants one in four of us to continue to pay hand over fist for services that we cannot access. Until the whole of the BBC's output is easily accessible to all, that situation must not continue. We are being charged by the BBC for services that it cannot provide. That is not right, but it can be put right simply. This is no wild idea; it is possible and there is precedent. I know that I cannot receive digital because I checked on the internet. I put my postcode in and got the disappointing news out. The same software could easily be used when renewal notices are sent out for TV licences.

I agree. I am not a technical expert but, as I understand it, the problem is that it is impossible to roll out digital until analogue is switched off. As I was saying, the suggestion of a differentiated licence fee is nothing new. Such a fee exists and has existed for many years. I was reminded of that by one of my older colleagues, Alasdair Morgan. If a person owns a colour TV, they pay £126.50 a year; if they own a black-and-white TV, they pay only £42. That choice is, to an extent, the person's own, but whether they can receive digital is a matter of geographical chance. What a difference in culture has come about over 40 years. Forty years ago, the BBC did not dream of charging for something that people did not receive; now, it has no intention of allowing fairness and justice to apply. That is why I say no see, no fee.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Lord Advocate has had with the Home Office in relation to proposals to detain terrorism suspects for 90 days. (S2O-8154)

I would thank the Lord Advocate for his answer if he had answered the question, but he has not. We know from Charles Clarke that the Lord Advocate was not consulted in advance, so what efforts did he make to ensure that the Home Secretary was aware of his views, whatever they were? Why were those efforts a failure? Subsequent to the vote that defeated the 90-day proposal and substituted 28 days, what discussions or other communications has he had, and when, with the Home Secretary or indeed the Advocate General on the implications of the extension for Scotland's justice system?

The Lord Advocate is in charge of Scotland's justice system.

I do not think that there is disagreement on the need to reduce the amount of waste that we produce and to improve considerably the way in which we deal with the remainder. Obviously, we need to waste less waste, but the problem is exacerbated in Perth and Kinross because of the substantial net inward migration that the area is experiencing, contrary to the national pattern—I suspect that Inverness is in the same category—which means that there are more people to produce waste. In effect, Perth and Kinross Council is having to run  to stand still—or not, because despite all the council's efforts, the waste produced in Perth and Kinross has increased by 25 per cent in the past 10 years, but then so has the population. In Perth and Kinross, there are serious concerns about strategic waste funding. I will examine two related issues. The first is a delay in strategic waste funding from the Scottish Executive, which means that the waste processing facilities that are needed to allow the council to meet European landfill diversion targets are unlikely to be in place. The second is the worry that there might not be enough funding for all strategic waste projects, with some councils receiving funding and others having to shoulder the burden of waste infrastructure costs themselves. That uncertainty is compounded by the delays in determining strategic waste funding. In his foreword to the 2003 national waste plan, the Minister for Environment and Rural Development stated that the Executive was "investing heavily, allocating £230 million over the next three years through the Strategic Waste Fund to enable local authorities to recover wasted resources and put the Area Waste Plans into effect". I asked my local council how that commitment matched up to its experience, and it told me that the minister's pledge was fair comment for the early funding that was received. Perth and Kinross raised landfill diversion from 20 per cent to around 35 per cent, largely because of the strategic waste funding that was received, but—and it is a big but—the problem is that it can go no further without funding for the major infrastructure projects that are required to compost, sort or derive energy from waste. I am sure that Perth and Kinross Council is not unique in that regard. The fact is that local authorities know what they need to do, but the delay in receiving the appropriate funding is holding them back. Perth and Kinross Council submitted its bid for funding in April 2003. Funding was not determined until February 2004 and even then was only partially awarded—the Executive withheld an outstanding £17 million that was applied for. Apparently, there was to be a strategic review to ensure best value. An Executive official advised officers of Perth and Kinross Council that the process would be quick and that funding issues would be cleared up within a few months. Since then, the requirements of the review process have changed on several occasions, resulting in successive delays. Finally, in June the Executive issued written guidance stating the format that bids should be in. It also indicated that it would not consider bids until January 2006, with the preliminary outcome of its assessment being made available by autumn/winter 2006. Those delays, uncertainties  and shifting goalposts are causing local authorities difficulties. For example, in Perth and Kinross, it means that once the time that is needed to procure and build large-scale waste infrastructure is added in, it could be 2012 or 2013 before plants are operational. The delays in providing funding will result in councils having to pay substantial landfill allowance fines of several million pounds a year, imposed by the very Scottish Executive that is the funder. That is worse than robbing Peter to pay Paul; it is holding back with one hand and taking away with the other. There is more to the problem even than a delay in funding. I note the minister's comments about fears that the central belt will use up most of the money, but I understand that guidance issued in June stated that there might not be sufficient funding, and that three large central belt projects would be given funding priority. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development will clarify that in her closing comments. If it is true, it will mean everyone else being left to scrabble around for the scraps after the lion's share has been gobbled up. I understand that £79 million of funding is available per annum. If the three large projects are given priority, that would not leave much for the rest, especially given that the rough estimate is that each of the premium projects will have £15 million to £25 million each year. Officials from Perth and Kinross Council have proposed a form of interim funding from strategic waste funding that could, for example, pay for the costs of transporting waste to be processed at a facility in another part of the country. I stress that that would be a temporary measure, until the permanent facilities that have been delayed can be built and brought on stream. The proposal received a positive reaction in principle but, again, timescales and uncertainty are making it almost impossible to get arrangements in place before April 2006. I urge the Minister for Environment and Rural Development to reconsider the proposal and to do all that he can to expedite matters.

There are two sides to this coin: the patients, or those who try and often fail to become patients; and the dentists. We know that Scotland's dental performance is pretty dismal in comparison with that of other countries, notably that of our old friends in Scandinavia and the Netherlands, who somehow manage to turn in a much better dental record than we do. As well as our bad national dental record, which is historical, there are other pressures that have led us to this debate today. The Health Committee's research from earlier this year, which we debated on 21 April, showed that, in the past two years, just over 10 per cent of dentists in Scotland increased their number of NHS hours, while more than 25 per cent reduced their NHS work. I do not suppose that that comparison has changed markedly since then; although it might have changed for the worse rather than for the better. In Tayside, which is of particular concern to me, nearly 30 per cent of dentists have cut the number of NHS hours they provide and, more worryingly, 41.5 per cent are either not accepting new children into their practices or are operating a waiting list. In Perth and Kinross, the picture is even worse. I believe that I am right in saying that no dental practice in the area is taking on new NHS patients. I guess that that is common to many other parts of the country. It means that many people are being forced into the private sector or off the dentist's  couch altogether, simply because they cannot afford treatment. Elaine Murray illustrated the point graphically. Tayside NHS Board, like other health boards, has taken steps to alleviate the situation. Dentists working from the Drumhar medical centre include an additional salaried dentist who was taken on to deal with emergency work only for children and the elderly on the basis of people phoning first thing in the morning for an appointment that day. The centre intends to take on two or three more salaried dentists to add to that provision. However, the restrictions on who can obtain an appointment mean that there is still a huge unmet need in Perthshire. There are plans to expand the number of salaried dentists. I know that a bid is in for a 24-strong community dental service. I understand that the outcome of that will be known by early December. By way of a little gentle lobbying, I say that I hope that the bid is successful, because it would make a huge difference to the situation in Perthshire. Many members have similar stories from their areas. In many parts of the country, the ratio of dentists to population reinforces what we know of people's real-life experiences from the cases with which we deal daily in our postbag and in our surgeries. It is getting harder and harder to find an NHS dentist who is willing to do NHS work. Without such dentists, it is difficult to see how improvement plans can be delivered, much less the promised universal oral health assessments. Earlier this year, I decided to conduct a small, local survey of dentists in my constituency to ascertain their views and concerns. All dentists were sent a questionnaire. We had an excellent response rate, as evidenced by the 25 per cent who returned the questionnaire within a day of receiving it. The speed with which they responded showed their concerns. The single most important reason for their moving out of the NHS was finance, which was followed closely by lack of time. The flight from the NHS has led to other obvious consequences. There is now a big difference between waiting times for an appointment for NHS patients and those for people who have gone private. I am concerned that the situation that exists in other parts of the health service will be replicated, with private patients being taken quickly and others having to wait quite a long time. In the survey, dentists were asked what they would do to change things. It was depressing that some of them felt that the situation was irredeemable—a word used directly in the survey. Others simply said that there should be either  more money or more dentists, or a combination of the two. That is not exactly rocket science. I join other members in saying that taking on the dentists is not a particularly helpful way forward. I will be interested to see whether today's announcement attracts back any of the dentists whom I surveyed. The minister can be sure that I will resurvey them on the basis of the announcement. However, some of the comments that have been made today are highly unlikely to encourage them back. We must take care that we do not end up driving them out instead of attracting them back, as a result of the attitudes that are being expressed. Jamie Stone mentioned the Polish recruitment.

I attributed the remark wrongly. Everybody welcomes that recruitment drive. I would like to hear the minister expand on how the Executive intends to roll it out in future, the global numbers and so on. Tayside NHS Board has not asked for any of the dentists; at the moment it does not think that it will have to. However, it is precisely such thinking that is needed to stop the immediate rot. There are anomalies that must be addressed. I cannot understand why it is possible for dentists to get assistance to start a new practice but not to buy out an existing practice if a dentist is retiring. I wonder whether that anomaly could be considered in the future. The SNP recognises the mountain that is to be climbed in tackling the problems, including our appalling record and the appalling state of our system of dental care. There are ways of making progress. I am sure that everyone in the chamber hopes that we find them.

As the minister must know, many members have received a great deal of correspondence on the issue. Some concerns have been taken on board by SSE, but some have not. In advance of any potential public inquiry, will the minister advise us about any communication that has taken place between his office and SSE regarding the possibilities for undergrounding at least some of the more environmentally sensitive sections of the proposed line?

We have heard some incredibly powerful speeches and there has been remarkable agreement in the chamber. The minister must listen to our expression of frustration and to the desire of every MSP to resolve the homelessness situation. For as long as I have been an MSP, housing and homelessness have been dominant issues in my postbag. Other issues have come and gone, but homelessness has always been there. As we know, the problem is growing throughout Scotland with 30,000 homelessness assessments carried out in 1992-93, increasing to 40,000 in 2003-04. Action needed to be taken and changes have been made. The Parliament voted to pass the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003, which received cross-party support. The act made a  range of amendments to the legislation that governed the way in which homelessness was tackled. It is probably too early to foresee the impact of those changes on the reality of homelessness in Scotland. However, the issue is not rocket science. Murray Tosh is right—purely and simply there are not enough homes available at an affordable rent. Until we fix that, we will not fix the problem. For example, on just one day recently in Perth and Kinross, 45 properties were available to let and 4,500 people were on the waiting list. Housing staff are dealing with 300 homelessness cases at any one time. The small size of rural communities exacerbates the problem and leads to greater social dislocation because of the distances about which Christine Grahame spoke. Waiting lists do not even show the true extent of the problem. People are not daft—they know how long their friends and relatives sit on waiting lists so they do not even bother to apply for housing. Many members have already mentioned the particular problem for young single men. It is unfortunate that we are not debating a motion today because that inevitably means that the debate will have no definitive outcome. Action is needed. We need the minister to give us assurances, on the record, that resources will be provided. That call comes not just from the Opposition, but from COSLA as well. Everyone who contacted MSPs about today's debate focused on the intention to abolish priority need by 2012. The aim had widespread support when the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003 was passed, but we need a commitment to ensure that councils are in a position to implement it. As it stands, I understand that seven councils, including Perth and Kinross Council, will not be able to do so. Throughout Scotland, 28 per cent of all lets go to homeless people; in Perth and Kinross, the figure is 53 per cent. It will not be long before people who are not homeless will cease to be considered in Perth and Kinross. There is a danger that that will mean a drift from rural areas in Perthshire to urban areas, which will exacerbate the problem for MSPs who represent those areas. The councils in such a position, including Perth and Kinross, need additional support if they are to meet the challenges of the 2012 deadline. Shelter recognises that, as do most members here. Today, the minister must recognise that. We need his unvarnished, straightforward commitment to delivering support and we need more houses. Shelter has calculated that, if the communities budget had kept pace with the average growth of the Scottish budget since 1999, another 1,500 homes could have been built. In Perth and Kinross, like in other areas, we have a particular problem because of development restrictions  imposed by Scottish Water. There are 25 settlements in Perth and Kinross where 200 desperately needed affordable houses cannot be built because of those restrictions. We also need to stop losing homes. I echo the concerns that have been expressed about the continuation of the right to buy. I think that it is time to revisit that policy. We need to do so soon to retain rented properties in the public sector. I will finish by re-emphasising my appeal for support for councils such as Perth and Kinross. However, unusually for me, I will leave the last words—or nearly last—to an Executive minister. Speaking during the stage 3 debate on the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill in 2003, Margaret Curran said: "It serves no one's interests to implement amendments and not have in place the provision and resources for local authorities and local communities."— [ Official Report , 5 March 2003; c 18999.]  She was bang on. It is time to put up.

It is worth recalling the climate in which the previous Minister for Health and Community Care set up the review in April 2004. Members will remember that, at the time, a wave of anger and frustration was sweeping the country about local health board decisions. Campaigns that were generally profoundly antagonistic to a health board decision or proposal were under way in almost every health board area. There was huge opposition to centralisation and the extensive consultation was seen as nothing more than a cosmetic exercise. The Kerr review has helped to moderate some of the anger and frustration, which might, of course, be the reason why the review was set up in the first place. However, I remind members that there is a danger that if we do not get the health service right, we will return to precisely the same climate. At the Health Committee's meeting on Tuesday  20 September, we heard directly from Professor Kerr. As well as having questions from members of the committee, we asked those who had participated in the committee's public debate in April to submit questions from which we could draw. We put directly to Professor Kerr some of the questions that people wanted to ask. We are now 18 months down the line from the setting up of the review and it is four months since we last debated the report in the Parliament—on a Tory motion—but I am still completely unclear as to the Executive's intentions vis-à-vis implementation. With the greatest respect, the minister's comments today were full of the phrases "could be" and "might", but I would like a lot more "will be" and "here is the date when". I can underline for the minister the instances in the Executive's report of "should be", "might" and "maybe". The important point is that many questions remain, not least about the definition of core services. One key message that comes through clearly in the Kerr report is the importance of providing health services as locally as possible, which is accepted by the minister and all members. However, it is difficult to find any clear guidance as to what will constitute the core services. A benchmark is needed against which communities can assess proposals from their local health board. Without a benchmark, concerns will continue to exist, as the matter will be left up to health boards to decide on the basis of expediency, which was the concern that my colleague John Swinney expressed. That expediency never seems to be what is expedient for the patient; decisions always seem to end up with patients travelling further and further from home to access services that they used to be able to access locally. The experience in Tayside is that patients can be told to turn up at 8 am at a hospital 70 miles away from where they live, passing two other hospitals to get there. People do not understand that. How does the minister propose to turn round that current reality? Professor Kerr clearly understands the travel issue better than many health boards, as he has stated: "it is unacceptable that it should be necessary to take two trains, three buses and an expensive taxi ride to access services."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 20 September 2005; c 2192.] We would all agree, but that is exactly what many folk in Scotland have to do. Personally, I believe that Professor Kerr is a bit idealistic about the availability of the public transport options that he mentioned, as they are simply not available in the example that I gave.

Tayside is an extremely large area. Right now, the reality is that people are told to turn up at 8 o'clock in the morning at a hospital that is 70 miles from where they live, passing two other hospitals on the way. Folk do not understand that. The Kerr report has more detailed guidelines for unplanned or urgent care—it talks of four different levels of care. However, even then, Professor Kerr could not outline the basis or the rules for such designations and he declined to outline any such set of rules at the Health Committee meeting in September. That issue must be resolved. The community health partnerships will be vital to any such process, but I am worried about how they will be resourced in practice. Professor Kerr told the committee of his vision: he talked of a diabetes consultant who has some sessions in a hospital and others in community hospitals or general practices. I have no doubt that that vision would be welcomed in all communities, but I am far less convinced that it can be delivered in practice. At the moment, it seems hard enough to get consultants to move from one hospital to another, much less into cottage hospitals or general practices. Again, I must query how the culture change that is needed to achieve that will be put in place in health boards. We should not forget that what happens on the ground will be the proof of the pudding. On unplanned care, the level 1 services include NHS 24, the mere mention of which brings to mind the great difficulties that exist in translating theory into practice. There is a standing joke in parts of Perthshire that if somebody wants to see a doctor out of hours, they had better be in church on a Sunday, because there is more chance of seeing one there than anywhere else at the weekend. Perhaps that just betrays the level of cynicism that exists about the NHS, but out-of-hours care is a prime example of the rhetoric failing to match people's experience. When that happens, a breakdown in trust occurs, of which the NHS has already had plenty experience. We have had too many promises of jam tomorrow if only we put up with the pain today, except the jam never appears. Professor Kerr is adamant that public trust must be maintained—he repeated the assertion before the committee in September. I am not sure that I would go as far he has in having confidence that the public mood is behind him. For the past 18 months, the public have been prepared to give the initiative the benefit of the doubt, although the jury has been out. Even after today, the jury will still be out.

We are talking about a day on which the nation would celebrate itself and yet I do not hear much in the way of celebration from the Executive benches. Curiously, the one big omission from the lists of national holidays is the United Kingdom. Perhaps that is because it is not quite British to celebrate one's country or perhaps the sensitivities of being a multinational state mean that folk have never wanted to fix on a single day for such a celebration for the reason that it would cause too much controversy. Whatever the reason, it should not detain us here in Scotland. St Andrew is the patron saint of many countries and things including, rather diversely, fishmongers, gout and sore throats—I am not entirely sure how all that came about. At one and the same time, he is the patron saint of unmarried women and women who want to become mothers. That is an interesting juxtaposition, given the traditional view that the churches take on those matters. First and foremost, internationally as well as in Scotland, St Andrew's strong association is with Scotland. All of us know the stories and the mythology; indeed, people may not realise it but some of his relics are in St Mary's cathedral in Edinburgh. St Andrew societies right across the globe help the diaspora to maintain a link with home. I remember growing up in Australia and taking part in St Andrew's day celebrations in that country. When I came back to Scotland, I was astounded to discover that there was virtually no celebration in this country. If there is an objection to Scotland alone in the UK having such a national day, one need only point out that other devolved countries are going down the national holiday road. I am thinking of Catalonia, Flanders, Wallonia and Quebec. Scotland should not be left behind, even if the Executive thinks that that is what should happen. A moment's thought is all that is needed to realise the potential for the sort of event that could be organised around such a holiday. It would become the key trigger for events such as a  festival at Gretna that could have at its centre the various marriage-related traditions that are associated with St Andrew, of which there are many. It could also trigger a fishing festival or a big music festival—after all, St Andrew is the patron saint of singers. People also say that St Andrew's day is in the off-season. Of course it is, but the tourist industry is always looking for opportunities to expand that season. That is why the industry is so much in favour of the St Andrew's day holiday. We can centre the holiday around roaring fires, ceilidhs and whisky; none of that sounds too bad to me, or anyone else. We can take a lesson from places such as Salzburg and Berlin, which make enormous money out of Christmas markets. In his intervention on the minister, Jim Wallace made a throwaway remark about shopping. Many cities across Europe make a big deal out of shopping; why on earth cannot we do the same? When Celtic Connections was first launched, I remember people saying that a huge traditional music festival in Glasgow in the middle of January would never work. It did and it is now one of the biggest such festivals in the world. I note that business people other than the CBI are more positive about the St Andrew's day proposal. I believe that the Executive's churlish response—that is the only way to describe what has happened in the chamber today—betrays a complete lack of ambition for Scotland and for the celebration of our culture. The Executive amendment suggests that its real problem is a reluctance to sanction anything that would be a celebration of the nation. Why should the rest of the world take it seriously if this country does not? Shame on the minister for his appalling statement today. Let us ditch the cringe, let us embrace Saint Andrew and let us give Scotland a break.

Rubbish.

I want to take a slightly different tack and to take one step back. I think that we are avoiding a question—what is the global vision that would inform our decisions about priorities? We spend a lot of time talking about priorities, but I see no agreement on the global vision. If we do not agree that vision, we will not be able to have a sensible discussion about the priorities. Without the underpinning, debates about funding and structure get us nowhere. They just become demands for more funding for this, that and the other pet project. We have heard some of those demands today. I do not take anything away from that approach—we all have a list of things that we would like to see funded. However, it will not get us any further forward in respect of the Cultural Commission's report. I see something of the same problem in the report, for all its length. Consequently, it is all over the place, which means that there is a danger that our debate will also be all over the place. Three elements should underpin any strategy. First, we should focus on nurturing, encouraging and developing all our unique, indigenous art forms. That is not about being narrow and parochial. Our indigenous art forms are unique; if we lose them the world loses them, because they are Scotland's gift to world culture. If they do not thrive here they will disappear. Secondly, we should focus on investing in the creative process and ensuring that the climate is right for writers of words and music and for artists of all kinds to ensure that there is a constant supply of new books, paintings, songs and creative work in all the newly emerging art forms. The importance of investment in the creation of art cannot be emphasised strongly enough. Thirdly, we should ensure that Scots, with all their diversity, have access to all that their own country can offer and access to the best of the rest. That means not only pibrochs but Indian ragas—those are other countries' gifts, which we deserve to be able to access. At best we end up talking about the third of those elements and miss out the discussion of the first two. I do not disagree with the talk of rights and entitlements, but we are in danger of putting the cart before the horse if we do not first ensure that there is something of quality to have a right to. That cannot be delivered by legislation. I am therefore a little sceptical about how the Executive could legislate so that rights and entitlements mean anything. All the wonderful delivery mechanisms in the world will be utterly pointless if there is nothing to deliver. It is only when we are clear about our  strategic priorities that we can make funding and other decisions in a coherent manner. Other countries all have to make the same decisions. For example, the vexed question of Scottish Opera comes around again and again. Whenever it does, everyone refers to Denmark and talks about however many opera companies it has. That is fair enough, but Ireland has no opera companies. Why is that? The difference between those two countries shows that in each one a national decision was made at some point about what could and could not be supported. In Ireland there is no national ballet or opera company but there is vibrant national theatre, which we are still waiting for in Scotland. We all have views about the funding afforded to our existing national companies. The problem is that there are no strategic guidelines that would assist us in the decision-making process. The result is that huge sectors of the arts feel that they are underfunded in comparison to the national companies, but they do not understand why that is the case. It would be churlish not to acknowledge in my speech all the good work that is currently taking place throughout Scotland in all sectors of the arts. The minister spoke about the role of central Government and was correct to do so with regard to the money that comes from central Government. Much of the work that is going on benefits from funding from the Scottish Arts Council and other work gets support from private sponsors. However, a key component in any cultural strategy must be the role of local government. We must recognise, with the caveat that local cultural initiatives are subject to the strategic imperatives that I have mentioned, the importance of local government in the sector. It is a provider of the bricks and mortar as well as what goes in the museums, galleries and libraries. There is a very good example of the role of local government in Perthshire. On Friday afternoon I listened to a presentation of the Perth and Kinross cultural strategy. Local cultural strategies are important because we must recognise regional variations within Scotland and local initiatives allow a focus on that. For example, Shetland is always held up as an area that has a strong fiddling tradition and so it does. However, Perthshire also has a strong fiddling tradition that stretches from the legendary Neil Gow in the 18 th century right through to Dougie MacLean, who was described by Michael Marra as Neil Gow's apprentice. I hope that Perthshire can capitalise on that tradition in the future. Perhaps we can capitalise on it in the wonderful new Perth concert hall, which has only just opened although its genesis was in the mid 1990s. The concert hall is an example of the ambition of much-derided local  government. It was paid for by Perth and Kinross Council, the Gannochy Trust and Norwich Union. It is also evidence of SNP ambition because it was an SNP Administration in the council that started it. I plead for a clear vision on the fundamentals. We can then debate the delivery mechanisms and the role of Government. If we do not reach agreement about the first, the arguments about the second—the funding decisions and the role of Government—will never go away.

The minister has talked about the difference between city-to-city services and local commuter services. There are no such things as local commuter services in and out of Perth; there are only city-to-city services, which are extremely poor. To talk about local  commuter train services is completely and totally to miss the point, because there is none.

I congratulate my colleague on securing the debate and I concur with all that he said and commend his eloquence on behalf of his constituents. The part of the A9 in my constituency is a dualled section south of Perth. Notwithstanding that, I have a constituency interest because my constituents—like the constituents of many other members—use the A9 north as well as south of Perth, so they have to deal with the reality of the situation. The accident record south of Perth also needs to be addressed. I caution my colleague against assuming that dualling will solve the problems—there will still be problems if the junctions are not dealt with. That is, of course, why he also talked about the junctions. There are very dangerous junctions south of Perth. I particularly recommend that the minister examine the problem between the two junctions at the Cairnie braes, because there has been a very bad accident record over a number of years in that area, which must be addressed. It is a cause of major concern south of Perth and it adds to pressure from some  communities to reopen railway stations, which is pertinent to what I want to say. Clearly, given the context of John Swinney's comments, problems at junctions must be addressed as well as the amount and nature of traffic on the A9. Andrew Arbuckle touched on that when he referred to freight and the number of lorries on the road. If more freight could be put on the railway, that might reduce the number of lorries on the road. There is also the issue of the number of cars that use the A9. However, the problem is the lack of viable alternatives. I have a specific question for the minister about freight. What is the Executive doing to shift the freight burden off the road and on to the railway? Such a shift would have a significant impact. I heard the minister on "Good Morning Scotland" today; he said that we must try to get people on to the trains and we must look at the train links into Perth. That issue is dear to my heart. I want to encroach a little on John Swinney's patch to concentrate on viable alternatives. Aberfeldy in John Swinney's constituency is 31.7 miles north-west of Perth. Travel to work on public transport from Aberfeldy to Perth takes 1 hour and 24 minutes, using two modes of public transport. People must leave Aberfeldy at 7.24 am to get to Perth for 8.48 am. If they are running a bit late, their next possible time of arrival in Perth is 10.26 am. Travel by car from Aberfeldy to Perth takes 30 minutes less than by public transport and people can leave and arrive when they like. Given the circumstances that I have described, I challenge the minister to say what he would choose to do. I ask him to be honest in his response, because the truth is that he would take his car, which would have to travel on the A9. With reference to the minister's comments this morning, I questioned a previous transport minister in the chamber about the fact that there is no train between Perth and Edinburgh between 7.10 am and 8.50 am. Is the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications aware that people who live north of Perth cannot get into Perth by train until 9.09 am at the earliest, unless they leave the previous night? Nicol Stephen, the former Minister for Transport, is now the Deputy First Minister. It is long past time for soothing comments about improving rail links into Perth. It is time for real action. We want fewer glib references to public transport options and more delivery of such options. Until those options are delivered and there is a real likelihood of traffic reduction, road improvements must be undertaken. Not to do so is to risk more people dying.

We all agree that, from the sad loss of an entire family in South Uist last winter to the massive destruction and loss of life that we have seen in New Orleans in recent weeks, we are reminded constantly of the potential impact of climate on our daily lives. The Environment and Rural Development Committee's report addresses an important and wide-ranging issue. It is a great pity that the time that has been made available to debate the report is so short; the actions of people are a major  variable in the equations that determine climate change and we all have to take responsibility for our actions. Of course, we need to think globally and, if anything worth while is to come out of recent events in the southern states of the United States, it will be that the biggest polluter on the planet has been made to think about its role in causing climate change and the part that it can play in tackling the problem. We also need to act locally and, as the committee's report says, urgently. Unfortunately, I did not sense any urgency in what the minister said this afternoon. For example, we need to set ambitious targets for carbon emission reduction and we need to take policy decisions that will meet those targets. Paragraph 177 of the report states: "The transport sector was regarded by most witnesses as absolutely central to addressing climate change." I could not agree more: a comparison of different forms of transport points the way towards progress in this regard. The Carbon Trust shows that on a per passenger kilometre basis, buses are more polluting than trains and that cars are the most polluting of all. I think that we might have already guessed that. It is apposite that we are having a debate on climate change this afternoon and a debate on the A9 at 5 o'clock this evening; some of the same issues are likely to arise. I listened to the minister's colleague, Tavish Scott, on the radio this morning saying that one of the things that we need to do about the A9 is to improve the rail network into Perth so that folk are more likely to get out of their cars and into the trains—if only. The Executive must promote, develop, improve and invest in our rail network much faster than it is doing at present. Apart from the very real problems that I face in trying to travel efficiently by rail from my home to the Parliament because of the shortcomings of the Perth to Edinburgh link, I have the experience in my constituency of several small campaigns for the opening or reopening of railways to serve communities that are almost wholly dependent on cars. Members with similar experiences will know just how incredibly slow the process is. We need, literally, to get moving much faster. Another hot topic in my constituency is the contribution to climate change by various forms of electricity generation. I am entirely convinced of the benefits of wind power technology; at the same time, I am increasingly frustrated by the lack of any sort of national strategy to deal with the sense of many communities that there will be turbines on every hilltop. I do not support every proposed wind farm in my constituency, but I would far rather have a wind farm at the bottom of  my garden than a nuclear power plant or, indeed, a nuclear waste dump. One of the most worrying aspects of the climate change debate has been the nuclear lobby's attempts to portray nuclear power as the clean, green answer to the problem. It is anything but. Nuclear power is expensive and unsafe and, because of the waste that it produces, it is probably the least-clean energy around. There is little sign of any change in our lifetime, the lifetime of this building or even of this country. The committee's report deserves to be taken more seriously and more urgently than seems to be the case at the moment. I hope that this will not be the only opportunity to discuss climate change.

Rather more than one and a half hours would seem appropriate. That would allow the likes of John Home Robertson to contribute. I look forward to coming back to this issue soon.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Further to today's events in the chamber, I wonder whether it is in order for the chamber to congratulate Perth and Kinross Council and Tayside police, which have, pending ratification, agreed with G8 Alternatives and the Stop the War Coalition a march in Auchterarder that will be as close to Gleneagles Hotel as is reasonably possible. Does that not prove that hard work, talk and compromise are significantly more effective than childish outbursts such as the display that we saw today? [ Applause. ]

I register a personal interest in the matter. I was one of the children whose eyesight problems were picked up in the standard school test that used to be carried out. My eyesight problems were the reason why my work was falling behind at the time—I suffer from quite severe short-sightedness. Amendment 63 reflects the unanimous view of the Health Committee, which is stated in paragraphs 90 and 91 of the committee's stage 1 report. The Health Committee strongly recommended that the Executive lodge suitable amendments at stage 2 to address the issue. I acknowledge that amendment 64, which Duncan McNeil lodged, represents an attempt to find a compromise position, but it is no more than a compromise and does not reflect what I thought was the unanimous view of the committee. I hope that Kate Maclean will press amendment 63 and I invite members to support it. Amendment 63 is clear and unambiguous and wholly superior to amendment 64. We ought to support clarity rather than vagueness.

Does the First Minister agree that there is a danger that arguments about the right to protest and the threats surrounding that are likely to overshadow significant local achievements in dealing with the issues to do with the G8 summit? Will he, in that spirit, join me in congratulating the people of Dunning for this week's local Dunning summit? Will he join me in congratulating the students of Perth and Kinross on last night's sterling  performance on the BBC programme "G8: The Road to the Summit"? Will he also join me in urging the Prime Minister to declare that the Crieff High School song "Build a Bridge" becomes the official G8 anthem? Does he agree that, instead of arguments about protest, those positive moves should be what we talk about over the next week?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to ensure that cancer treatment targets can be met. (S2O-7211)

The minister frequently tells us that efforts are being focused on the big killer diseases such as cancer, but is he aware that, in Tayside, compliance with the treatment targets for lung cancer, breast cancer and ovarian cancer is below the Scottish average and that even with colorectal cancer, the figures for which are above the national average, it is still the case that only two thirds of patients receive treatment within two months of referral? How does the minister believe that his targets stack up against that reality?

I reassure the minister that, notwithstanding the First Minister's comments today, Perth and Kinross Council has made no attempt whatever to pass the buck on decisions that it has made—it takes full responsibility for them. However, the police are also involved. The minister will have  seen the comments of the chief constable of Tayside police, which are widely reported in today's newspapers, that protesters will be "free to demonstrate along the perimeter fence". Will the minister clarify, particularly for local people, who are at the sharp end, whether that is a departure from the previously understood position or a restatement of it?

What about policing?

There have been a few entertaining speeches this morning, and I particularly enjoyed Jackie Baillie's three-minute riff on the Tories' troubles. I welcome the fact that the Conservatives allowed their time to be used for a debate that the Executive has so far refused us. I am somewhat surprised at Labour members, including Helen Eadie and Kate Maclean, who seemed to think that we need further consultation on what has already been a long consultation. Do we then consult on the consultation on the consultation? Sooner or later we have to get on with it and do something. I welcome the fact that the Tories have given their time; sadly, I cannot welcome the terms of their motion or their contributions. I listened to David McLetchie praising his party's record, but it did not accord with anything that the rest of us remember happening in practice. With respect to Annabel Goldie, I have to point out that David McLetchie said nothing that was in any way new to anybody. As for the Scottish Socialist Party, I have to advise members that Carolyn Leckie is in a bit of a huff because she did not get any support for her amendments at the Health Committee on Tuesday. There is little that I can say about a policy that would close down all private providers—including, presumably, the local chiropodist and Chinese herbal medical centre. That seems an extraordinary position for the SSP to take. When the Kerr report was published, my initial reaction was that it was an anticlimax; it was a real case of "What's new?" and "What now?". There is not much in the report that has not been said before. I agree that there has been a lot of consultation to get to this point, but a lot of what the report says was being said anyway. Much of what Kerr has to say is basically an endorsement of the recommendations and conclusions of the Health Committee's report on workforce planning in the NHS, which focused on many of the same issues, including the important issue of staffing. As convener of the Health Committee I point out that  our report came out months earlier and at a substantially lower cost to the taxpayer. I wish that our committee system, which is often referred to as the jewel in the Parliament's crown, got a bit more recognition.

I suggest that Duncan McNeil read the whole of the committee's report, because as I recall, it did suggest options and solutions. Leaving aside the comments that I have made, I accept that the Kerr report raises important questions, and that a great deal of detailed work was done in the various sub-committees, which none of us has gone through in its entirety. The minister needs to start answering some of those questions. It is time the Executive told us when and how it intends to deliver the health service fit for the future that we all want to see. In her opening speech, the deputy minister talked about being pro-patient choice and pro-diversity. I welcome those sentiments, but as many members have said, the problem is that that is not being translated into any reality that ordinary people experience. Professor Kerr supports diagnostic and treatment centres in the NHS. I listened to Labour members laughing when my colleague Stewart Maxwell talked about that being SNP policy—but it is, and if Labour members agree with it, why do they not just say so instead of laughing? They call for consensus, but when they see that there is consensus it does not make them happy. One of the key messages that comes through clearly from the Kerr report is the importance of providing health services as locally as possible. Like Fergus Ewing—who had clearly taken his happy pills this morning—I would have preferred a clearer definition of what core services are, which the report acknowledges that the public want to see delivered as close to home as possible. I assure members and the minister that throughout Scotland—and certainly in my constituency—they will find a determination that such services should and must include both maternity services and accident and emergency services, which are precisely the services most under threat. Everybody recognises that there are specialist  services that can best be delivered in a few centralised centres, but when it comes to giving birth or receiving urgent treatment people want to be as close to home as possible. I now turn to waiting times. The reality in Scotland is that too many people are waiting for too long to get the treatment that they need. The figures for Tayside NHS Board show that the average out-patient can now expect to wait 72 days for an appointment—17 days longer than last quarter, 22 days longer than last year, and 26 days longer than in 1999. For in-patients the picture is no better, with average waiting times of 61 days—18 days longer than last quarter, 16 days longer than last year, and 26 days longer than in 1999. Labour and the Liberal Democrats can try to spin their way out of that reality, but the fact is that they have now had eight years to make a difference. Despite a few successes, there are too many areas in which they continue to fail. The Tories offer no alternatives except privatisation, the SSP is, frankly, on another planet, and the debate supports my view that only the SNP has a clear and realistic view of the NHS's future. Support the SNP amendment.

Despite the wording of the motion, Scotland is not "hosting the G8 summit"; it is the venue for the summit; would that we were the host. I remain to be convinced about the "economic benefit" that is  likely to accrue to Scotland from the summit. However, I am convinced, sadly, that the G8 summit will have serious negative consequences for my constituents, especially those who live in and around Auchterarder. I am talking not just about concern about the damage that will be caused by the protests that the G8 will attract but about the local disruption and chaos that the summit's presence will create, which is a reality that must be taken on board. The security and policing operation is massive—I never doubted that it would be. The First Minister denied that the policing costs will be the £100 million that has been reported, but the Executive apparently does not want to share the true figure with us. People are rightly concerned and people in the most affected part of Scotland are understandably concerned that they will be left to bear the cost. I am not talking about what the First Minister described as the "potential for the odd penny to go astray".— [ Official Report , 19 May 2005; c17049.]  I am talking about millions of pounds. My constituents and people in other affected constituencies should not be left to pick up the tab. I will continue to press for clarity on the amount of money that will be spent on policing and I will continue to press the case for compensation.

I thank the minister for that assurance, but compensation remains unaddressed. The motion talks about "making the summit safe", but it says nothing about the surrounding communities. The minute that it was announced that the G8 summit would come to Strathearn, everyone knew that protesters would follow, as night follows day, but for some reason nobody wanted to acknowledge that fact. If protesters come in a controlled, managed and organised fashion, that is fine. However, threatening to cause mayhem if they do not get their own way is not fine and such threats have been made. Policing the G8 summit is the responsibility of the Executive, so the Executive should show greater leadership or we will be left with a vacuum into which the extremist elements about whose plans we read will move.

First, my concern is not about what the cost will be, but who will bear the cost, although it is clear that the cost is an issue. Secondly, the G8 is a UK summit, not a Scottish summit, so it is not clear to me why only Scotland should bear the cost. The minister talked about the gentle Scottish policing style. I have asked questions about that, because we know that a vast number of police officers will not come from Scottish forces. Who will train them in Scotland's policing style? I have had no answers to my questions. We need to acknowledge that the G8 is an unwelcome beast in Strathearn. Now that Bob's boat is setting sail, most locals are glad that Strathearn is landlocked and they will not have to deal with that. There has been not even a suggestion of a lasting legacy of the G8 for Auchterarder, which might have sweetened the pill a little. The minister might like to consider something along those lines in order to alleviate the inconvenience that will be created for the folk of the town.

I am sorry. I have taken interventions and I need to move on. Of course the G8 summit is not just about what we can get out of it or our difficulties with it. We all want there to be a global legacy, as well as a local legacy, from the summit. Much publicity surrounded the recent visit of the First Minister to Malawi and I congratulate the First Minister on what he is trying to do. Although there might be debate around the detail of the proposals, let us have that debate without the level of cynicism that I have seen emanating from some quarters. I have found that there is a magic cure for cynicism. One must stand, as I did recently, in a corrugated tin shack of a classroom crammed with 70, 80, 90 or more children from a squatter camp, all in school uniform, being taught by volunteer teachers with no support other than charity. All cynicism disappears. Visit a hospital where babies die for want of incubators or medicines—I know that some of my colleagues had that experience  recently—and cynicism disappears. By all means, let us have the debate, but if we really believe that our aid money goes into the back pockets of people who are already rich, we must ensure that it goes directly to the schools and hospitals; we should not use the situation as an excuse to stop giving. If the UK reaches its 0.7 per cent aid target, it will happen 43 years after the target was agreed. That shows no sense of urgency. I have a message for the leaders of the G8 countries as they get ready to come to my constituency; be prepared to take some real decisions and act on them. They must consider the needs of the world's poor and they must listen to the tens of thousands who will march and demand that that those leaders make poverty history. Thirty thousand children die in Africa every year. The G8 leaders must come prepared to change that, or they should stay at home.

Although I fervently hope that the people of Perthshire do not get caught in the middle of a row about finances—or, indeed, a row about a protest, which, if it happens, I hope is peaceful—those attending the G8 are indeed precisely the folk who can really make poverty history. I know that the First Minister will have listened carefully to what Bob Geldof said, and I congratulate the First Minister and the Presiding Officer on inviting Bob Geldof to this Parliament. How does the First Minister personally propose to lay down the challenge to the leaders of the G8 on Scotland's behalf?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to support the work of the family mediation network. (S2O-6647)

Is the minister aware that Family Mediation Tayside, and presumably other regional groups on whom he will rely to deliver aspects of the Family Law (Scotland) Bill, are extremely concerned that their funding from the Executive will end in 2007? He suggests in written answers that they could then apply for further funding, but other sources are telling them that they will get nothing more from central Government after that point. Does he agree that they are doing important work, which needs to be properly funded? They cannot expect to plan in a vacuum. Will he clarify what appears to be a mixed message from the Executive in respect of that funding?

Does Duncan McNeil accept that the researchers did what the Health Committee instructed them to do? The Health Committee did not widen their remit beyond the consideration of dentists.

Members of the Health Committee, like members throughout the chamber, have been concerned by the extent of the anecdotal evidence of a perceived decline in access to national health service dentistry services. The committee thought it appropriate to have a more objective assessment of the situation than was available, so in April 2004 it commissioned researchers from the Guy's, King's and St Thomas' dental institute in London to conduct a survey of Scottish dentists. Their remit was to identify the contribution of dentists to the provision of NHS dental services in Scotland and to identify areas where the availability of services is insufficient to meet need or demand. The report and conclusions were published on 1 February 2005. On behalf of the Health Committee, I thank Professor Tim Newton, Professor Alison Williams and Dr Elizabeth Bower for their comprehensive piece of work, which I hope will form the basis of a serious examination of some of the real difficulties and shortcomings facing NHS dental provision throughout Scotland. I also thank the clerks to the committee for all their assistance and hard work. The research is extremely thorough. I will take some time to present the main findings of the report to the chamber, with a detour here and there, as members might expect, into my experience as a constituency MSP who receives complaints from constituents who are unable to access dental services. The purpose of the exercise was to find the facts behind what we knew to be the reality of some of our constituents' experiences. Stories abound of queues down the street when a dentist announces that he or she is taking on NHS patients or, worse, restricting his or her NHS list on a first-come, first-served basis. There was just such a story in The Herald on Tuesday. The sole remaining NHS dental practice in Stranraer announced that it was going private and would be offering NHS treatment only to children and existing NHS patients. That dentist had nearly 3,500 patients, a great many of whom queued outside the surgery to join the private scheme, which has been restricted to only 1,000 members, leaving 2,500 people disappointed. The question is where those people are to go. Of course, Stranraer is not alone in  experiencing such a situation. The report identifies a number of problems in relation to access to dental services and flags up the difficulties that could arise with the implementation of the Executive's policy on free oral health checks unless dentists can be encouraged to increase the amount of time that they spend treating NHS Scotland patients over the next two years. Frankly, there is little sign of that happening, either from past performance or from indications for the future. In the past two years, just over one in 10 dentists in Scotland have increased the number of NHS hours that they work, while more than a quarter have decreased their NHS hours. Only 3.5 per cent of primary care dentists have stated that they intend to increase the amount of time that they spend treating NHS patients in the next two years. It may come as a surprise to members that insufficient information is available at health board level on a whole range of indicators, such as numbers of dentists; the number of dentists who are accepting new NHS patients; distances travelled by patients for primary and secondary dental care, which is pretty fundamental, especially in rural areas; the availability of evening and weekend appointments; access for groups with special needs; demand for dental services; and recruitment and retention of all dental staff. That is all basic information, yet it is not readily available. We know some things, however. The researchers established that the dentist to population ratio for Scotland as a whole was 5.57 NHS dentists per 10,000 population, although when part-time provision and the provision of private services were taken into account the figure fell to 3.52 NHS dentists per 10,000 population. However, there are significant variations. Surprisingly—I say that because most committee members were surprised—the highest dentist to population ration was in greater Glasgow and the lowest was in Dumfries and Galloway. Presumably, the news from Stranraer means that the figures there have got even worse.

Yes. There is an issue with how the figures operate, because they relate to health board areas, not local authority areas or, indeed, constituency areas. There is also wide variation in the proportion of time that dentists in different health board areas  spend providing NHS services, ranging from 99.5 per cent in the Western Isles to 64.5 per cent in the Highlands. In the recent past, 26 per cent of dentists have decreased their NHS time. Significantly, that proportion was greater in general dental practice. Members might think that that is stating the obvious, but the research report states: "Registration rates were significantly higher in areas where there were more GDS dentists available, suggesting that increasing the dentist to population ratio in an area is a way of improving the utilisation of services in that area." That means that the more dentists there are, the more likely people are to go to the dentist. Given the appalling state of Scotland's dental health, that has to be an immediate area of concern. Scotland has a slightly higher dentist to population ratio than the United Kingdom as a whole, but that has to be seen in the context of our far higher levels of remoteness and rurality. When we compare ourselves to other European countries, there is no need to adjust the figures to take those factors into account. In Denmark and Norway—the two countries in Europe that are most comparable to Scotland in terms of population and geography—the dentist to population ratios are more than twice that in Scotland. We have a long way to go to catch up. When we turn to accessibility issues, we find that 58 per cent of primary care dentists are offering appointments to new child patients. That is all well and good, but it means that 42 per cent are not. Moreover, only 37 per cent are accepting all categories of adults as new NHS patients. Again, that varies throughout the country, with Orkney dentists accepting the highest proportion and Borders dentists accepting the lowest proportion of new NHS patients. More than 80 per cent of Borders dentists are either not accepting new patients or have a waiting list. There are problems with access to NHS specialist services in rural and urban areas, with long waiting times for some specialties in Lothian, greater Glasgow, the Borders and Dumfries and Galloway. More than half of specialist practitioners are not accepting new patients or are using a waiting list. The point must be made that the public are prepared to travel for specialist services, but they are not prepared to wait for them. As I said, only 3.5 per cent of primary care dentists intend to increase the amount of time that they spend treating NHS patients in the next two years. It is worth thinking about that in the current context. No single incentive to increase NHS commitment from dentists was favoured by an overwhelming majority of practitioners. The most frequently endorsed incentive was a significant increase in the fee per item of treatment. Moves to a salaried contract or a capitation arrangement are  less popular and there seems little likelihood of retired dentists being attracted back into work. That means that the significant increase in NHS provision that is required to meet pledges to make free NHS check-ups available to all by 2007 is unlikely to be achieved with the range of incentives that are currently available. The report provides a summary of the performance of each health board in relation to NHS dental services, in terms of availability, accessibility and accommodation. I have no doubt that members went straight to that information as they tried to figure out how provision in their constituencies compares with provision in the rest of the country. If members have not found that information, I can tell them that it is on pages 6 and 7, just before the brightly coloured map that will help to orientate them. Of course, everything is relative, as Mike Rumbles suggested. Tayside, where my particular interest lies, appears on paper to be better served than some areas. However, I will give an example of what can happen in one of the so-called better-served areas. I have a constituent who needed to have a front crown replaced. She cannot afford to go private. Because she works in Stirling, she called dentists in Stirling, Dunblane, Bridge of Allan and Perth, with no success. She managed to get her family placed on the waiting list of a practice in Perth, but she was told that she would have to wait at least until August before anything came up. Eventually, a week after her tooth had fallen out, she called the dental hospital in Dundee but, because the crown pin had fractured, the hospital advised her—wait for it—to get a dentist. She sat outside the dental hospital calling dentists in Dundee until she finally found one who was taking NHS patients. She had her crown fixed at a third of the private price. She is relieved about that, but now faces a long round trip to take herself or her children to the dentist. Given that she works in Stirling, she will presumably have to take most of a day off work. Simply put, the best that there is—Tayside is one of the better-served areas—is just not good enough. On 17 March, the Executive published its "An Action Plan for Improving Oral Health and Modernising NHS Dental Services in Scotland". In a letter to me on 4 April, the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care welcomed the research report and provided the Executive's response to its findings. I have three questions arising from that, which I hope that the minister will address either during the debate or afterwards. First, the minister acknowledged that better information is required at a local level to address supply and demand issues for NHS dental services. The Executive's action plan gives NHS  boards responsibility for planning and securing the provision of NHS dental services, including improved information. The main focus is to be on those people with the greatest need—that is, children and older people. My question to the Executive is: how is greatest need to be assessed, in the absence of adequate information? Secondly, the minister indicated that the availability and access issues that are raised in the report will be addressed in the national workforce plan to be published in June 2005. Would she care to give an indication of how quickly she believes the plan can be expected to have an impact on dental services in Scotland? Thirdly, on recruitment and retention, the Executive has indicated that it plans to increase Scottish dental schools' output of dentists and to offer dentists incentives to return to Scotland. The minister also wants to recruit from outwith Scotland and intends to increase the remote areas allowance from £6,000 to £9,000. Once again, I ask whether the minister can give us a timetable for when those plans will begin to have a real impact, because that will be important to people's perceptions of what is happening throughout Scotland. The research that the Health Committee commissioned offers a comprehensive snapshot of the views and experiences of NHS dentists in Scotland. Ministers and members would do well to reflect on what it tells them, particularly about incentives. I highlight a comment from one respondent on incentives:  "Stop access money for young dentists to allow them to set up a new practice around the corner from the retiring practitioners desperate to sell."  There must be logic in the way in which the incentives are applied.  The Health Committee recognises that, through the development and publication of the action plan, the Executive has begun to take action on the issues that are identified in the report. However, I am concerned that that action is not enough to tackle the depressing picture that is painted in the final summary of the report. As the report says, the Executive's pledge of free check-ups for all by 2007  "is going to be difficult to fulfil". Plans to use retired dentists are "unlikely to be successful". Moreover, the significant increase in NHS Scotland provision that is required to meet the Executive's pledges is "unlikely to be achieved with the type of incentives currently available". Finally, "a broader national strategy is required to ensure that the  majority of practitioners receive adequate incentives to commit to NHSScotland".  We are all aware of the problems with access to NHS dental services. By commissioning the research and sponsoring today's debate, the Health Committee hopes to highlight the issues that require to be addressed and to make a positive contribution to the solutions. We will continue to monitor progress.  I move,  That the Parliament commends to the Scottish Executive the research report, Access to Dental Health Services in Scotland (SP Paper 277) , commissioned by the Health Committee; draws the Executive's attention to the problems of access to services that the report identifies and their implications for the introduction of free dental checks, and urges the Executive to use the report to inform the implementation of its dental strategy.

I am astonished at Mr Barrie's comments. He does not want us to debate the reserved matter of UK weapons, yet he somehow thinks that we should debate matters that pertain to entirely different countries. He needs to question his logic on the issue.

We should be clear that this debate is about Britain's very own weapons of mass destruction, which are paid for by you and me, Presiding Officer, and indeed by the taxes of everyone in the chamber. How do they differ from other WMDs? For a start, they are easily verifiable and they are not difficult to locate. A team of United Nations inspectors would have little difficulty in tracking them down and, at the end of their search, the world would know what it already knows: that Britain, unlike some other countries, has WMDs. Let us not pretend that we are talking about anything other than WMDs. We have moved on from the days of the arms race and the madness of mutually assured destruction, but the facts about nuclear weapons have not changed. Every single Trident warhead has seven times the destructive power of the bomb that devastated Hiroshima in 1945, killing 140,000 and leaving a legacy that continued to kill for generations. The moral argument against nuclear weapons remains as strong as ever—indeed, I believe that it has been strengthened. We are no longer in a situation where two power blocs strive to cancel each other out while fingers are poised twitchily over the nuclear trigger. Instead, a group of countries in the nuclear club are insisting that they and only they are responsible enough to have nuclear weapons. The door has been locked and nobody else is to join the club. Anyone who attempts to do so is slapped down and told not to be a naughty boy, unless of course they are a friend of the United States, in which case their actions are overlooked. That is international arrogance of the highest order and a case of "do as I say, not as I do". The country that tried most recently to join the nuclear club is North Korea. The US Secretary of State, Condoleezza Rice, stated clearly that North Korea is risking further world isolation. She said: "there needs to be no nuclear weapons on the Korean Peninsula in order to maintain stability in that region." That somewhat begs the question why, if nuclear weapons are not okay for the Korean peninsula, they are okay for the Cowal peninsula. I do not accept the argument. There are safety issues with our current system. We know that there have been eight incidents on  the jetty at Coulport, where nuclear warheads are loaded on to Trident submarines, which have resulted in the emergency services being called. We know that Scottish local authorities and the Scottish Executive are not included in risk assessment exercises on the transportation of nuclear materials through places such as Glasgow. The Ministry of Defence will not tell us what the most recent risk assessment exercise, which was carried out in January 2005, had to say. That is unacceptable. It is clear that there are safety issues that we should be addressing in the Parliament. On the legal side of things, our possession of weapons of mass destruction is in flagrant disregard of international law. In 1996, the International Court of Justice ruled: "the threat of use of nuclear weapons would be generally contrary to the rules of international law applicable in armed conflict, and in particular the principles and rules of humanitarian law"— but hey, why should that apply to the United Kingdom?

I believe that no country should have nuclear weapons and that those that do should be setting an example to ensure that others do not decide to take that road. If the moral and legal arguments will not sway members, they should consider the finances involved. Apart from being objectionable because of the evil that it has the potential to do, Trident has been a costly white elephant and I have no reason to believe that any replacement system would be any different. Over the 10 to 12 years of its operational life, Trident will have cost the UK taxpayer £15 billion, the cost of replacing the system will be upwards of £20 billion and it costs something in the region of £1 billion a year to run. If we do not ditch it now, Scotland's share of the money blown on a replacement for it would be in the region of £3 billion over 10 years, at an annual cost of £300 million. I do not believe that Scotland can afford to spend its money on that. Compare all that to the cost of retaining Scotland's historic infantry regiments—the MOD expects to save only a few million pounds by disbanding them—not to mention what those vast sums could have meant for schools or hospitals.

Like most modern west European states, an independent Scotland would have its own defence forces—we have never said any different—which would include the continued existence of the historic regiments of Scotland. I turn to the three amendments. The Green amendment would be a useful addition to the motion and we are happy to accept it. I have to characterise the amendment in Robert Brown's name as typical Liberal Democrat weaselspeak. I am trying to work out from it whether the Liberal Democrats are for or against Trident, but it is impossible to do so—I look forward to an explanation. Scott Barrie's amendment is profoundly confused. He was obviously never on any of the anti-nuclear marches that I was on, which is a pity, because I had thought that more members had been on such marches. If he is so keen to debate the reserved matter of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, I suggest that he persuade his ministers to introduce a debate on it in Executive time. The Scottish National Party will be well up for such a debate. I make no apology for debating nuclear weapons in the Scottish Parliament. I do not deny that the subject matter is outwith the Parliament's current competence, but we have debated such issues before and we will do so again. It is an issue of huge importance to Scotland and we are Scotland's voice. We must be heard. There is a UK general election in the offing and voters will have the opportunity to vote for a party that is committed to delivering an independent, nuclear-free Scotland. I hope that they take that option. Until then, the debate must go on and must influence that decision. I doubt that Scots want the son-of-Trident programme any more than they wanted Trident in the first place—a fact that tends to be glossed over by members of the Executive parties. Only three months ago, the Parliament passed a motion that condemned the amalgamation of Scotland's infantry regiments. The money that Trident costs Scotland every year could save the Black Watch and the rest of the Scottish regiments. I want Labour and Liberal Democrat members individually to look to their consciences as they consider how to vote this afternoon. This is not an issue on which the partnership agreement takes a stand and the Parliament is not going to pass legislation on it. I know that many members have a long-standing commitment to the cause of nuclear disarmament, and some of us have been on the same demonstrations together down the years. Today, the Parliament has the opportunity to keep faith with those principles by supporting the motion in my name.  I move, That the Parliament is opposed to the existence of weapons of mass destruction in Scotland; believes that the existing Trident nuclear system which costs almost £1 billion annually to keep in operation should be scrapped; recognises that a decision on the replacement of Trident will require to be taken within the next UK Parliament; further recognises that the cost of replacing Trident would be over £20 billion, and wishes to register strong opposition to any proposal by Her Majesty's Government to procure a replacement for the Trident nuclear system.

To ask the Scottish Executive what facilities are available for deaf people in courts. (S2O-5728)

I am aware that a loop system is in place in Perth sheriff court. However, is the minister aware of a recent case in  which, although the loop system was used for a deaf litigant on a first calling, the system was not in use during the subsequent substantive calling? As a result, the litigant missed about 90 per cent of what was happening in court. The litigant lost his case and had expenses awarded against him. That might not have had anything to do with the loop system, but does the minister agree that, as well a system being in place, staff must be trained and educated to use it so that it will be of benefit to those who are deaf?

I guarantee that Perthshire will provide a beautiful backdrop to the summit. That said, the concerns that I want to raise, which are germane to the debate, are both practical and political. First I will outline my practical concerns. Right from the start, I have expressed concerns on behalf of my constituents in respect of the disruption to their lives that they will experience as a result of the summit being held in their area. This morning, the BBC seemed to have some difficulty with the wording of my amendment. However, I have constituents who are particularly concerned that constant references to Gleneagles instead of to Gleneagles hotel will result in the variously named other Gleneagles properties in the area being targeted in error. All of us are guilty of referring simply to Gleneagles. The aim of my amendment is to get home the point that it is not just Gleneagles hotel that is at issue. The wording of the amendment also makes clear that the direct disruption that will be caused will be felt throughout a much larger area than just the immediate vicinity of the hotel. The daily lives of many of my constituents will be disrupted and to pretend otherwise is to let them down badly. The insurance issue has been raised. There is a great deal of anger at the decision that has been taken in that respect and I hope that the Executive and the Foreign Office will review it. Equally, transport in and around the area will be seriously disrupted and to pretend otherwise is to ignore reality. After all, the area is key not just for my constituents but for people in the whole of Scotland. So far, it is the impositions of the Government and the security services, not the actions of the protesters, that are most likely to disrupt my constituents' lives. So far, the security arrangements that will be put in place are focused entirely on the needs of summit participants and not on those of my constituents or, indeed, the many thousands of peaceful protesters whom we can expect to see in the area. I expect that the actions of most of the protesters who will come to Scotland—and, indeed, to Perthshire—will be peaceful. The aims of the make poverty history campaign show just how peaceful their protest is likely to be. We need to uphold the tradition of peaceful protest. However, I fear that there is a danger in the way in which the police are presenting things at the moment. It is beginning to look suspiciously as if the police are saying, "Come on, if you think you're hard enough." If there are many more alarmist security pronouncements and threats from the less  scrupulous activists about whom we are already reading, I am afraid that the world's TV cameras will be transmitting pictures from an Auchterarder High Street with its shops barricaded and closed for the duration—indeed, the possibility is already being considered by some. I am advised that even the local police are asking people to do precisely that. Among the high-profile policing and the threats of some potential demonstrators, there is a tendency to forget that there is a real community of real people in that area, who are beginning to feel that they are caught in the middle and that their concerns are being ignored. We can accept disruption, but only if we secure from the summit the agreements that we seek in respect of trade justice, international aid and debt relief. The Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive have an important role in progressing the agenda but, frankly, despite the Executive amendment, I have seen no sign that it is spearheading any such debate. I want important international meetings to be held in Scotland, but I want Scotland to take part and influence the decisions from within, not just provide the backdrop and the refreshments. When the Commonwealth heads of state came to Edinburgh in 1997, Margaret Ewing memorably said that Scotland's role was that of a tartan waitress. The First Minister would not like that description, but I hope that, when he attends functions at Gleneagles hotel in July, he will try to come across as something more than just a pin-striped sommelier. As a start, a debate on the issue in Executive time would be appropriate. I move amendment S2M-2506.2, to leave out from "notes that the G8 summit" to end and insert: "notes that the G8 summit will be meeting in Strathearn in July this year; resolves to uphold and support the right to peaceful assembly and protest in Scotland, in particular in Edinburgh at the Make Poverty History demonstration and at the summit itself in Strathearn; recognises, however, that those who reside close to the location of the G8 summit also have the right to privacy and to be able to pursue their lives and livelihoods free from harassment from whatever quarter, and considers that the important issues to be debated at the summit should be given as much publicity and consideration as the reported security arrangements."

I, too, congratulate Christine May on providing the vehicle for tonight's debate. There seems to be a big move towards towns and villages across Scotland declaring themselves to be fair trade towns and villages—Perthshire is no exception. Reference has already been made to Aberfeldy and I expect that my colleague John Swinney will want to say something about that. Not to be outdone, Perth and Kinross Council wants to make Perth itself a fair trade city. I say "city" rather than "town" because that is how we in Perth think of where we live. I welcome that move and have challenged the council to say that the whole of its area should become the first fair trade local authority in Scotland. Although the city councils have already made such a declaration, I will not count them because their areas do not include all the surrounding towns and villages. I want Perth and Kinross Council to do that—to extend fair trade status right across its huge area. The debate in Perthshire has been prompted by the holding of the G8 summit there, about which we will hear more tomorrow. That is an example of how people are beginning to react to the issues that the summit raises. I listened with interest to what Murdo Fraser said, but I want to say how disappointed I was at the article in this morning's edition of The Scotsman that was written by a Conservative councillor. I very much hope that his views are not widely held in the Conservative party. He talks about fair trade producers having practices that are restrictive in comparison with those of their efficient, low-cost competitors. In his view, fair trade products are high cost because they are artificially protected. Of course, in his world "low cost" is a euphemism for paying people buttons and not getting too hung up on boring issues such as environmental regulations and workplace conditions. When people opt for fair trade goods, they are making it clear that they believe that people should be paid a decent wage for the work that they do and that they should be able to expect to work in reasonable conditions that are not a threat to their health or that of the environment. Fair trade tea and coffee are already widely available in the Parliament, but I do not think that we go nearly far enough. Some of the products that were on sale when we first moved into the new building seem to have disappeared. I wonder why that is. We need to ensure that both the cafeterias, the coffee bar and the members' restaurant all sell, display and draw attention to fair trade products. That is not happening at the moment. As MSPs we should take a lead, but the Executive should do so as well. Let us make Scotland the first fair trade country in the world.

I am glad that the minister talks about the need to get people into employment. Does that include those who are about to made unemployed by the DWP?

I congratulate Brian Adam on securing the debate. Although the issue in question is decided at Westminster, we in the Scottish Parliament must have a say because the decision will have a huge impact on the communities that we represent. The  Parliament does what it can to promote social justice and economic development in our communities, and it is quite unhelpful for Westminster then to come along and pull the economic rug from under us as the DWP is doing with these closures. We should not be afraid of saying so. The DWP proposes to close down the local social security office in Perth completely with the loss of 54 jobs. That is a shoddy way to treat people. The staff who are affected by such cuts are not faceless bureaucrats sitting in back offices; they are hard-working front-line staff who are involved in service delivery. Many of them have families and other commitments and will find it extremely difficult to relocate—even if relocation were on offer, which does not look likely. The announcement of these cuts was made in a written statement in the House of Commons and was listed on the order paper in the middle of 32 other items under the heading "departmental efficiency", which seems to have been given without any obvious appreciation of the irony. However, efficient is something that the DWP certainly is not. Richard Baker was quite right to mention the work of local MPs on this matter. My colleague Annabelle Ewing MP has also been pursuing the matter. The DWP is so efficient that two different ministers sent her two different letters on the same subject, which were both dated 6 October 2004 and which said two different things. The first, from Maria Eagle MP, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary for Work and Pensions said: "Perth Social Security Office will close and the Benefit Processing Centre in Grampian and Tayside District will be located in Inverness". The other letter, from Jane Kennedy MP, the Minister of State for Work, said: "The Benefit Processing Centre taking claims from Grampian and Tayside District will be operational by the end of the 2005/06 financial year and benefit processing in ... Perth, will move to Greenock." Greenock, Inverness, Perth—it is probably all the same to Whitehall. However, it makes a bit of a difference to people who live in Perthshire. It really does not engender much confidence to see what is coming out of the DWP. As other members have pointed out, the plan is certainly not good for the staff who will be directly affected, nor will it provide a better service for the people who use it: the benefits applicants, who include the some of the most needy people in our society. We should not be making it even harder for them to access the benefits to which they are entitled.  Indeed, in a very recent written answer that was published in Hansard on 1 February 2005, Jane Kennedy had the brass neck to say: "These changes will not impede or hinder access to face-to-face interviews"—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 1 February 2005; Vol 430, c 808W.] How on earth can removing the service from Perth or other areas to Inverness and/or Greenock, whichever it might turn out to be, not in some way impede "access to face-to-face interviews"? Who is she kidding? Although claimants might still be able to go into a local office to make a claim, it will be sent away to be processed and it will no longer be possible to have easy access to the individual who processes it. The truth is that the whole system will become more impersonal and inflexible than it already is—and that is not to mention the knock-on effect for advice agencies, which are of course a devolved issue that the minister will have to address. There is outrage across all parties and at all levels of society in Perth at the proposal and what it will mean for the poorest in our society. I hope that the minister will listen to the anger and frustration that members have expressed today and that he will convey those feelings to the ministers at Westminster who are responsible for making the decision. I also hope that the minister will say to his Westminster counterpart that he, too, agrees with that sense of anger and frustration.

John Home Robertson gave us five minutes of history lesson and 50 seconds of fatuous waffle, which is what we have come to expect from the Government. I am astonished that the duly elected, democratic Labour Government of this country is going to be told what to do by the military. I thought that that kind of thing happened only in third-world countries—apparently not. I quote from Kipling: "For it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' 'Chuck him out, the brute!' But it's 'Saviour of 'is country' when the guns begin to shoot; An' it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' anything you please; An' Tommy ain't a bloomin' fool—you bet that Tommy sees!" We can replace the word "Tommy" with "the Black Watch", "the KOSB", or any of the other regiments and we can bet that Scottish soldiers are not bloomin' fools and that they see through the Government. I brought with me a stack of blueys—letters from the field, which were sent to me from Iraq by  soldiers who are serving in the Black Watch. The letters represent the views of soldiers, from privates to non-commissioned officers and senior officers. I will quote directly from some of the blueys so that the words of those soldiers are recorded in our Official Report : "I have been sent here from (what was until now) a non-deployable post but, due to the lack of trained units Britain has to offer at short notice, there are no other units in a position to deploy rapidly." "We are serving out here ... with an Artillery Regiment that is serving in a role more normally filled by an infantry regiment ... In a period of 18 months they will have the opportunity to train on their artillery weapons for one 2-week period, because they are being deployed as infantry to fill a gap created by Options for Change." "The decision to reduce the armed forces ... can only add to the stress, strains and pressures already endured by us soldiers, wives and children. Some of us have been separated for 400 days in the last 2 years." It makes me profoundly angry to read those messages and then to hear the managerial newspeak that emanates from a senior Government minister, who waffles away about how the emphasis is no longer on troop numbers but is on efficiencies and outcomes. Our soldiers deserve straight talking, not fatuous waffle, spin and deceit. They do not deserve the fatuous waffle that has spewed out of Westminster over the past few months and that we have just heard in the debate. The reality is that although money is no object when it comes to our weapons of mass destruction, the ordinary soldier is regarded as an expensive luxury. I have heard it said that the United Kingdom has been involved in six wars in five years. I have not counted them, but if that is the case, we cannot expect our soldiers to be spread so thinly. Most people who join the army do so in the knowledge that at some time they might be expected to fight. Perhaps they do not anticipate that they will fight as often as they do—we have not anticipated that—or that they might occasionally be expected to fight in dubious circumstances. In Scotland, most people who join up prefer to join a unit that has a strong and distinct identity. Young people go into the family regiment. In Perthshire, that regiment is the Black Watch, in which the ties are multigenerational and permeate the entire county and beyond. I believe that that is the case for all the other regiments. The experience of previous mergers, such as the one that led to the creation of the Highlanders in 1994, shows that it can take 10 years for recruitment to recover. Do we want that to happen to the whole of the Scottish division? I will give the last word to a writer of one of the blueys: "As a voter and a soldier I am writing to you for support,  for you to question this decision and fight on our behalf to reverse the decision to reduce our armed services, as I am fighting for my life out here in Iraq in support of the politicians." Shame on those politicians, and shame on Labour front-bench politicians in the Scottish Parliament, who display their contempt by their absence. I move amendment S2M-2165.3, to insert at end: "and condemns the fact that these proposals have been developed while Black Watch soldiers and other members of the armed forces are involved in a dangerous conflict in Iraq."

I see that we are once again generating more heat than light and more noise than anything else. Perhaps we would have had a better debate if the minister had ensured that members were better informed. I hope that he will reflect on that.

Perhaps Duncan McNeil could let me get started before he intervenes. The most recent figures on waiting times, which were published at the end of November, showed that the number of patients who are being treated per month across Scotland is now at an all-time low, while the median wait for treatment is at an all-time high. I have no doubt that health professionals in the NHS in Scotland are working extremely hard and doing an excellent job. I know that they dislike the focus on waiting times, but reality dictates that that is the way in which people experience the service. In my area, folk have to wait 10 days longer than the Scottish average, which is 11 days longer than they had to wait last year, and 18 days longer than when this Executive first came into power in June 1999. Not only that, but the percentage of patients who are admitted within the first three months is down a staggering 15 per cent on June 1999. That is the reality in Tayside, and all the talk will not talk that reality away. The record is difficult and it has to be overcome. The numbers are not empty statistics; they represent ordinary people waiting for treatment. The minister listed targets for specific conditions, but I will give members some reality. I have a constituent who was diagnosed on 12 September 2003 with an aortic aneurysm—a life-threatening condition, which could take him away just like that.  His GP expected that he would be treated surgically within one to two weeks. The chief executive of the health board told me that that was the ideal, but that it was not possible in this case because of the pressure of patients who had similar or worse medical problems. After a last-minute cancellation and because of a lack of high-dependency beds—a lack of capacity—in the Tayside NHS Board area, my constituent finally had his operation on 13 February. That was a five-month wait after a diagnosis of an aortic aneurysm. He had to live with that diagnosis for five months and I do not think that that is acceptable. If that is the situation for a life-threatening condition, what is the picture like for those whose conditions are not considered to be serious enough to merit any kind of priority? The waiting times for non-life-threatening ailments do not get much in the way of coverage in the chamber, but they should; one or two members have spoken about that. For example, one young mother with a full-time job was diagnosed in the middle of 2003 as needing a tonsillectomy. Tonsillitis seems like such a trivial illness. At the time, she was told that she would have to wait 60 weeks just to be seen by an ear, nose and throat consultant. During 2003 alone, she suffered from tonsillitis 10 times and was off work for approximately 14 weeks in total. She got to see a consultant on 20 July this year. I give credit to NHS Tayside—she waited 53 weeks, rather than 60. She had her operation on 13 September, a whole year after diagnosis. In that time, she feared losing her job and her future promotion prospects, because of her frequent absences. That is not just a cost to industry—it also had a catastrophic effect on her quality of life.

I am fascinated if that is the guarantee right across the board, including for situations such as that which I have described. I would be interested if the minister, in his closing remarks, would tell me how he will get a current wait of something like 60 weeks down to 18 weeks across the board. If he can do so, I will be much more satisfied than I am at present. My concern relates to how long people should have to put up with so-called non-serious conditions, which have a profound effect on their quality of life. Are we expecting that they should resort to paying for treatment? Make no mistake—leaving aside the proposals that have been  announced today, people are already utilising the capacity of the private sector. They are doing so all the time. Who, if they can afford it—which is the problem—would not think seriously about getting their granny an earlier cataract operation or their mum an earlier bone scan? Who would not think about getting the poor woman with chronically bad tonsils into surgery, so that she can be free of tonsillitis for ever, without having to wait for more than a year? It happens all the time, and we know it. The Executive is cynically forcing people into the private sector by stealth. Extended long-term use of private sector capacity, whether via the back door as just described, or by the front door in the way in which I presume the Executive is proposing, is not the right way of solving the problems of our national health service. No matter what the minister says, I believe that it will result in even greater staff shortages in the NHS and that it has the potential to undermine permanently the ethos of the NHS. The more that private health insurance looks like a necessary resort for people, the more that they will resent paying again for something for which they consider they have already paid. Sooner or later, that will become the big political issue. Labour, I regret, will have taken us to a destination that the Tories never dared try.

Were they horse-drawn trams?

I am grateful for the opportunity to bring this debate to the chamber. I am also grateful to Geoff Brown—who is, of course, the chairman of my local senior football club, St Johnstone Football Club—for bringing the issue to my attention in the first place. I know that other clubs will have been in touch with members about the same issue. The debate is about football and, I guess, about gambling. Football is devolved while gambling is reserved. I have taken up the issue with the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport here in Scotland, while my Westminster colleague Annabelle Ewing MP has written to the minister in London who is responsible for gambling and I hope that the two ministers will at least talk to each other about it. In his initial letter to me, Geoff Brown spelled out the situation. Since 1960, the Pools Promoters Association—which comprises Littlewoods, Vernons and Zetters—has made copyright payments to the Scottish Football League, as it has done to the other three leagues, for the right to use the SFL's fixtures in its games. However, as of this season, the pools companies have stopped all payments to the leagues. The SFL distributes all the money that it gets from the pools companies directly to the clubs. This season, the SFL was due to receive around £600,000, which would have meant an income of some £20,000 for each club. If we bear in mind the financial knife edge on which many clubs operate, it becomes clear how incredibly important that money is to their survival. In fact, the revenue from the pools companies amounts to 20 per cent of the SFL's commercial income.  The SFL has provided me with further background on the dispute. Originally, the payment was based on a percentage of the stakes that the pools companies received, minus prize fund allocation, Government tax and payments to charities. When discussions began for a new contract this season, the Pools Promoters Association sought to change the basis on which royalties were calculated. It proposed a heavily reduced fixed fee or a reduction—from 4.75 per cent to 1 per cent—in the percentage of the stakes that the pools companies received that went to football. It is understandable that that major cut was rejected by the leagues. I admit that I may have been a little harsh with the pools companies in the title for the debate and I understand that they have been having a difficult time since the establishment of the national lottery. I wrote to the pools companies and this afternoon I met Gary Speakman of the Pools Promoters Association, who, along with a colleague, is in the gallery to listen to the debate. I know that they do not want to cause football harm. It is their view that any intransigence that there has been in the negotiations has been on the part of Football Dataco Ltd, which acts as agents for the two Scottish and two English football leagues.

I understand that considerable legal debate on that matter is going on in the background. However, the fact is that a long-standing agreement has now come to an end and nothing has taken its place; that is what is causing the problem. We know that the pools companies are in difficulty. The turnover of Littlewoods has declined from £800 million in 1993 to £89.7 million in 2003 and employee numbers have fallen from 5,000 to 300 in same period. According to Vernons, the industry has lost 90 per cent of its customers and revenue to the national lottery, which now dominates what it calls the long-odds betting market—I take that to mean that people who participate in it do not have much chance of winning anything. As a direct result of a Government decision in 1994 to establish the lottery, the turnover of Vernons has declined to the extent that it has reduced its work force in Liverpool from 1,050 to 120. I have no doubt that the pools companies will also be worried about the potential impact of the  planned loosening of the gambling laws. There is a huge difference between the weekly punt on the pools, which is almost a part of our way of life, and the slot-machine alleys and mega-casinos that are being touted at Westminster. There is a symbiotic relationship between the pools and football. Many small team names and places are widely known simply because they appear in the classified results. However, the face of betting on football matches is changing and there is no doubt that there is an imbalance between what the pools companies have been paying and what is paid by bookmakers, for example, who use the same data for telephone and internet betting. That is part of the problem that Dennis Canavan referred to. A bookmaker such as William Hill will have paid about £0.1 million in total over the past three years, whereas Littlewoods has paid closer to £10 million over the same period. I understand and appreciate all that. It is clear to me that the Westminster Government has a role to play in putting the situation right, as the root of the problem lies in the establishment of the national lottery, which has had a devastating effect on the pools industry. However, there is also a role for the Scottish Executive to play in trying to secure a successful resolution to the matter. We have debated the state of Scottish football in the chamber before—indeed, the debate was one of those rare occasions when the Executive parties supported a Scottish National Party motion. The bottom line for me is that most SFL clubs are small community clubs. They are also businesses that are in a delicate financial state. We are talking about people's continued employment as well as their continued enjoyment. Kenny MacAskill said in the debate in February: "Scottish football finds itself in troubled times. The list of clubs in financial trouble reads like an excerpt from a hall of fame. More may follow those that have already been engulfed. Others, professional or not, are in debt or at best cash strapped."— [ Official Report , 11 February 2004; c 5695.]  Although I have focused on the SFL clubs, I have no doubt that some of the Scottish Premier League clubs are also feeling the pressure—we know that a number of them are teetering on the edge of bankruptcy. Any disruption in the flow of anticipated revenue will be difficult for them to deal with. The purpose of the debate was never to point the finger of accusation at any one sector in particular, but to highlight the issues involved. I urge the parties to come to an agreement before it is too late for some of our financially weaker football clubs. I also urge the Executive to play whatever part it can in ensuring that some kind of compromise is arrived at.

I was still a member of the Environment and Rural Development Committee when consideration of the bill began. At the outset, I must say that I am a little confused by the discussion over whether the bill is about the sale of water. I might be wrong, but I thought that it was about billing mechanisms and certain aspects of retailing. Perhaps when he closes the minister will confirm whether my recollection is right in that regard. Even in my absence, the committee rightly accepted the Executive's arguments about prohibiting common carriage. I welcome its position that such a prohibition is justified on public health and environmental grounds. That said, I  hope that, by handing over final say on certain matters to the Competition Commission, it has not introduced the thin end of the privatisation wedge. It was clear from the evidence-taking session with Ceri Jones of Water UK that the private water companies resent both the bar on common carriage and our view that public health issues should outweigh competition issues. Mr Jones described the public health issue as "emotive", as if that somehow condemned the concern. That is of course not the case, and I hope that the minister will assure us that public health issues will continue to be paramount. Another issue that I have raised on more than one occasion and that has already been raised in this debate concerns the embargoes on development that are in place all around Scotland. Huge swaths of the country are blocked for any kind of housebuilding because of sewerage and drainage constraints. Earlier, the minister argued that such issues were not raised at what he considered to be an appropriate time some years ago. However, we can equally respond by pointing out that Scottish Water did not flag up any advance warnings. Indeed, three weeks before the embargo on the whole city of Perth, Scottish Water explicitly denied to council officials that there was any problem at all. It is difficult to see how officials could be expected to deal with such circumstances other than as they have done. Currently, in Perth and Kinross as a whole, 25 sites are constrained, but only four of those fail SEPA discharge constraints. Attempts by a local builder to establish why the remaining 21 sites were constrained have failed. The question is whether some embargoes are placed on sites prematurely to avoid attracting SEPA notices in the future, and indeed whether that is done on sites where agreements were previously in place. That, of course, is the point that my colleague John Swinney was trying to make with regard to Alyth. Current constraints are potentially blocking the development of more than 1200 open-market houses and, worse, 250 affordable houses. In a report published in June 2003, Scottish Water acknowledged that "Constraints on development due to the lack of capacity in the water and sewerage infrastructure are a growing concern to Local Authorities across Scotland." Scottish Water also pointed out that it continues to receive representations from the development sector on the impact that development constraint has on employment, economic growth and the housing land supply. That includes representations from the likes of the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations on affordable housing sites.  The report from June last year calculates a total cost for alleviating constraints for the whole of Scotland of £647,730,487—that is well over half a billion pounds and big money in anybody's book. The independent consultants who evaluated the report make the point that "Despite the rigour in the approach adopted by Scottish Water ... the schedules may ... underestimate constrained sites and land." Who is going to pay for that? The relationship between that question and the bill is that Scottish Water warned last June that because of "the implications of the ... Competition Act and ... stringent efficiency targets set by the Water Commissioner, subsidising development through Scottish Water charges could no longer be an option." However, Scottish Water also said: "the current demand to have development pay for itself ... has engendered significant concern in the development sector". We know that. I know that the stock response is that private developers will just have to pick up the cost themselves. Many are indeed willing to do so, but that is not as easy as we might think. I have received a letter from a prominent local building firm, A & J Stephen Ltd, which was referred to earlier—indeed, representatives of the firm are here this afternoon. The letter made the point that the firm's attempts to fund infrastructure have been met by Scottish Water with "no meaningful response or alternatively rejection." I know that that particular building company has written to the minister's department. Can the minister explain in his closing remarks what is going on? If we assume that what the firm says is true—there is no doubt that it is—it seems that builders are damned if they do and damned if they do not and that Scottish Water is in effect banning development in rural areas. When Professor Alexander and Dr Jon Hargreaves of Scottish Water came before the committee, I raised that issue with them, asking whether the problems of development constraint would be affected in any way—negatively or positively—by the bill, either in the short, the medium or the long term. The answer that they both gave was that it depends on the regulations. Dr Hargreaves said: "the regulations will decide how much developers will bear, how much Scottish Water customers will bear and how much the social aspect of development will be dealt with."—[ Official Report , Environment and Rural Development Committee , 15 September; c 1169.] I hope that the minister will bear all that in mind when he comes to lodge amendments to the bill and when the regulations are drafted.

I have noticed that all the pictures from Iraq show that the Black Watch soldiers are indeed proudly fighting under a flag—everything that I have seen suggests that that flag is the Scottish saltire, not the union flag. I listened carefully to what the First Minister said and his comments were as careful as my listening was. I ask him to go further. In response to Nicola Sturgeon, he expressed his concern about troops being undermined by a debate here in Scotland and in the UK. Does he not agree that the biggest single factor that is most likely to undermine the morale of the troops in Iraq is the threat of their regiment being disbanded when and if they return? Does he not believe that all of us should actively support and campaign on the demand to save Scotland's regiments?

In the Perth and Kinross Council area, there is currently a combined waiting list of 4,639 applicants. That follows a rigorous review and, even if the 700 to 800 who are seeking a housing transfer are stripped out, there are still about 3,800 new applicants on that waiting list. I know that the figures might well be higher in other parts of Scotland, but housing need is experienced individually, not collectively. Every one of those 3,800 households is in need right now, with precious little likelihood of that need being met. There is virtually no chance now of somebody getting a council house unless they are actually homeless. I think that that is what Donald Gorrie might have been referring to in some of his comments. In Perth and Kinross there have been 1,500 applications from homeless people this year alone. It would be very helpful if, in her closing remarks, the deputy minister could give some indication of how the global spending figures will break down. The Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland is already concerned that the Government's intentions to build just 5,500 affordable houses per year will result in a continuing shortfall. The figure  of 5,500 suggests an average of only 75 houses per constituency per year. Even if every constituency got those 75 houses, it would take about 25 years to clear the current waiting list in Perth and Kinross. The population in our area is growing, so the figures are likely to go up. The assumption is also made that we can find the land to build those houses on. I make no apologies for repeating in the chamber what I, my colleague John Swinney and others have already said about the new player in the housing game: Scottish Water. It does not matter that it is not Scottish Water's role to be a player in housing and it does not matter that it does not want that role. The fact is that, right now, Scottish Water is having as great an impact on housing in Scotland—if not greater—as anything that the Minister for Communities might wish to do. Embargoes on development are in place all around the country. Huge swathes of Scotland are blocked for any kind of house building, because of sewerage and drainage constraints. A written answer made by one of the minister's predecessors in August indicated that, of the capacity to accommodate 230,000 houses, which is currently a theoretical figure in local authority plans, half the sites that have been identified are affected by water or drainage constraints. In theory, we could build 230,000 houses in Scotland; in fact, 115,000 of those are blocked because of the problem with Scottish Water. It is a colossal problem, which needs to be dealt with. For a short while, there was a complete development embargo for the whole city of Perth. Luckily, that has now been lifted, but there is still a problem in my constituency and in others.

There are many different ways in which it could be tackled. I would like to see evidence of concrete results for the investment that is being made. By concrete results I literally mean houses that can now be built that could not be built before. That is an important issue that needs continually to be brought to the chamber. Current drainage constraints have blocked development of more than 1,200 potential open-market housing sites in Perth and Kinross; worse, that includes more than 250 sites that would have been earmarked for the development of affordable housing. We need to remember that the lack of  affordable housing can be particularly detrimental in rural areas, where transport and distance issues are a far greater problem than in the cities. I need to hear far more detail about how the minister hopes to counter the negative effect of sewerage and drainage constraints on housebuilding. My second concern is one that has been reiterated today, which is the impact that the tackling of right to buy is having on the situation in Scotland. Karen Whitefield's logic is bizarre. Unless we undertake a wholesale review of the way in which housing is provided, we have to accept that the right to buy has not only contributed to the problem in the past and present but will contribute to it in future. In The Herald yesterday, Alastair Cameron of the cross-denominational group, Scottish Churches Housing Action, described the extension of the right to buy as being like "filling a bath without putting a plug in". I could not put it better myself. The right to buy needs to be tackled. We must remove it from new tenancies and from new build, and we need to put the plug back in, at least until the situation in Scotland is resolved. We will have to move on the issue soon. It is not helpful of the Tories to introduce some new concept of "mainstream housing". I am curious about what non-mainstream housing would be in the Tories' world view. In truth, people will have to be housed somewhere, regardless of their situation. The lack of affordable housing in the public rented sector and in the owner-occupied sector is starting to have a serious negative effect on development in huge areas of the country. Let us not wait until someone decides to make an updated version of "Cathy Come Home" before we move on this.

For years now, people in Perthshire have been having meetings, marches and postcard campaigns and lobbying Parliament because of the erosion of services at Perth royal infirmary—particularly in maternity provision and paediatrics. When those services go, concerns arise over the knock-on effects on accident and emergency services, and frustration grows about decisions that seem to be made before farcical consultations and about the apparently one-way nature of the so-called specialisation of services in Tayside. This morning, the minister gave a long list of services to be transferred to the PRI. However, it is years since it was conceded to me that it made sense for a full out-patient satellite dialysis unit, for example, to be set up in Perth, or for Perth to be the base for a mobile unit. That was promised again earlier this year, but we still do not have it. In fact, just this morning, because of what the minister said, we double-checked. Our calls to NHS Tayside to clarify the situation on dialysis were met with the telephone equivalent of a blank stare. Somehow, amazingly, the withdrawal of services  takes far less time than the introduction of any new services. We lose services but still await the arrival of new ones. No statement that the minister has made in the past few weeks will make any difference to what has already been lost. I know that such concerns are not restricted to Perth. From every corner of the country, from television, from colleagues, from lobbying of Parliament and from every party, the voice of protest is loud and clear. It can be as loud and clear as Duncan McNeil has just shown us. Some debates are about local hospitals that currently provide a service that administrators regard as outdated or inefficient but which communities regard as absolutely essential. Other hospitals, such as the Queen Mother's and the homoeopathic hospital in Glasgow, provide services that are sought out from far beyond their own immediate geographical areas. Until now, everyone has been fighting on their own patch, but the common threat and the common aim are now being recognised. Campaigners from all over the country are beginning to come together. Wherever we look in Scotland, there is anger about what is happening in the NHS. The common primary cause of the symptoms of dissatisfaction is a general sense that the public have completely lost ownership and control of the health service. Democratisation of the health service is and should be an important part of this debate and any future debate that we have. The NHS is the great public service. Acknowledgement of that fact is one thing that distinguishes all the other parties from the Tories. Nobody expects a maternity hospital at the end of every street or an accident and emergency service round every corner; but people expect politicians and administrators to recognise their demands for the sort of health service that they want. However, we have health boards that run consultations that are little more than cosmetic cover for fait-accompli programmes of centralisation—and the minister has finally accepted today that there has been centralisation. I now want to concentrate on consultation. The current combination of circumstances is doing untold damage to democracy in Scotland, not just to the health service. At election time, politicians complain about the lack of engagement in the political process. However, can there be any surprise at that lack of engagement when—on an issue as important as the shape of the health service—the people speak and the officials and ministers listen, and then the officials and ministers go and do what they were going to do anyway? Consultation after pointless consultation means that the scunner factor is rising—and who can blame people for that? At one of the many public meetings that I have  attended in Perth—and this is after years of so-called consultation—a senior health service official stated: "It doesn't matter if every household in Perthshire objected to the removal of consultant-led maternity services; it wouldn't make a blind bit of difference." That was a breathtaking insult to the thousands of people who had participated in what they expected to be a genuine consultation. I could give that official 10 out of 10 for honesty, but what was the point of the exercise that we had gone through during the previous four years? Given that an NHS official can so openly acknowledge the pointlessness of all that consultation, can we be at all surprised when voters learn the lesson and apply it to the rest of politics? Town halls throughout the country have been packed to the rafters. A member who campaigned on the single issue of hospital services has been returned to the Scottish Parliament. How much more will it take for the Executive and all politicians not just to listen, but to take on board what they hear?

I should say at the outset that I am mystified by the psychology of Christine May who, as I understand it, is Irish born. I wonder whether her comments about independence would apply to the country of her birth and whether they would be received in a positive manner when she visits Ireland on holiday. It is interesting that she applies a different standard to the country where she now lives and where she represents constituents. In his statement yesterday, the First Minister listed the five bills that we have brought down the High Street with us, which are scheduled to finish their parliamentary progress in the coming year. Included in that list was the Water Services etc (Scotland) Bill that is moving into stage 1 at committee. Of course we all want to see an improvement in the quality of Scotland's drinking water and sewerage efficiency. However, of greater concern to Scotland is the burgeoning water bureaucracy, complete with bonuses and all. The Minister for Environment and Rural Development, who has yet to speak, could make a start by merging the water industry commissioner's office with the water quality regulator's office and allowing the current consultation on Scottish Water to effect real change to that organisation. I have dealt with some of the issues concerning the legislation, but more important is what has not been addressed. As my colleagues John Swinney and Alex Neil said, there is a pressing need to confront the development embargoes that are in place throughout Scotland, including in my constituency, which are caused by the constraints that are imposed by lack of sewerage capacity. Although the blanket embargo that Scottish Water placed on Perth has been lifted—I thank Ross Finnie for his assistance—there are still nearly 1,300 potential open market house sites and more than 250 sites that are earmarked specifically for affordable housing that cannot be developed because of drainage constraints. That is in one constituency only. By the time that we multiply the numbers throughout Scotland, we see that lack of infrastructure seriously impedes development. It is not enough to talk about dealing with the problem at some vague time in the future,  as indicated by the Deputy First Minister yesterday morning. Scotland needs more affordable housing now and we cannot allow a development deadlock to put the hems on that ambition. There is not much point in talking about economic development when lack of infrastructure is such an obstacle to that development. I am conscious that Ross Finnie has yet to speak, so I hope that he will address some wider rural affairs issues such as the lack of a decent rural public transport network. The Deputy First Minister said that about two thirds of all transport money was spent on public transport, but huge parts of Scotland must be wondering where that money has gone. The centralisation of health services, which we have heard discussed in detail, is a particular problem in rural areas and I hope that the Minister for Environment and Rural Development will at least refer to that. In a broader environmental sense, it would be useful if the minister would also say whether he will have any input into the on-going search for nuclear waste dumping opportunities and the Ministry of Defence plans to break up nuclear submarines, as they might affect Coulport. Those are environmental issues that will affect Scotland in the near future. I presume that renewable energy, which has been mentioned, is a matter for the Minister for Environment and Rural Development and his colleague the Deputy First Minister. There is an urgent need to widen the renewable energy base across a variety of sectors instead of focusing only on onshore wind farms. Before we rush to nuclear power—as was suggested again by John Home Robertson—with all its long-term implications, could we at least look at widening the potential for alternative sources of energy? We also need clearer planning guidance at all levels and I ask the minister to comment on that. We need to address the point that was raised by Alex Neil about the effect of the British electricity trading and transmission arrangements on costs for alternative energy suppliers in Scotland. Those arrangements will have a big impact, which needs to be addressed. The draft Gaelic language bill was, at one and the same time, a welcome if long overdue development, but also a bit of a disappointment. The First Minister spoke at length yesterday about how this was to be a year in which the Executive focused on young people and he claimed that it was vital to ensure that Gaelic not only thrives but survives. However, John Farquhar Munro's concerns are well founded. If, when the bill is published, the Executive has not responded positively to the overwhelming demand that was voiced during the consultation period for a right to Gaelic-medium education to be written into the bill,  it can expect to find that disappointment being expressed a lot more vocally by many who, up to now, might have given it the benefit of the doubt. Public services are a big issue throughout Scotland and health is the biggest public services issue. I noted David McLetchie's comment yesterday morning on the size of government. He said that he would return it to the level it was at in 1999, but he did not elucidate exactly what he meant by that. I am sorry that he did not give us more specifics, because I would like to know who he would sack and how that would affect the national health service, particularly given the Conservatives' record on the health service. Yesterday, the First Minister spoke about the planned health bill, but we have not heard much about that this afternoon. I have little confidence, following his performance at First Minister's question time this afternoon—sorry, I mean yesterday afternoon. No, was it today? I am getting so carried away that I cannot even remember what day it is. I have little confidence that anything that comes from the Executive this year will be good news for the groups throughout the country that are campaigning hard to retain essential services in their local areas. That is the biggest issue in the current health service debate, but it has reached national prominence only now that it affects Labour constituencies. Those of us who have been fighting on that issue in the Parliament for years are glad to have the belated support of Labour MSPs, but it is a pity that they were not there rather earlier. It seems that Labour MSPs want to act out the role of staunch defenders in their local patches but they keep schtum when they are involved in debates in Parliament. They should have taken up the cross-party group opportunity that was offered to them, but God forbid that they might find common cause with members from other parties or, worse yet, realise that the problems that are being faced and the issues that are being raised in their constituencies are not isolated examples after all but are replicated throughout the country.

The role of those back benchers in local health campaigns is symbolic of the way in which the Executive works: talking a good game and delivering nothing. In the past two days, people have talked about the new Parliament building. In this building we are surrounded by concrete, but in the Executive's programme there is nothing concrete about affordable housing; there is nothing concrete to alleviate poverty and its effects; there is nothing  concrete to ensure business growth and, through that, employment opportunities; and there is nothing concrete to ensure faster and more efficient delivery of health services to the whole of Scotland. We have heard a few promises, but mostly we have heard vague, recycled generalities. A fitting verdict on the Executive's programme might be: nae vision, just a lot of déjà vu.

The First Minister referred to my concerns, and the concerns that I reflect from my constituents, about the forthcoming G8 summit in my constituency. He needs to be aware that although there is benefit to be gained from such events, there is nevertheless a serious downside, given the nature of the event and the disruption that it is likely to cause. What arrangements will be made to compensate my constituents—the farmers, the business people and the residents of the wide area that will be affected—who are seriously inconvenienced or, worse, whose property and/or livelihood is damaged by the event next July?

I listened with interest to the minister's comments on Scottish Water's efficiency. Is he aware that, in the past week, Scottish Water has announced a total embargo on residential and commercial developments in Perth, despite the fact that it was consulted in the preparation of local plans that were agreed as recently as June 2003? Scottish Water made the announcement without giving any prior warning that there was the slightest difficulty. Does he accept that such an embargo would have a catastrophic effect on the future growth of Perth and will he agree to meet council leaders urgently to discuss solutions to the problem?

I think that you were being just a little kind there, Presiding Officer. While I was listening to John Home Robertson, I wondered whether he had wandered in from another debate that was taking place elsewhere. It sounded to me as if we got nine or seven minutes—whatever it was—of a justification for an invasion of Israel. I am sure that that is not what he was arguing for, but it sure as heck sounded like it. I had hoped that the debate would show the Parliament at its best. Did that happen? Well it could have happened, but then Andy Kerr got to his feet. His contribution from the Labour front bench was an absolutely pitiful failure to rise to the occasion. He talked about integrity but showed throughout his speech that he does not know the meaning of the word. There are things about which we can be in no doubt and on which we will all agree. Saddam Hussein was a brutal dictator who carried out numerous atrocities against his own people, not least the Iraqi Kurds, with whom the SNP feels a strong affinity. Like my colleague Alasdair Morgan, I remember as long as 20 years ago the flag of Kurdistan being unfurled on our conference platform when the likes of Donald Rumsfeld were doing deals direct with the butcher of Baghdad and when the UK and US Governments were supporting his atrocities against Iran. At least Michael McMahon had the grace to acknowledge that, even though I did not agree with everything that he said in his speech.

It goes without saying that we welcome all visitors to the Parliament. Those who want to lecture us on the evils of Saddam will get short shrift from me, but I accept that there can come a point in international affairs when it becomes necessary for the international community to tell an individual dictator or Government that enough is enough. Only a  pacifist—which I am not—would refuse to accept the possibility that intolerable behaviour might result in the necessity of the use of force. However, the overriding issue is that the basis on which we act must stay within international law. Just as our criminal justice system at home does not permit individuals to take the law into their own hands, so on the international stage we cannot allow individual states to go off on their own by ignoring the rule of law and engaging in the international equivalent of getting up a posse and setting out as a lynch mob. Let us be quite clear: the war was illegal and it was based on a lie. It was illegal because there was no UN mandate for the use of force or an armed invasion of Iraq. Given everything that we were told about stockpiles of banned weapons, chemical facilities, mobile laboratories and nuclear programmes, the truth is now clear: at worst, what we were told was all a tissue of lies; at best, it was a paranoid self-delusion, brought on by a political interpretation of intelligence that was manipulated to provide a justification for war. I am sorry, although not surprised, to discover that some MSPs are still prepared to provide that self-same justification, but there are others who have not been prepared to do so. I commend among others Keith Raffan—with whom I do not always agree, but who made a commendable speech today—and Elaine Smith, whose speech was inspired. Equally, I commend Robert Brown for the admirable comments that he made in closing for the Liberal Democrats. However, we also heard some very silly speeches, from Pauline McNeill and Irene Oldfather, about which party has had which debates and when and where those have taken place. It is crystal clear that Tony Blair and new Labour do not want to debate this issue. The SNP has initiated today's debate because of the 30 June deadline, but that appears to have escaped the notice of Labour back benchers. For Irene Oldfather's information, the SNP and Plaid Cymru are allowed a debate in the House of Commons on only one day each year. On 9 March last year, the subject that they chose to debate was the need for the Attorney General to publish his advice on the legality of the war. Irene Oldfather said that she wanted to put politics aside, but she seemed not to want to do so without attacking the SNP. We have heard a lot of sound and fury from the Executive benches in today's debate, so I want to take some time to address the claims that have been made. We have, of course, heard precious little intervention from Labour ministers other than Andy Kerr. According to the opinion poll on the BBC today, Scotland is the part of the UK that is  most opposed to the war, but where is the voice of those people in this Parliament? The silence of the Executive leadership is a shameful disgrace. The general line appears to have been that it is valid for party members to hold a range of views unless the party to which they belong happens to be the SNP, the SSP or the Greens, for whom a range of views is not valid. The empty Labour, Liberal Democrat and Tory benches that we have seen throughout this afternoon are testament to the collective failure of those parties to understand the importance of today's debate to ordinary Scots, who are appalled at the failure of politicians to reflect their views. The Conservative voice was rather muted, but I suspect that that reflects the uncertainty that now exists at the top of their party.

When the Executive is prepared to disclose the detailed discussions that take place at its Cabinet, we will disclose the discussions that take place at ours. The war was declared to have been won and Saddam was ousted, but nobody was in any doubt about that outcome, which was virtually guaranteed by the technical and logistical superiority of the US forces in particular. However, as we have warned from the very start, the peace has proved much harder to secure. The actions of Bush and Blair in Iraq have not sorted out an international problem but exacerbated it and they have contributed to a massive increase in global instability. Fear levels have increased dramatically among ordinary people who go about their daily lives around the world. Once upon a time, we were all terrified of nuclear explosions, but now it is the terrorist bomb that fills us with dread. Despite what the US intelligence services would have us believe, there was no link between al-Qa'ida and Iraq before the war, but there sure as heck is now. John Swinney mentioned a report that describes the occupation of Iraq as "a potent global recruitment pretext" for Osama bin Laden. That translates into, "We improved their recruitment figures." What an own goal. Insurgency in Iraq continues and it shows no sign of abating or being brought under control—no wonder, when the coalition forces are seen more as an army of occupation than as an army of liberation.  Continued reports and horrifying evidence of prisoner abuse continue to appal us in Scotland; I cannot imagine their impact in Iraq. The lives of British soldiers in Iraq are further endangered with every incident that is uncovered. I say with considerable regret that the truth of the allegations is probably now immaterial. The fact is that people believe that such incidents are happening in Iraq and around the world. The UK is so closely linked to the US that our soldiers cannot escape being linked to the admitted abuses that have been carried out by US troops and indeed by private contractors. In that light, I learned with a heavy heart that the Black Watch, the regiment from my constituency and from John Swinney's constituency, is to be sent back to Iraq, having already performed one tour of duty, during which it lost one of its comrades, Lance-Corporal Barry Stephen of Perth, who was the first Scottish casualty of the war. Many of my constituents will be extremely concerned as their loved ones prepare to head out to Iraq and our thoughts are very much with them as we debate the issue today. For Mike Rumbles to suggest otherwise was unworthy of him.

If the situation is to be turned around and we are to start contributing to a safer Iraq and a safer world, we must ensure that the transfer of sovereignty is on track and on time and that it is seen to be a true transfer of power rather than the installation of a puppet regime.

Given the plan that we have seen today, people must remember that armed intervention in Vietnam was always at the carefully orchestrated behest of the south Vietnamese Government. The way in which we are proceeding will not necessarily solve the problem. The debate should be all about legitimacy. I say to the minister that there are many examples around the world of Islamic troops undertaking peacekeeping roles and it is a disgrace for him to suggest that they are not capable of doing that. I say to the SSP and others that the SNP has always looked to the UN to mandate action and we will always do so, but that means accepting the decisions that the UN makes—one cannot pick and choose whether to go with the UN. Nor is it responsible politics to call for overnight withdrawal,  which would be a betrayal of the Iraqi people as big as anything that has happened in the past 18 months. We know that the vast majority of Scots are opposed to the war and we have seen that again today. Their voice deserves to be heard and it is an indictment of the paucity of vision in the Executive, in particular, that these matters are only ever discussed in the chamber at the instigation of the Opposition. The UK Government does not speak for Scotland and the Executive does not seem to want to. This Parliament must.

I congratulate Jamie McGrigor on securing the debate and I hope very much that the minister will take on board the concerns that are being expressed this evening, especially those about the decision to withdraw the bull hire scheme. The minister should listen not just to the voices of members here this evening, but to those of the organisations that directly represent the people who will be most affected by the Executive's decision. The Lewis and Harris Cattle Producers  Group claims that the bull hire scheme is "vitally important to crofting", and that it delivers significant benefits to the crofting community. If we talk to people from crofting communities, we are told that the number of cattle in a community and whether the number is growing or declining can be used as a measure of the strength of the community. It is a matter of real concern that anything might be being done that would further disadvantage communities that can be seen to be disadvantaged in the first place. As has been stated earlier in the debate, Lewis and Harris have seen an increase in the numbers of cattle as well as in the numbers of people who keep cattle. That is a good news story in which the bull hire scheme has played a significant role. I find the tenor of the debate to be extraordinary. Mrs McNeill, the chairman of the Scottish Crofting Foundation made a good point in The  Press and Journal : "The bull hire scheme is particularly highly valued, not only by crofting communities, but also by environmental organisations who value the important role of cattle extensive high nature value systems". We are engaging in another debate at the moment about whether the national beef envelope can be applied in a way that will directly affect the sorts of communities that we are discussing this evening; however, this debate seems to be about removing one of the ways of supporting those very communities. As my colleague Fergus Ewing said, the NFU Scotland has described the removal of the ram schemes and the replacement of the bull hire scheme as a "draconian step". There are real concerns that the accounting practices that are employed have led to the concerns about the scheme's compliance with state aid regulations. Again, Fergus Ewing went into that issue in greater detail. When Ena McNeill expressed her concern about the withdrawal of the scheme, she referred to the empty rhetoric of the Executive, when it talked about wanting to support remote and fragile crofting areas and to keep livestock in the north and west. That is the sort of rhetoric that we heard throughout the debate on reform of the common agricultural policy. Ena McNeill's statement is one with which all members in the chamber would agree. In essence, she is saying that the Scottish Crofting Foundation wants to know whether the Executive means what it says. I believe that plenty of figures are available to suggest that the bull hire scheme is cheaper and more efficient, both for its users and providers. I urge the minister to listen to the people whose livelihoods and very way of life will be seriously and negatively affected by the proposed changes.  If the Executive claims to have the interests of crofting communities at heart it should, as Ena McNeill said, show those communities that it means what it says.

We would remove the UK from the equation.

I said that we would remove the UK from the equation.

I welcome the debate. We have been asking for it through the Environment and Rural Development Committee and in the Parliament, and it is good to finally get it. I reassure the minister that I, for one, got his reference to "The Day After Tomorrow". For the uninformed in the Parliament, it is the latest Hollywood blockbuster, which is based on climate change and will be coming to a cinema near you in the very near future. No, I am not on any retainer for the producers either. It is interesting that climate change and similar issues are forming the basis for such films. Most of us live near the coast—for anyone in Scotland, it is almost impossible not to. Thousands of us, including fishermen, make our livings from the sea, millions of us travel on ferries every year, and millions of tonnes of waterborne freight passed through Scottish ports in 2001. It might surprise members to know that Perth has a busy harbour, which handled 218,000 tonnes of foreign and domestic freight traffic last year alone. There will be many similar small harbours right round Scotland's coast. Therefore, there is a delicate balance to be struck between the importance of economic activity in and around our waters and environmental imperatives. The oil and gas industry is undoubtedly a major and extremely important contributor to the Scottish economy, but, like everything else, it has its environmental costs. Oil and gas are not, of course, the only sources of energy in our seas; there is a massive marine renewable energy resource waiting to be tapped, which brings with it the potential for 24,000 new jobs related to marine energy and wave power. However, because Scotland is fast losing offshore fabrication capability, we may lose out on those benefits unless rapid Government action is taken to fast-track offshore wind development and to encourage the offshore industry to diversify into that field. The issue is not only a failure to provide any support for offshore wind power to justify investment. It is just as important that the Executive ensures that the roll-out concerns for offshore renewable energy be examined so that we do not end up in the boorach that we have with onshore wind power at the moment, with  communities up in arms, developers putting in applications for every possible hilltop and everybody feeling that they have no strategic guidance to direct what is happening onshore. Let us not have that happen offshore. We have a chance to plan well in advance. Scotland's marine environment will continue to be economically important only if it is managed sustainably. Scotland's seas and estuaries contribute most of the total estimated £17 billion that the environment contributes to the Scottish economy: a staggering £14.3 billion. Eco-tourism is an important and growing sector of the Scottish economy, not least because of the money that it brings into some of the more remote and economically disadvantaged parts of our country. The fact that marine wildlife tourism contributes more than 2,500 jobs and £57 million of revenue to the Highlands and Islands alone tells its own story. Scottish waters support hugely diverse marine species, many of which need protection, and 33 of the United Kingdom's 65 possible marine special areas of conservation are Scottish. The Darwin mounds were discovered only in the summer of 1998—it is astonishing to realise that—and they were almost immediately acknowledged to be under threat of destruction. Of course, it is understandable that, as we had been working the seas in complete ignorance of the mounds, no protection was in place. Thankfully, on 22 March this year, fisheries ministers in Brussels finally agreed to give the Darwin mounds permanent protection, which was the final fulfilment of a promise that was made as far back as 2001. That is a really useful development, but it is a salutary thought to consider what else in our waters has an equally precarious future and of what else's existence we remain ignorant. It is always useful to remember that. The Executive has launched a consultation on the possible establishment of a national coastline park and marine national parks and I welcome that. As most legislation for the protection of sites and species is designed for use on land, there is still no legal basis for designating and managing areas of nationally important marine habitat and species, so a national coastline park and marine national parks could be an answer to that problem. I have no difficulty with supporting the opening portion of the Executive's motion, which "recognises the considerable ecological, economic and social importance of Scotland's marine environment", but, as the minister might expect, we begin to differ when it comes to the actions that are required to rectify the problem.

I do not think that the Scottish National Party has ever been against international co-operation. Welcoming a single decision does not necessarily mean welcoming the entire basis for the decision-making process behind it for ever and anon. Not all the individual decisions will be welcome. I am far from convinced that enough is being done by the Executive, even within the powers that are available to the Scottish Parliament, or indeed that the Scottish Parliament has all the powers that it needs to meet all the laudable aims that are set out in the Executive's motion. Of course, environmental issues are no respecters of borders or boundaries. Scotland is part of the Atlantic arc—Europe's western seaboard—which sweeps from the Hebrides to Andalucía, and we must continue to work with communities, for example in the west of Ireland and those that border the Bay of Biscay and the Gulf of Cádiz. The Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic—the OSPAR convention—is an international treaty charged with preventing and eliminating pollution of the marine environment in the north-east Atlantic. As my amendment makes clear, we must continue to be involved in it. However, to speak about the United Kingdom Government, marine stewardship and OSPAR in the same breath, as the Executive motion does, beggars belief. All contracting parties to the OSPAR convention must "take all possible steps to prevent and eliminate pollution". Despite the UK being a signatory, British Nuclear Fuels Ltd continues to be allowed to discharge 8 million litres of radioactive waste a day into the Irish sea, which is supposed to be covered by the convention. The Sintra agreement, which was drawn up by the OSPAR commission in 1998, has committed to eliminate discharges of hazardous and radioactive pollutants by 2020, but I believe that the UK Government should stop that discharge now, so that it will meet the Sintra agreement obligations. Scotland's seas are governed—I use the term "governed" in the loosest possible sense—by a mishmash of international, European, UK and Scots law. There is no strategic overview and, at present, no way of achieving a strategic overview,  much less a planning framework to co-ordinate the work of the many bodies that have responsibility for aspects of marine management. More fundamentally, there is almost no mechanism to encourage any sense of ownership or responsibility or to enable local management. At least 13 UK bodies have some marine responsibilities. Some of those extend out to 3 nautical miles; some to the 6-nautical-mile limit of Scottish waters; some to the 12-nautical-mile boundary of UK territorial waters; and some to the 200-nautical-mile continental shelf. Their competencies often overlap or compete. At least 85 acts of Parliament relate to marine and coastal activities. The minister, quite rightly, drew our attention to the publication from Scottish Natural Heritage; equally, I draw attention to the WWF Scotland publication, "The Tangle of the Clyde", which shows just how complicated the situation is. Frankly, it is a dog's breakfast. If, as the Executive claims, it wants a more coherent, strategic framework, with improved co-ordination of activity, it seems that a starting point would be a piece of comprehensive legislation to deliver integrated management and proper spatial planning. More to the point, if the Executive is serious about working towards good governance of Scotland's marine environment in the future and improved co-ordination of activity, then the Executive parties should support my amendment and my call to have those matters that affect the marine environment that are currently reserved to Westminster devolved to the Scottish Parliament. If we want good governance, we need to unfankle the tangled legislation that is currently in place. For example, how can Scotland possibly develop a workable mechanism for the sustainable management of our marine environment if oil tankers can travel willy-nilly through some of Scotland's most sensitive sea areas while navigation issues are reserved and so beyond the remit of this Parliament? How effective can marine national parks be if half of the foreshore and almost all the sea bed, to a distance of 12 miles, are owned by the Crown Estate? Highland Council recognises the ridiculous contradiction of that position and is campaigning for a review. MSPs should support Highland Council in its campaign. SNP MSPs certainly will. Will the minister? I move amendment S2M-1327.1, to leave out from "acknowledges" to end and insert: "supports continued involvement by the Scottish Executive in the development of a European marine strategy and in OSPAR; notes that the regulation and management of Scotland's coast and seas is fragmented with no coherent regulatory or planning framework and that, despite Scotland's unique variety of marine wildlife, there is no legal basis for designating and managing areas for nationally important marine habitats and species; believes that there is a need for legislation to deliver integrated  management of all aspects of Scotland's marine environment; welcomes the consultation on the establishment of a national coastline park and marine national park, and, in recognising the importance of improving the co-ordination of activity to support, and develop a mechanism for, the future good governance and sustainable management of Scotland's marine environment, calls for control of all matters impacting on the marine environment that are currently reserved, including the Crown Estate Commission's ownership of the seabed, to be devolved to the Scottish Parliament."

It is Santa Claus.

Those improvements are welcome, but they will amount to nothing if there are not enough trains running on the tracks. Is the minister aware of the level of concern about the Perth to Edinburgh rail link? Does he know that there is no Perth to Edinburgh train between 7.10 am and 8.50 am? Can he say, hand on heart, that that level of service is sufficient to encourage people out of their cars and on to the railways? If not, what proposals does he have to improve the service between Perth and Edinburgh?

I thank again the staff of the Environment and Rural Development Committee, who worked extremely hard throughout all the bill's stages, but particularly at stage 2. I am grateful to all the outside organisations that showed an interest in the bill's progress and supported committee members with evidence, briefings and proposals for amendments. I said at the start of the stage 1 debate that the Scottish National Party had no hesitation in supporting the bill's general principles; indeed, we have supported the bill right through to this stage. A number of my concerns about detail at earlier stages of the bill were addressed by concessions that the minister made as a result of amendments that other members and I had lodged. The amendments were either agreed to at stage 2 or brought back in slightly altered form by the minister today at stage 3. I am grateful for that consideration. I am pleased that the minister took on board my arguments at stage 2 about the need to make it clear that the bill covers all holders of any public office that might have an impact on biodiversity. The bill sets out explicitly that the duty applies to all of a body's functions and that bodies cannot red-line certain areas. The minister also accepted my arguments about the need for section 12 to focus more on the effect that the functions of public bodies will have on SSSIs and the need to acknowledge explicitly the importance of maintaining the integrity of the SSSI series in addition to safeguarding individual sites. I am particularly pleased to support section 51, which relates to wildlife crime. When I first entered the Parliament and was considering a possible member's bill, that was the subject to which I gave  serious consideration. There had been a number of incidents of raptor poisoning in my constituency and I was concerned that the powers that were available to the police and the courts were far from strong enough. I was told that wildlife crime would not be an appropriate topic for a member's bill because the Executive was going to introduce legislation on that subject. The legislation is here at last and I am delighted to support it. Two news stories this week have underlined to me the importance of the bill, which emphasises the unacceptability of wildlife crime. Members will have read reports of Lord Tryon, who is being sued for constructive dismissal by his former estate manager. The former manager alleges that, on seeing a golden eagle, his lordship told him: "Eagles have no place on my grouse moor." That took place near Comrie, which is in my constituency. The current edition of The Hebridean newspaper carries a front-page report of a raid on a golden eagle's eyrie, in which collectors stole the eggs. Frankly, I cannot understand what motivates people to kill such wonderful creatures or to steal their eggs. However, it is clear that such things happen and that the bill is necessary. There have been a couple of controversial issues this afternoon—snaring and pigeons—and despite the broad consensus across all parties in support of the bill, there were areas of contention. We have dealt with snares, and I tell members for the avoidance of all doubt that the SNP also had a free vote on the issue of pigeons. I did not support Alex Neil's amendment, as I felt that the scientific evidence was such as to make it unnecessary. I do not see the point of unnecessarily anthropomorphising animals. Eagles are no more cruel than my cat is cruel—they simply are what they are—and to judge them on that basis is quite wrong. The bill will be an important measure in protecting and conserving Scotland's natural heritage, and it will assist us in meeting our commitments under the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity. I am pleased to say that I and my fellow SNP members will vote for it.

I will be brief. Amendments 51 and 52 would mean that all wildlife offences would be dealt with in the same way—it would be a matter for the procurator fiscal and/or the court as to whether they were taken on indictment or on a summary complaint. That is already the case in some respects; all we want to do is to spread that provision to cover all such offences. Amendments 53 and 54 would allow the procurator fiscal to take into consideration financial costs as well as conservation impacts—for example, a small fine might be seen simply as a running cost for those who steal falcon chicks to sell to the middle east. That ought to be taken into consideration when we look at penalties. Although killing a white-tailed eagle and killing a blackbird are both considered to be offences in the bill, one is far more serious than the other. Although the Procurator Fiscal Service can deal with such considerations at present, it does not always do so, and we believe that it should be told that it must. I am afraid that I gabbled my comments. I move amendment 51.

I will press amendment 51.

I welcome Dennis Canavan's amendment. As members may know, the SNP is generally in favour of anything that restores to the person of the monarch all the rights and privileges afforded to ordinary citizens of Scotland, and I hope that everybody else will endorse amendment 1, too.

Again, I express my thanks to the minister for taking on board issues that were raised at stage 2. Not only are SSSIs important as individual sites, but together they amount to more than the sum of their parts. Amendment 17 was lodged to address that issue and I am grateful to the minister for doing so.

I thank the minister for his concession in respect of amendment 2, which was originally an amendment in my name at stage 2. A number of us on the Environment and Rural Development Committee expressed concerns that, if we did not get the specific clarification that the amendment provides, some departments might choose to designate certain aspects of their functions as relating to biodiversity and to decide that other aspects did not relate to biodiversity. The amendment is intended to avoid that. The Scottish National Party will support Mark Ruskell's amendment 45, as it supported the equivalent amendment at stage 2, because we are a little bit in danger of ending up with broad-brush legislation, which does not require terribly much  detail. We seek to pin down in the bill a little more of what will be required, so we will support Mark Ruskell's amendment 45.

The First Minister is going to do the same thing.

I have heard the minister make similar statements before. If he thinks that his position is correct, how does he explain the demand for national guidelines not only from members, but from organisations as diverse as developers and Friends of the Earth?

Moving towards renewable and greener sources of energy is an essential part of reducing our carbon emissions. The Scottish Power briefing indicates that its existing wind farms alone will reduce carbon dioxide emissions in Scotland by more than £3.5 million tonnes over the next 25 years. The threat of climate change is real and we ignore it at our peril. The need to reduce carbon emissions is only one of the reasons why we must go down the renewables road. For all my concerns about the way in which the wind energy market is being developed, I have no doubt that I would rather see in my back yard a field of wind turbines than a nuclear reactor leaking goodness knows what and leaving an environmental legacy to be dealt with by generations to come.

That certainly is achievable. However, the closer we get to 2010 without meeting that target, the less likely it is to be achieved. We need to work towards the target in order to meet it. I will address that issue later. The nuclear industry lobbyists have been hard at work yet again and there have been reports in the newspapers this week punting calls for nuclear power to be promoted ahead of wind and other renewable energy sources. I know that there are some cheerleaders for the nuclear industry in the chamber, but I hope that the rest of us will make it known that there is no support in Scotland for going down the nuclear road. Regardless of what the nuclear apologists might claim, nuclear power is not green, clean or renewable.  The Executive's targets for renewable energy production are a step in the right direction, but we need to be even more ambitious if we are to become a leading player in the renewable energy industry. Other European nations are well ahead of us, which may be an answer to Phil Gallie's question. For example, 29 per cent of Swedish electricity generation comes from renewable sources. In Finland the figure is 22 per cent and in Austria it is 21 per cent. I want us to release Scotland's massive potential for electricity production from renewable sources and I would set a target for the production of electricity from renewables at 25 per cent by 2010, with a progressive build-up capacity leading up to 40 per cent by 2020.

The best way of doing it is to ensure that the widest range of renewable energy technologies is available to most people in Scotland. Understandably, new technologies inevitably take a while to become commercially viable on a large scale. At present, apart from hydro generation—which is well established—wind turbine generation is the main commercially viable new renewable energy technology. As such, it has an important contribution to make to the mix of Scotland's energy generation, although it cannot be the only contributor. However, hostility is being created by the absence of clear, concise and coherent national guidelines for the approval of wind farm sites. Friends of the Earth thinks that such guidelines are necessary for all renewable energy technologies, especially in view of their cumulative impact. The publication of local guidelines on wind farms is welcome, but the continuing silence of the Executive on proposals to generate more than 50MW is causing untold damage. I have little doubt that many of the more contentious proposals will be rejected, but the effect of the cack-handed way in which the Executive has dealt with the whole issue is that many individuals and communities will have had their hackles raised by the system. There is a real danger that public support for the wider case for wind farms and renewable energy will be undermined. Local communities and wind farm developments can get along together beneficially. In Argyll, Scottish Power's first two wind farms have contributed tens of thousands of pounds every year to community trust funds. That is good news for those communities. The Executive should be  doing more to encourage all developers to recognise their responsibilities towards local communities so that the communities can benefit from developments on their doorstep. It would be better yet if the involvement of communities and individuals in power generation came from the bottom up rather than from the top down. At present, power generation is almost exclusively developer led. I am aware of the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative. Although it is early in the day to comment on its effectiveness, I would like much more to be done to promote and assist community-led renewable energy projects. At national level, we need to encourage the development of a wide range of renewable technologies, for economic as well as environmental reasons. The issue is not just about research and development funding, but about investing in the industries. Murdo Fraser has already mentioned the Portuguese example. Portugal is determined to become a market leader and is offering a level of funding that provides a firm support framework for early technology. In return, the Portuguese are understandably looking to attract companies to establish manufacturing in Portugal. The worst-case scenario, which we have to be careful to avoid, is one in which technologies that are initially developed in Scotland by Scottish companies are used to establish new industries in countries other than Scotland, such as Portugal. We should be ambitious for Scotland, to the point that Scotland becomes the first place that people think of when they think of renewable energy innovations. We need to consider investing in a wide range of renewable projects, including biomass, geothermals and hydrogen fuel cells for the storage of energy. WWF Scotland believes that around 24,000 jobs could be created in the renewables industry. The industry could therefore be very important economically for Scotland. I am aware that I have devoted the bulk of my speech to the importance of renewable energy. However, we must not overlook the equivalent importance of improving energy efficiency and addressing our continually increasing demand for electricity. Unless we address that side of the equation, all the good work done in setting and meeting targets for renewable energy production—regardless of whose targets we choose—will be cancelled out by increases in consumption. I do not doubt that most parties in the chamber desire to make Scotland the green powerhouse of Europe. It is just a pity that the Scotland Act 1998 reserves to Westminster the generation, transmission, distribution and supply of electricity  and leaves the Executive with the power only to promote renewable energy development. If our country is to become a powerhouse, our Parliament must become one, too. That will require independence. I move amendment S2M-1185.1, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "recognises the contribution that both renewable energy and energy efficiency make to tackling carbon emissions; further recognises the importance of tackling climate change; agrees, therefore, to raise the Scottish Executive's targets for generating increasing amounts of electricity from renewable resources to 25% of electricity generation capacity by 2010, 30% by 2015 and 50% by 2020; regrets that energy policy is largely reserved to Westminster and rejects calls for an expansion of the nuclear contribution to Scotland's electricity production; acknowledges the important contribution that can be made by small-scale, domestic and community-based renewable energy projects; notes the recent growth in applications for wind farm developments and regrets the absence of clear, concise and coherent guidelines for the approval of such developments; acknowledges the long-term potential for the development of renewable energy technologies, including the associated economic benefits and rural regeneration and export opportunities, and urges the Executive to ensure that these technologies are supported beyond the research and development stage to ensure that Scotland can become a world leader in renewable energy technologies."

Presiding Officer, I apologise for arriving 30 seconds late. Unfortunately, that came about because we were still waiting for a copy of the statement at 9.20. I have had a bit of speed reading to do, so I hope that the minister will  forgive me if my questions are a little broad-brush as a result. How does the minister see the review relating to the cultural strategy of a few years ago, about which there was a great deal of debate and some criticism? It would be useful for us to understand how the two are to mesh. We need some blue-sky thinking, but I am not entirely clear how the review will deliver that. How will the minister ensure that the members of the commission are not just the usual suspects? We do not want to see coming out of the review a repeat of some of the things that we have always seen. We need something new. On membership of the commission, I make a personal plea that the traditional arts and music be directly represented on the commission, because in the past they have often missed out on cultural discussions in Scotland. There are two specific issues in creating a truly effective cultural medium in the country. There is the process of creating in the first place what might be called the cultural artefact, and there is the process by which access to it is delivered. Is the review to be about both those aspects of cultural life? If we end up concentrating on only one, we risk there being a severe imbalance in the way in which things are delivered. I suppose I am asking the minister to be clear about whether he can guard against the review just becoming an exercise in moving furniture, and instead ensure that it becomes something far more serious and long term for the future of Scotland's cultural life.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment has been made of the social and economic impact on rural communities of the rural post office network. (S2O-1890)

The minister will be aware that the current rural post office network is safeguarded until 2006 and that the network will thereafter be under review. Does he agree that there will be an opportunity to argue for a different approach in Scotland, rather than there being a UK-wide, one-size-fits-all policy? Does he further agree that, to strengthen that argument, either the Executive or the enterprise network in Scotland must instruct a study of the network's current socioeconomic impact on fragile rural communities?

With rising house prices outstripping salaries by four to one, 50,000 people faced with homelessness, 200,000 people on council waiting lists and 250,000 dwellings lost because of the right to buy, will the First Minister accept that there is a housing crisis in Scotland at the affordable end of the market? Given that the Barker review was a review of UK housing, will he address directly the recommendations of that review and wrap them into the current review, which he says that the Scottish Executive is conducting?

I could summarise the minister's position as follows: "We'll wait until the horse has bolted and then we might think about closing the door." I thank the Green party for providing the opportunity to revisit a subject on which the response from both Executive parties has been hypocritical and downright obtuse. I had hoped that, unlike in last week's performance, with the constant referrals to blanket bans, the Executive parties would keep to the terms of the debate this morning and discuss the legal powers of the Scottish ministers, but it is already clear that they will not. I am concerned about the minister's ability to understand some simple concepts of legal terminology, let alone his ability to use the legal powers that we believe he has. In dismissing what I said last week, Mr Wilson said: "I noted that, in her conclusion, Miss Cunningham said that the point is 'arguable'—no more, no less." The minister should know that, when the term is used legally, "arguable" means that there is a case that can be put and not that the case is tenuous or weak, which is what he apparently thinks. He then compounded the error by saying: "Anything is arguable in legal terms."— [ Official Report , 18 March 2004; c 6773.]  That is simply not true and displays a basic and worrying misunderstanding of the law. Perhaps that explains, although it does not excuse, his apparent inability to exercise his powers under the law.

Like other members, I spent a considerable time last week discussing our concerns about the extent of that scientific evidence and its validity. This week, I wanted—paradoxically—to concentrate on the motion. I know that that is an unusual concept, but we should at least try to do so. I am still concerned about the minister's misunderstanding of the word "arguable" in a legal context.  I thank the Greens for letting us see a copy of the opinion that they obtained. Such a courtesy was not extended by the minister in respect of the detail of his legal advice. I presume that that means that even the Lib Dems are arguing in the complete absence of any knowledge of that detail, although it seems from George Lyon's intervention a few minutes ago that, even when he has an opinion to read, he can do so only selectively, so perhaps we would not have been any further forward in any case. The minister has powers in relation to Chardon LL—however much he might try to wish those powers away—and he should use them. The preliminary opinion to which the motion refers raises a number of important concerns that should be addressed. Some of those concerns involve points that I made last week. I will not go over that ground again, because the opinion raises other points that need to be addressed—for example, the fact that the precautionary principle in relation to Chardon LL appears to have been interpreted and applied more narrowly than the definition that was given by the Government in the document "The GM Dialogue: Government response" and that there is some disjunction even with the definition, a fact that, in the opinion of counsel, the legal authorities would support. There is therefore a big grey area. Another interesting question is the definition of risk. When the European Union sought to ban the use of hormones in beef and thereby exclude much United States beef from EU markets, it took the view that a one-in-a-million risk is sufficient justification for avoidance action. I wonder what kind of risk assessment has been done in the context of the introduction of Chardon LL to Scotland. We are discussing a GM seed variety that still has many question marks hanging over it. It is unsuitable for growing in Scotland and, indeed, most of the United Kingdom. Even the Netherlands does not seek to have it included on the European common catalogue. It is not grown in the Netherlands or anywhere else in the European Union. The issue is so important for Scottish agriculture and Scottish consumers that it is amazing that the GM crop that the minister wanted to use as a trail-blazer was not of a variety that one could argue might be of more use to Scotland. I can see no purpose in promoting the GM crop that we are discussing as a potential addition to the UK's national seed list other than for it to be a Trojan horse for subsequent introductions. Chardon LL is being used to bridge the Rubicon. It is a bridge too far.

He is not listening.

It is arguable.

Why did the minister not argue it then?

rose—

Perhaps he could wind up by telling us about the tests.

Whether it is due to concern about the science behind GM foods, the impact on the wider environment, the removal of consumer choice or the huge commercial interests behind GM foods, there is enormous public opposition to the growing of GM crops. One recent poll showed that 85 per cent of people believe that GM crops would have a negative impact on the environment, 86 per cent believe that the technology has been driven by profit rather than public interest and only 4 per cent strongly agree that they would eat GM food. As politicians, we must respond to that overwhelming public concern by using all the powers that we have at our disposal to prevent the commercialisation of GM crops. At this moment, that means that we must say no to the Government's proposals regarding Chardon LL maize. In Westminster and the National Assembly for Wales, the Liberal Democrats, in particular, have been firm in their opposition to GM, but in Scotland, where they have some loose grasp on the reins of power, their response has been to roll over and do what the Government, the Labour Party and the GM industry want them to do. In their alternative Queen's speech last year, the Liberal Democrats in Westminster made a strong statement that no decision on the growing of GM crops in the United Kingdom should be taken until the public debate was re-run. In advance of Margaret Beckett's statement on GM, the Westminster Liberal Democrat spokesperson on food and rural affairs, Andrew George MP, said that giving the go ahead for GM maize would "show a breathtaking disdain for both the public and MPs".

It is interesting that George Lyon makes that point, because Mick Bates AM, the Welsh Liberal Democrat countryside spokesperson, accused the Welsh Executive of having "caved in to pressure from Westminster" over Chardon LL maize, which he described as "a Trojan Horse crop" that would "mark the end of any dream for a GM-free area". He also said that he was "ashamed" of the Welsh decision. The position of the Liberal Democrats is hardly clear. How, then, to explain to voters their behaviour in Scotland? The existence of Lord Sainsbury might explain the Labour Party's position but it gives no comfort to the Liberal Democrats. The problem for the Liberal Democrats is that big questions remain about the suitability of Chardon LL maize for Scotland. In his statement last week, the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development made great play of his insistence that there are no reasons for principled opposition to Chardon LL maize. Among other things, he said: "The safety of this GM maize was confirmed by its gaining part C consent in 1998."— [ Official Report , 10 March 2004; c 6428.]  That is true, but he did not say that the consent was given under a European Union directive dating from 1990 that has been superseded by directive 2001/18/EC, which provides for a rather more rigorous process. Indeed, it is that kind of rigorous process that the House of Commons Environmental Audit Committee was concerned about. It said that the advice from the Advisory Committee on Releases to the Environment was "clear but ... not decisive", that problems evident in North America had "not been taken seriously enough", that "No decision to proceed with the commercial growing of GM crops should be made until thorough research into the experience with GM crops in north America has been completed and published" and that farm trials  "should have lasted longer than three years". Despite the Environmental Audit Committee's report, within days Margaret Beckett was making an announcement that responded to none of the concerns that were expressed therein.

If George Lyon will sit in his seat for two minutes, I will be able to deal with some of the issues surrounding the legal position. The Environmental Audit Committee's report is important because it was published only on 5 March. There are huge concerns about the fact that atrazine, a herbicide that is being phased out, was used in the trials. However, while the committee called for Chardon LL to be "thoroughly re-trialled", Beckett's statement called for only "further scientific analysis". Arguably, if that is needed, the statement should not have been made at all, but well might she take the view that further analysis is required. Quite apart from concerns surrounding atrazine, there are other questions. For example, no feeding studies have been carried out on cattle, although that is what Chardon LL would be used for. Further, although the committee called on the Government to ensure that, before any GM crops are grown commercially in this country, a clear and comprehensive liability should be put in place to underpin any future regulations to deal with co-existence issues, Margaret Beckett would say only that the Government "anticipate" that such measures would be in place. Allan Wilson's reference to that was wholly without timescale. Legal opinion exists that suggests that a rather different position from the Executive's current position could be taken and which expresses the view that seed matters generally are devolved. It states: "under the 2001 Regulations the functions of the National Authorities are stated to be exercisable by the devolved authorities in relation to each of the devolved regions. However, there remains only one National Seed List for the whole of the UK and the term National Authorities is specifically defined to mean each of the relevant devolved authorities 'acting jointly' ... As a result, no decision to add Chardon LL to the National List ... may be made without the agreement of all the relevant authorities."  Therefore, it is legally arguable that the Scottish Executive could have taken a different position. That legal advice suggests that we have some clout. What evidence do we have that that clout was used? The same opinion also suggests that, although there are a couple of prescriptive reasons for refusal, there are also discretionary powers under regulation 5(4)(b) of the Seeds (National List of Varieties) Regulations 2001, which is where some of the flexibility exists. Has the Executive explored that? Indeed, has the minister explored any of the means by which he can stop what he and the First Minister profess to be so uneasy about? If the Scottish Parliament is "sceptical"—to use the First Minister's phrase—about GM crops and shares the concerns of the public, our Health Committee and the Westminster Environmental Audit Committee, for heaven's sake, let us make sure that we have done everything in our power within the powers that we have available to us to have the decision on Chardon LL blocked. I move, That the Parliament notes the recommendations of the House of Commons Environmental Audit Committee's report GM Foods - Evaluating the Farm Scale Trials ; believes that the cultivation of Chardon LL maize should not be considered in Scotland until a full inquiry has been undertaken into the potential commercial, environmental and health impact of such an introduction, and believes that, pending the outcome of such an inquiry, all existing legal powers should be used to block the approval of Chardon LL maize in keeping with the precautionary principle.

I was absolutely with the minister right up to his final phrase. I could not have agreed more with everything he said before that. However, my problem is that I do not know what he is trying to achieve by the debate. If he does not have something specific to say about the historic environment, why are we having the debate? The purpose of my amendment is to try to say something specific about the historic environment. I hoped to hear something meaty in the minister's speech, but we got only an expansion of a vague and anodyne motion. I will support that motion, but I believe that we should also be talking about the present and the future of our historic environment. It is important that we recognise the work that is being done to ensure that our archaeological sites,  historic buildings, gardens and monuments are protected, conserved and promoted as visitor attractions. Once visitors have been attracted, it is important to provide appropriate interpretations to enable them to maximise their experience. Many organisations are involved in that process, as are individuals, many of whom are volunteers. Those volunteers are the unsung heroes without whom much of our historic environment would not be what it is today and would not be getting presented to tourists from Scotland and elsewhere. The volunteers cannot achieve miracles, so it would be wrong to pretend that huge improvements cannot be made and that there are no overgrown paths, missing signs or crumbling buildings. At present, 1,161 buildings are registered as being at risk. As far as we know, 208 historic buildings, which were mostly listed, have been demolished since 1990. Public funding of the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland has fallen in real terms by about 35 per cent since 1990. In addition, Historic Scotland's budget allocation for rescue archaeology has fallen by about 33 per cent since 1994. Currently, there is no national statutory designation mechanism for protecting and managing cultural landscapes, such as battlefields, and no effective protection for gardens and designed landscapes. Given Scotland's history, battlefields in particular are a substantial and significant part of the historic environment and are, indeed, what tourists are interested in. Therefore, there are big gaps and big problems. There is a real concern that a chronic under-resourcing of historic environment interests at local government level leads to ill-informed development-control decisions and wastes opportunities for enhancing local community and tourist interest. If the minister contends that sufficient resources are available, he must explain why we are in our current situation. The distribution of funding is also a matter of concern. I have a relevant example from my constituency. I was concerned to learn from the Perth and Kinross Heritage Trust that Aberdeen, Dundee, Inverness and Stirling are to share in an annual £1 million scheme to set up four city heritage trusts, although Perth and Kinross, which has some 3,450 listed buildings and 33 conservation areas, was awarded only £5,532 in historic building grants by Historic Scotland in 2002-03. Dundee, which has 1,000 listed buildings and 16 conservation areas, is in line to get a great windfall, while Perth and Kinross—which has three times the number of equivalent sites—will get a pittance. I have no doubt that that situation is replicated throughout Scotland, but how can it be justified?  Surely we are not saying that the historic environment is more important in one area than it is in another. The issue is not about saying that Aberdeen, Dundee, Inverness and Stirling deserve less—of course they do not—but there is a serious question about the Executive's commitment to the historic environment throughout Scotland; I presume that today's debate is about the whole of Scotland. I was glad to hear the minister's comments on the Antonine wall, about which I have written to him recently but, in parts, its state of repair is extremely poor. That is the kind of issue that we should be addressing. Historic Scotland is putting together a case for the wall to be granted world heritage status and, given that it is a physical reminder of an extremely important period in Scottish, European and world history, that case will be strong. I make a plea for the inclusion in that proposal of the Gask ridge in my constituency. Although it is not part of the Antonine wall, it is the site of what was the oldest and northernmost linear defence system in the entire Roman empire and is therefore of real significance. We need a review, not of Historic Scotland the organisation, but of Scotland's historic environment. We need processes that ensure that the information is updated regularly. Does the minister intend to implement the recommendations that were made in the relatively recent report "Review of the Structure and Functions of Historic Scotland", or will he lend his support to the joint initiative between Scottish Environment LINK and the Built Environment Forum Scotland that will report in May, about which he has said nothing? If we want to send out a message to all those people who are involved in the historic environment in Scotland today that we recognise the difficulties that they face and want to assist them in their important work, we should agree to a motion that does more than state the obvious. That is why I move amendment S2M-1033.2, to insert at end: "; regrets that, notwithstanding the work done by individuals and organisations, there remain serious concerns about (a) a lack of both resources and information and (b) the failure to sufficiently protect, conserve, interpret and promote Scotland's historic environment and endorses the call for a review of the historic environment backed up by a regular audit to measure progress."

Highland Spring Ltd is based in my constituency. It is a big employer, and the industry as a whole employs a huge number of people throughout Scotland. Can the minister say what specific steps he and the Executive are taking to support Highland Spring Ltd in its current campaign against the misleading selling of Dasani water? Dasani is labelled in a way that allows people to believe that it is something that it is not, whereas it should be labelled "Not the real thing". Are there specific steps that he can take to support that campaign?

The minister's statement was nine pages of very little. I am a long-time opponent of GM crops, but I could be a late convert to the technology if I thought that it could genetically modify a backbone into the minister and his Cabinet colleagues. Perhaps the minister will show that he does not need that genetic modification by answering three simple questions. Are the minister and the rest of the Executive for or against the commercial growing of GM crops in Scotland? That is straightforward. If they are against it—the voluntary ban scenario suggests that—what avenues are being explored proactively to delay or prevent the planting of such crops? Will the minister say with a yes or no whether, if he had refused to agree to the listing of Chardon maize, that would have been an end to the matter for Scotland?

No, you did not.

I congratulate Rosemary Byrne on securing this debate and on raising a very important issue in the chamber. I also congratulate the Upperward against pollution campaign group on its work in highlighting this issue. Members of the local community have been in to talk to SNP MSPs this week. We were—as I am sure that everyone in the chamber will be—stunned to learn the details that lie behind this debate. There is an understandable tendency towards bad puns when discussing this matter, but a number of very serious issues arise—not least the potential threat to the health and quality of life of the communities affected. Before I go on, I want to say that I recollect that the former Transport and the Environment Committee did a great deal of work on this issue in the previous session of the Parliament. The members of that committee should be commended for their work. The present Presiding Officer of the Parliament, George Reid, worked very hard on behalf of the community at Blairingone when it was dealing with the same problem. The problem is not new. I would be the first to argue for the extension of biomass projects in Scotland. They have an important contribution to make to the mix of renewable energies. However, I sincerely regret that a very sensible scheme to grow willow trees, ultimately for electricity generation, has become embroiled in this farce. In fact, I am really not sure why willow has to be fertilised to this extent; in my experience, all that is needed to get willow to grow is to stick a bit in the ground. I suspect that what has been important has been the public subsidy that is available to Scottish Coal to take waste off the hands of English authorities. Another aspect that has to be addressed is the community right to be heard. It is simply unacceptable for thousands of tonnes of untreated or semi-treated sewage waste to be dumped in Scotland without any input from the planning authorities, leaving local communities with no say. On a range of problems, communities' right to be heard is beginning to be a problem throughout Scotland. That is a serious issue that we must face up to, not only in the present context, but in connection with many other areas. The fact that communities feel that they are simply not being heard needs to be examined seriously. It is worth considering that Thames Water would  not be allowed to dump its sewage south of the border in the way that it is doing in Scotland; the fact that it can cart it up here to be dumped surely cannot be right. I see that the minister is looking puzzled, but that is the information that we have been given as part of our preparation for the debate.

A great deal of investigation has been carried out in the past 48 hours on the reasoning behind the situation. The advice that we have been given is that the regulations in England would not allow the form of waste in question to be dumped there. The minister may have information that we do not have, but our information is that that practice would not be allowed in England. To add insult to injury, a very bizarre comment from a representative of Scottish Coal is quoted in this morning's Daily Record . They said that the sewage that the company got from Thames Water was of a "higher quality than what was on offer in Scotland". I am rather nervous about going too far down that road, but some explanation is surely required. The situation is entirely unacceptable and the Executive must act to stop Thames Water in its tracks. Frankly, I do not care how much perfume the operators of the sites spray in the air—the whole thing still stinks and the communities are right to complain.

I welcome the minister's statement, which goes a considerable way towards addressing some of the key questions and problems raised by a number of sectors in the industry, notably the beef sector. However, I note that a considerable number of issues remain unresolved and much uncertainty remains. I wish to question the minister on a few specific issues. First, the door is obviously left open for the modulation rate of 10 per cent to increase, but a great deal is dependent on the availability of match funding and I presume that that depends in turn on the United Kingdom's 2004 spending review. Does the minister have an ideal percentage target in mind? How confident is he that match funding will be made available? Indeed, how confident is he that he will even be able to maintain the proposed 10 per cent rate? Secondly, the minister indicated that he wants to press for a review date for the single farm payment. Does he have a date in mind? If so, what is it and how confident is he of success in achieving it? Thirdly, I note that a number of final decisions are still to be made, one of which involves consultation on cross-compliance standards. Does  the minister have a timescale for completion of that?

Does the minister support disclosure of the 12 sites that are contained in the list that is held by Nirex, but which it is not allowed to disclose to the public?

We have always said that.

I did not say that.

That has still not been sorted out.

Sold out!

Will the minister give way?

Obviously, we are all aware of the passage of the Energy Bill through Westminster. Much as I would prefer the subject matter of that bill to be dealt with in this legislature, the effect of last week's Sewel motion at least means that this Parliament is aware of what is going on at Westminster. However, other discussions that are taking place at European level will also have a direct impact on nuclear waste management, which has been a matter of great public controversy from time to time in Scotland. Here are just a few of the matters that are under consideration. The Commission proposes to expand its competence in nuclear safety control. There is a push towards developing deep geological disposal sites. Consideration is being given to approving the transportation of shipments of nuclear waste from one member state to another or on to a third, presumably non-European Union, country. There is discussion about making European Atomic Energy Community money available not just for safety improvements and decommissioning, but for financing new nuclear power stations. Europe is considering not requiring any advance consultation with or even notification of local authorities when nuclear waste is transported through local authority areas. Do the Parliament and ministers have a view on any or all of those issues, which are under discussion in Europe? We may be heading down the road of granting public money to build new nuclear power stations, thereby increasing the production of nuclear waste well before we have a clue about how to handle it—leaving aside other aspects of the debate on domestic nuclear energy. We may end up having the waste schlepped across land and sea to a few as yet undisclosed deep burial sites. However, no one will be informed when that waste is on the move, not even the emergency planners. The little control that we in Scotland have over aspects of the issue may be eroded further. That is not some theoretical worry. A year ago, a lorry carrying radioactive waste crashed on the Friarton bridge in my constituency. The emergency services knew nothing about the potential dangers until they arrived on the scene.  That rather negates the point of planning for emergencies. We need to minimise the transportation of nuclear waste. When waste has to be shifted, we need to ensure that the responsible authorities along the route are aware of what is happening. Wherever possible, nuclear waste should be stored and monitored on site and above ground. As burial of waste comes back on to the agenda, surely the history of United Kingdom efforts to find such solutions should alert Scotland to the distinct possibility that we will end up as one of the favoured areas for disposal. We already know that 25 of the 45 proposed sites under consideration in the public domain over a period of years—more than 55 per cent of the total—were in Scotland. That is before we remind ourselves of the secret list, whose existence is openly acknowledged, even if we are allowed to know only two of the sites on the list: Sellafield and Dounreay. Those who doubt the existence of the list should have a conversation with representatives of Nirex and ask them directly about it. Nirex is honest about the list and equally honest about its inability—at the insistence of the Government—to divulge the details. The list names potential sites for nuclear waste. I commend Nirex for making huge efforts to repair its reputation with the public. Any contact with Nirex now is a vastly more satisfactory experience than it might have been 10 or 15 years ago. Nirex wants to be able to discuss nuclear waste management in the open and honestly. I suspect that it would much prefer to make the secret list not a secret. However, as long as the list exists, it will fuel suspicion about the current agenda—and rightly so. The SNP believes that, in the interests of both safety and democracy, it is essential that the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency should have responsibility for the regulation of waste storage and disposal. Currently, we have the nonsensical position that Her Majesty's nuclear installations inspectorate regulates the storage of waste at nuclear sites and SEPA takes over responsibility only when the waste is to be disposed of. Shifting responsibility for nuclear waste storage to SEPA would provide a more seamless regulatory framework for the handling of nuclear waste and would increase openness and democracy in the system. Such a move would mean that waste storage sites could be subject to public consultations and it would effectively devolve responsibility for nuclear waste storage to the Scottish Parliament. Before any member gets too restive about the fact that this call is coming from the SNP, I inform the chamber that it is not an exclusively nationalist position. In 1999, the  House of Lords Science and Technology Committee recommended exactly the same thing. The statutory guidance for SEPA for which the motion calls has been promised and is long overdue. Draft statutory guidance for the Environment Agency in England and Wales was produced as long ago as November 2001. We do not need to reinvent the wheel, but the Executive must get moving on the issue. The groundwork has already been done in the England and Wales draft, which refers to a "progressive reduction" of discharges taking "primacy over other considerations, apart from safety" and states that "the unnecessary introduction of radioactivity into the environment is undesirable, even at levels where the doses ... are low." In the light of those comments, the Executive's amendment today is particularly disappointing. It welcomes the "UK strategy for radioactive discharges 2001-2020", which means accepting, among other things, increased discharges from Sellafield from now until 2012 and beyond and allowing the thermal oxide reprocessing plant to remain open until 2024. At least the Tories are honest in their open support for the unbridled development of nuclear power, but they show absolutely no concern for the serious issue of how we should deal with the waste produced by the nuclear process. The Green amendment adds to my motion and I will support it if we get there. Support for the SNP motion will signal the Parliament's intention to put public safety, openness and democracy above all other considerations in dealing with nuclear waste. The communities of Scotland deserve no less. I move, That the Parliament is concerned that policies related to nuclear waste management are being discussed and debated at UK and European level without significant input from Scotland; believes that appropriate statutory guidance for the Scottish Environment Protection Agency on radioactive discharges is urgently required, and considers that decisions regarding the control, management and disposal of nuclear waste material in Scotland should be a matter solely for the Scottish Ministers.

Why not debate that?

The UK Energy Bill will effectively set up a new cross-border public body—the nuclear decommissioning authority—which, as Shiona Baird has said, will not have any statement whatsoever of environmental principles at its inception. What is there instead? There is a clear statement of what is required—duties regarding maintenance of skills, promoting competition and value for money—but the NDA must only have regard to the need to safeguard the environment. Given that the waste material that we are discussing has implications for the environment that will continue for thousands—indeed, for tens of thousands—of years, it is astonishing that concern for the environment is not at the heart of the new authority. The SNP believes that it should be.

Why, then, are the environmental principles not enshrined in the bill? The current UK nuclear regulatory system is in chaos, but the NDA will be required only to meet quite inadequate regulatory requirements. Instead of statutory guidance for SEPA, there will be memorandums of understanding, which will probably not be worth the paper that they are written on, especially when commercial and economic considerations seem to be more important than environmental considerations. Given that statutory guidance for SEPA is long overdue, can we expect the minister to publish draft guidance on radioactive discharges in the near future? To give a direction in Scotland, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry will have only to consult the Scottish ministers. Many of us here might suspect that, in that context, the so-called consultation with the Scottish ministers will smack more of telling them than of consulting them. Certainly, the ministers should not rule out the possibility of being overruled. Frankly, I do not see anything in the bill that ensures any accountability at all, despite what the minister said in his opening speech.  Nuclear waste storage is currently regulated by Her Majesty's nuclear installations inspectorate, and SEPA gets responsibility only when the waste is to be disposed of. The NII has no duty of public consultation, but SEPA has. Shifting NII responsibilities to SEPA would increase public involvement; therefore, I ask that, instead of agreeing to this Sewel motion, we should seek the transfer of responsibility for the regulation of waste storage from the NII to SEPA, so that SEPA deals with both storage and disposal. The bill will allow fast-tracking of the transfer of radioactive discharge authorisations, which process has been one of the few opportunities for public consultation on the operation of a nuclear site. Clause 3 of the Energy Bill also allows for the NDA being allocated responsibility for the decommissioning and cleaning up of Ministry of Defence sites, which may end up including the management of nuclear submarine decommissioning. Can the minister point me to anything in the bill that, if that should happen, will prevent the imposition of a nuclear waste storage site in Scotland for nuclear submarine waste? As for British Energy, this is obviously a massive Government bail-out in the course of which the bill appears to open the door to public funding for future private nuclear operators. That is being discussed even at the European level. What we need is a Scotland-wide debate on the best option for dealing with spent nuclear waste and on the nuclear industry as a whole. Does the minister intend to initiate such a debate any time soon? We need to be vigilant when these issues are being discussed, especially when they are being discussed outwith Scotland and a long way away from any public involvement. We know that, through the years, a large number of sites for nuclear waste disposal have been identified, the majority of which have been in Scotland. We also know—and any conversation with Nirex will confirm this as fact—that there exists a secret list of 12 sites, of which only two were ever made public: Sellafield and Dounreay. That list has been in existence since 1988 but Nirex is not permitted to publish it. Given that background, it is vital that Scotland should retain as much control and public involvement as it can in this area. Of course, I would argue for total control. Westminster has created a mess, is erecting a smokescreen of consultation documents, has produced and continues to produce nuclear waste that it cannot deal with satisfactorily, and is bailing out British Energy at a cost to the taxpayer. How can that be allowed to continue with only the fig-leaf of consultation for Scotland? The minister should be ashamed of himself. In fact, both ministers should be ashamed of themselves, as I assume that the closing remarks will simply echo the opening remarks.  I listened to what the minister had to say about BETTA, but I am afraid that the concerns in the industry mean that it is not so sanguine. I have great sympathy for the substance of the Green amendment; however, notwithstanding what Shiona Baird said, it unfortunately implicitly accepts a Sewel procedure that we do not accept.

There was me thinking that participating in debates was part of an MSP's job description—clearly not in the political background that Christine May comes from. The Presiding Officer might be a little puzzled about what is happening in here. I suspect that she will not have read the press release that was put out on the back of this debate, which I could categorise as falling into one of three categories. It is either just totally stupid, wilfully ignorant or, perhaps more truthfully, maliciously mendacious.

No. I have only three minutes. I will quote something that was said during the debate in November, to which Murdo Fraser referred. A member said: "I strongly support ... renewable energy. ... However, we must ensure that the locations of wind farms are suitable." I agree. They said: "A strategic approach will guide ... developments to areas where the effects on our natural heritage are minimised." I agree. They also said: "The planning framework ... will seek to address energy issues. ... but it must also identify environmentally sensitive sites where development is inappropriate." Again I agree. In a prescient condemnation of Ms May's current attitude, the member also said: "let us have a sensible debate on this issue without those who register concern about the impact of wind farms on environmentally sensitive areas being stereotyped as being anti-jobs."— [ Official Report , 6 November 2003; c 3113-4.]  I agree. See Rhona Brankin, see me: we agree. It is a pity that the member who brought this debate to the chamber did not concentrate on the issue that she was trying to debate, rather than the nonsensical rubbish that she put out today. The fundamental problem with wind farms is the lack of a national strategy. We have debated the issue before and I expect that we will debate it again. It is not just members in the chamber who have concerns, but Scottish Natural Heritage. There is a real problem that needs to be addressed. Taking the attitude of members such as Christine May is not going to make the problem go away. Nor will it help if she ignores the big problem in her party, which is that  proponents such as Brian Wilson, in their desperate attempts to push nuclear power on Scotland, want to do down the commitment to renewable energy and to pretend that it will not work. One of the biggest problems that Christine May and her colleagues have to address is the fact that Brian Wilson and others want to push us down the road of an environmentally unsustainable nuclear power programme. I would like to hear whether anything will be said about that today. Yes, we need to get in on the ground floor of some of the developing renewables, particularly wave power. We have missed our chance on much of what is going on with wind farms: we have let the Danes and the Norwegians make all the running and we are not going to get some of the benefits that we might have. Let us not miss the boat again when it comes to wave power. Let us address the issue so that we do not go down one single road on renewable energy. We need to address the problem and develop technologies right across the board.

I thank all the staff who assisted in the production of the report and I echo the Environment and Rural Development Committee convener's comments about that. I welcome the minister to his temporary sojourn on the front line. I hope that he will convey the SNP's good wishes to Ross Finnie in his medical excursions. Few people can fail to feel at least a little ashamed of Scotland's record on managing waste in an environmentally efficient manner. The problem is made plain in the report. The truth is that we start from a long way back. Scottish figures are appallingly low, especially when they are compared with those of other small European countries, such as Denmark, which has a 63 per cent target for recycling and composting by 2008, and Austria, which recycled 75 per cent of its municipal solid waste in 2002. We could only  dream of such a target, but another country has achieved it. The committee's report is wide ranging, but of course it could not be made comprehensive in the limited time that was available to us. Of the three waste management components—reduce, reuse and recycle—the report focuses almost entirely on recycling. If we can regard composting as reuse, a nod is made in that direction. It is obvious that much more needs to be done to reduce at source the amount of waste that we produce in the first place. Perhaps we can return to that focus in the future. The over-packaging of products in supermarkets is a bugbear of mine. Sometimes, it seems that we cannot buy a thing that has not been stuck on a polystyrene tray, wrapped in clingfilm, then encased in a cardboard sleeve. That is all pointless packaging that goes straight in the bin as soon as people get home.

The member would be grateful if she lived in an area that had much choice. Many folk, particularly those who go to small corner shops, often do not have a choice. If any of the domestic charging regimes that are occasionally discussed came into play, that pointless packaging would go straight on to the supermarket floor at the checkout if I had anything to do with it. Perhaps we might all consider that for the future. Instead of going through the report section by section, I will use the limited time that is available to me—although it turns out not to be as limited as I expected it to be—to examine more closely a major issue that the Executive and all of us must resolve, which is how we go beyond the good intentions of the report and the national waste plan and ensure that the targets that have been set can be met in localities throughout the country. The minister will know that I am concerned about the practical implementation of any such proposals and that I raised my concerns at the Environment and Rural Development Committee last week, in connection with draft EU directives. In preparing the report, the committee recognised the problem, and the report has a section entitled "Key Challenges in Meeting the Targets". The debate focuses on domestic waste, for which services vary widely throughout the country. I conducted my own mini-survey by comparing  refuse collection and other domestic environmental services in two localities: Crieff, which happens to be where I live, and Knightswood in Glasgow, as an urban alternative. I stress that I do not want to have a go at individual councils—I simply want to highlight the issues that arise from practical implementation of policies. In Crieff, I can put out my bin once a week and I can bag up paper and cans and put them out on the kerbside every two weeks. There are no bins for those bags, so there is a possibility that bags will be burst and that litter will be strewn about. Green waste can be collected from the kerbside fortnightly in the summer and every four weeks in the winter if I join a scheme, which has a £10 annual registration charge. That is not a problem for me, but it will be a factor for people who are on a very limited income. Compost bins are available—again for a charge—but there is not much point in producing compost if one does not have a garden, if one's idea of or inclination for gardening is limited to a couple of plant pots sitting on an expanse of paving or if one lives in a flat. If I have bulky items that I want to be uplifted, I can request a special uplift, for which there is a £15 charge for a collection of up to four of five bulky items. The vaguely arbitrary-sounding nature of the charge is the result of the council's vagueness and not vagueness on my part. Of course, that again involves cluttering up the kerbside, as items must be out by at least by 7.45 am. In practice, that means that those items will be out the night before. There are issues attached to that approach. I can take anything that is not uplifted to the civic amenity—or skip—site, which is open three days a week. However, there is a bit of a paradox. First, a person must have a car. In Crieff, between one in three and one in four households do not have a car. Secondly, is not there something of a contradiction in environmental terms in recycling by increasing the number of car journeys in order to recycle? I wonder whether anybody has calculated the trade-off that is involved. Perth and Kinross Council has a plan to get out 45,000 bins for the collection of paper. There are 62,709 households in the area and, currently, there are only 23,000 such bins. However, the plan will depend on approval and—more significantly—money from the Executive. Therefore, we come back to money. In Glasgow by contrast, there are weekly kerbside collections of refuse and householders can join the green box scheme, in which newspapers, cans and plastic bottles are collected each week from the kerbside. The council provides a special uplift service, which is largely  free, but a charge is made for some items. The charge is quite hefty—£16.22 for each 15-minute period or part period, with a minimum charge of £16.22. I imagine that the charge increases considerably in practice for people who access the service. Again, a lot of work must be done by the householder to ensure that the items that are to be uplifted are presented in the approved manner and there are civic amenity sites where items can be taken—again, if one has private transport to do so. I will highlight four issues that arise from the provision that is made by those councils. First, there is the potential cost to individuals. Things can depend on individuals' incomes and costs can have a greater or lesser impact on individuals' ability to access the provision. The danger is that going green will become a middle-class pursuit. Secondly, people must have their own transport, as most of the councils' schemes have a fallback option of taking things to skips. There are still a significant number of households in Scotland for which that is not an option. Thirdly, the majority of the effort seems to be on increasing domestic recycling—we have discussed that matter already. A huge issue relating to industrial and business recycling must be addressed. Finally—this is perhaps one of the smallest points, but it is the most important point—the householder must be proactive in getting hold of information about what is available in their area. I welcome the extra money that is going to the Scottish waste awareness group, but that group does not act in many parts of Scotland, so there is really no existing provision. From paragraph 61 onwards, the committee's report deals with education, which is a key issue. Digging out information about what is available from councils seems to be a matter that is entirely for the householder, which may be related to council concerns about the overall cost to them of some schemes. The councils and Government should be proactive in making information available. That is one of the key problems that we face. When people want to access a service, they simply do not know about it, which is a problem.

I have definitely gone over my time and I do not know whether the Presiding Officer wishes me to let Jamie Stone intervene.

We had to finesse the relevant section of the committee's report to ensure that it was possible for those such as me to argue for the repatriation of moneys for use directly in Scotland. There are issues about the landfill tax that could be taken on board in this area. All such issues must be tackled if the waste plan is to become an implemented reality, and I look forward to the minister's response. Some of the points that I have raised have seemed quite minor on the surface, but they are in fact some of the biggest obstacles to our moving forward in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what information is provided to local communities regarding proposed wind farm developments. (S2O-1027)

The minister will know of the considerable concerns that are being expressed by communities throughout Scotland about proposals that are being made, many of which we know are not likely to be approved. He will know also about the difficulties that such communities have in dealing with proposals when all the weight of money and research is on the developers' side and not on the side of the community. Will he consider providing a guidance pack for communities to allow them to find their way through the thicket of regulations so that they can make more appropriate representations in respect of such proposals?

I take the opportunity to express my thanks to all those who have assisted the Environment and Rural Development Committee in the production of its report. I should also say that the Scottish National Party has no hesitation in supporting the motion, which endorses the general principles of the bill, even though I have a few questions about detail. Nature conservation is an end in itself. We should want Scotland to follow a strategy that meets our commitments under the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity and we should welcome the opportunity to overhaul and improve our system of designating sites of special scientific interest, but there is more to the bill than that. It is essential to the future of Scotland's economy that we take the steps that are prescribed in the bill. Scottish agriculture will not survive unless we proceed on a basis of sustainability and a great deal of business—not least in tourism, our biggest industry—is dependent on Scotland's image as a country with a clean environment, which provides a wide and fascinating variety of plants, birds, animals and habitats, so we must ensure that that continues. The basic thrust of part 1 of the bill, which is about the duty to further the conservation of  biodiversity, is to be welcomed, but I agree with the committee that there is a need for more clarity on the definition of biodiversity. It seems strange that the bill seeks to introduce a duty on all public bodies and office holders to further the conservation of biodiversity without providing a working definition of what the term "biodiversity" actually means. It is true that the fact that the bill talks about regard being paid to the UN Convention on Biological Diversity provides a definition by implication, but if that definition is to be adopted as the Scottish definition, we should make that clear in the bill. Alternatively, if it is thought that the UN definition is not appropriate, the bill should provide an alternative definition. The bill should also do more than say that bodies should "have regard to" those principles. What sanctions are available if they do not have such regard? What will compel them to have such regard if they are not so minded? Let us not provide an easy opt-out right at the heart of the bill. The committee needed to have the framework for a biodiversity strategy in front of it during its stage 1 consideration so that we and our witnesses could analyse, rather than speculate on, how part 1 of the bill would operate in practice. At stage 1, speculation is not a sensible way for any committee to have to do its work and the situation will become even more problematic at stage 2 if we still lack the clarity that we needed at stage 1. I wonder whether the minister will reassure us that we will not have to continue with one hand tied behind our back. The committee has made a number of recommendations, with which I concur, on the part of the bill to do with SSSIs. For the purposes of the debate, I want to concentrate on three issues. A considerable number of environmental organisations, including SNH, have expressed the view that the statutory purpose of the SSSIs is drawn too narrowly and should be expanded to take into account other factors. In his evidence, the minister relied on the Joint Nature Conservation Committee guidelines, but surely we should take the opportunity that the bill presents to ensure the greatest possible degree of transparency, as that should dictate a rather more expansive and explicit statutory purpose than is currently envisaged. I look forward to the minister's closing remarks on that. I also want to draw the minister's attention to the concerns that the committee expressed about land management orders and nature conservation orders in paragraph 81 of its report. Those concerns reflect the SNP's long-standing argument, which has been expressed frequently in various land reform speeches in the Parliament, that the ability to establish who owns and/or  manages land in Scotland is central to the ability of communities, both local and national, to make real progress. All the best intentions in the world will come to nothing if owners cannot be traced, so we should be prepared to impose a legal obligation of either disclosure of ownership or designation of a legal representative. I particularly look forward to the minister's response to that point in his closing remarks. Equally, good intentions will not suffice if there is a lack of resources to carry out the designated work. Despite the minister's assurances at stage 1, there has to be real doubt about the ability of organisations to implement the legislation. I note that the Finance Committee shares SNH's concerns on that. I hope that the minister will take on board those concerns and review how the extra work is to be funded. Robbing Peter to pay Paul, which seems to be what is likely to happen, is hardly a positive approach to this aspect of Scottish politics. Ironically, much of part 3 of the bill deals with problems of what might be called non-biodiversity, given that it deals with wildlife crime. The need for the new powers is great, but the resources will need to be available, particularly for the training and support of wildlife crime officers. Scotland currently has 80 specially trained wildlife crime officers who carry out investigative, educational and preventative duties relating to crimes against wildlife, but only two of them do so full time. Perhaps the minister will advise us what discussions he has had with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland about the best way forward for policing the legislation. Members will already be aware of the controversy surrounding the proposed outlawing of snares. Strong opinions are held on the subject, but I believe that the committee has been sensible in taking the middle road. That means supporting the ban on the use of snares that are likely to cause injury while allowing the continued use of free-running snares for pest control and other land management purposes. I understand that that is in accord with the so-called Bern convention. The only comment that I would make on that is that it is ironic that the convention should be named after a city whose major tourist attraction is a bear pit. That seems something of a contradiction in terms. I have already expressed my concern that we have not yet had the opportunity to consider a wider marine environment strategy. It would help if, in his closing remarks, the minister could give us a clear steer as to the time scale within which that will be introduced. I hope that we will see the strategy in the lifetime of this parliamentary session. The bill is not yet perfect. It does not address areas that it perhaps should. Nevertheless, the bill  is an important and significant step forward in protecting and conserving Scotland's natural heritage. I am pleased to be able to support the bill's general principles and look forward to working to improve it in committee.

Does the minister agree that the consultation process underlines the fact that the clean-up required after a nuclear installation has served its time is so complex and costly that further nuclear power stations should be ruled out for the foreseeable future?

Allan Wilson started with a distinct lack of enthusiasm, which suggests that he was not party to the decision to have this debate. Despite what some members of the press might think, the debate has nothing to do with swimming pools. Nevertheless, we must face the fact that an increasing number of commentators are looking at the debates the Executive is bringing to the Parliament and asking, "Why on earth are they spending so long talking about that?" To me, it is not so much that the topics of debate are pointless—today's debate, for example, has the potential to be important; the real pity is that we have been presented with yet another self-congratulatory, self-deluding motion from the Executive, on such a narrow focus.  Good progress has been made: SEPA figures show that 95 per cent of Scotland's bathing waters met mandatory European quality standards and 60 per cent met the guideline pass standard, which means excellent quality. I am happy to commend those who have been involved in securing that progress, but even SEPA expressed disappointment that 100 per cent compliance was not achieved. It also recognised that if we had not had such a relatively dry summer, the results might not have been as good. I suspect that last summer will provide a blip in more than one set of statistics. We should aim for excellence grade for all our bathing waters. We need to ask why the Government officially recognises only 60 bathing beaches in Scotland. Denmark has designated more than 1,000 beaches and Finland—Finland, for goodness' sake—has designated 500. Initially, 126 beaches were recommended to the Scottish Office, which opted to select 23. That number was then raised to 60 at the start of 1999. As any beach that is used regularly has the potential to be designated, it is puzzling that the Executive apparently has no plans to reconvene the bathing water review panel. It seems as though the Executive is happy to say, "We have listed our 60 beaches. Everything is fine with them, so there is nothing more to be done." Perhaps that is part of the do-nothing-hope-no-one-notices strategy that the Executive appears to be pursuing. A huge number of Scottish beaches lie outwith the list of 60. Hundreds of our most beautiful, quiet, seemingly unspoiled and relatively remote beaches are used by members of the public. Those members of the public equally deserve to be protected from pollution. Quiet out-of-the-way beaches are not the only beaches to fall through the net. Many other beaches that are not on the official list are used regularly by bathers, windsurfers, surfers and sailors. Some of those were tested by SEPA: beaches at Largs, Kirkcaldy and Helensburgh failed to meet the EU standard. I do not believe that we should get too hung up on the number of blue flags we can run up our seaside flagpoles. Some of the things, such as toilet facilities and car parking, that are required for that status would change the unspoilt nature that is part of the appeal of some of our beaches. However, we need to ensure that the water quality around those beaches is up to standard. Such beaches are becoming increasingly popular with surfers and other watersports enthusiasts. A clean environment is a major part of Scotland's tourism potential. That is why it is a pity that today's debate has been given such a narrow focus: bathing waters do not exist in isolation from the rest of the marine environment.

There is nothing wrong with making a correlation between usage and quality as long as we are ultimately talking about the water quality around all our coastal areas. In a speech to WWF's oceans recovery seminar on 23 October, Allan Wilson promised that he would work with stakeholders before Christmas to produce a full consultation on the marine environment early in 2004. Today's debate would have been an ideal opportunity to inform the Parliament about the progress of that initiative, but the Executive is giving extremely mixed messages on its commitment to introducing legislation to protect the marine environment. Just a month after Allan Wilson's speech in October, Ross Finnie discussed the issue with the Environment and Rural Development Committee. Let me quote at length what Ross Finnie said during consideration of the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Bill: "If you can dispense with this bill quickly, deal with the water environment legislation relatively quickly and dispose of the proposed strategic environmental assessment bill in a trice, we will have time to consider much wider ranges of legislation. I do not wish to be facetious; the matter is important, but I have introduced a heavy programme that will take up much parliamentary time. I am conscious of the burden that we have already placed on your committee and you have other things to do. We will continue to work up what is required in terms of consultation and the scope we are looking at, but we have already proposed to the committee a hefty programme of legislation that will make a lot of work for you and me."—[ Official Report, Environment and Rural Development Committee , 26 November 2003; c 522-23.] I do not wish to appear facetious either, but if we have such a heavy work load and if there is so much meaningful debate to be had, why do we spend our time on debates such as today's, which are designed to be nothing more than self-congratulatory time fillers? That is why my amendment talks about bathing water quality being a component of the bigger issue that is the wider marine environment. The Parliament needs to do some bigger-picture thinking. That is what people want to see. If we are discussing the waters around our shores, of course we need to consider the progress in improving the quality of the bathing water at 60 hand-picked beaches, but we must also consider the call for a single EU directive on maritime safety and oil pollution that has been made by KIMO—I shall not try to pronounce its Finnish name in full—which is the organisation that represents coastal  communities throughout the north of Europe. We need to take on board KIMO's findings that 96 per cent of dead seabirds surveyed in 2001 had plastics in their stomachs. We should be considering the potential threat to our marine environment of the toxic fleet from the United States, and Westminster's plans for the dismantling of nuclear submarines. We should join the Irish Government in its concern about the impact of Sellafield on the marine environment. We are a coastal country—a maritime nation—and we should be doing a lot more than talk about paddling in the sea. The Executive motion does no more than dip its toe in the issues that should be addressed. I ask members to support my amendment. I move amendment S2M-695.3, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "but believes that this is only one component in a larger concern about the marine environment that must be addressed urgently if the commitment to improving Scotland's natural environment overall is to be realised."

The debate is on a subject that is close to my heart. I thought that I would do a Stewart Stevenson today and say, "Not a lot of people know this." In Australia, before I went to university, I spent four years in library work and gained professional library qualifications. Sadly, however, I worked in a university library and not in the public library system. Stewart Stevenson's crown therefore remains. Like the Deputy First Minister, I have a strong local interest in the debate and in the development of public libraries in Scotland. Innerpeffray library, which is the oldest lending library in Scotland, is in my constituency. I suspect that other members, too, will mention libraries in their constituencies this afternoon. Innerpeffray library dates from around 1680 and therefore predates the Public  Libraries (Ireland and Scotland) Act 1853 by a considerable period. Indeed, in what may have been the Lonely Planet guide of its day—"Travels in Northern England and Scotland"—Thomas Newte wrote in 1791: "It is impossible to pass over the venerable beauties of Innerpeffray, fronting Castle Drummond, in the concavity of serpentizing Ern, its castle, the antient seat of the Lords of Maderty, its chapel, public library and school, both established for the good of community and carrying back the mind to the antient situation and genius of Scotland." That "good of community" was a driving force behind the growth of public libraries in Scotland over many years and, indeed, centuries. As well as libraries established by churches and charities, groups of workers would get together to buy books to set up libraries. Miners at Leadhills and Wanlockhead and the mechanics institute in Airdrie are prime examples. I am sure that other members will want to say something about those. The 1853 act was certainly a major landmark in the history of public libraries, although the cap on the rate that could be levied to provide libraries was not lifted until 1919. A truly comprehensive and free library service was possible only once the local authorities had been given that fiscal freedom. I hope that the Parliament will have secured a similar advantage long before we celebrate the 150 th anniversary of that landmark. While the penny rate held back the involvement of local authorities in the early stages of the development of public libraries, the support of philanthropists such as Andrew Carnegie was extremely important. No look through the history of Scottish libraries would be complete without an acknowledgement of the contribution of Andrew Carnegie. Whatever one might think about the way in which he amassed his millions, he was certainly generous in his philanthropy. Towns and cities throughout Scotland can attest to his generosity, which we should acknowledge. Such libraries reflected and encouraged the desire for education and self-improvement among Scotland's working class. Access to the public libraries, hand in hand with the development of public education, were the means by which all Scottish society could start to participate in Scottish intellectual life. Libraries remain a key public service. Almost 60 per cent of the population regularly use libraries' services. There are 557 libraries in Scotland, which lend more than 37 million items each year in 31 million visits. Furthermore, they enable 8.5 million hours of internet access to be provided to communities throughout Scotland. In my constituency, as well as the library at Innerpeffray, there are libraries in Perth, Comrie,  Crieff and Auchterarder, and a mobile service that travels throughout Perthshire every week. Members who represent rural parts of Scotland will be familiar with the mobile libraries that give such a good service to our outlying communities. It is important to take the opportunity that the anniversary provides to look back, to thank and to congratulate all those who have been involved in the development of the library service as well as those who currently work in the continually developing service. However, the anniversary is also an opportunity to take stock of where we are, to look to the future and to determine what changes need to be made to how things are done. Everything in the garden is not rosy for Scotland's libraries. The percentage of the population who borrow books from libraries is declining and the number of books borrowed by each user, although not at an all-time low, has failed to increase in the past four to five years. There is no doubt that some of that is because of a general shift in public interest away from books towards the internet and television, both for information and for entertainment, and an increased ability and desire among our consumer society to own rather than to borrow or rent everything that we use. However, there is another reason. Book funds for our libraries have dropped on average by 30 per cent throughout Scotland in the past five years, while book prices have risen by 36.2 per cent over the same period. Members can begin to see what some of the pressures are when it comes to stocking our public libraries. Many library buildings are in desperate need of investment for repairs and upgrades; they are not necessarily welcoming and comfortable places to be. As public buildings have to comply with the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 by October next year, what assurances can the Executive give that funding will be available to help libraries to meet 21 st century access problems without having to sacrifice funding for the provision of books and services to the public? Perhaps the minister can comment on that. There is no support for indigenous Scottish library suppliers. The last one closed last year, which raised concerns about access to Scottish publishers and titles. All that Elaine Murray, the minister responsible at the time, would say in a parliamentary answer was that each local authority is responsible for its own library service and for determining allocation of funding for purchasing books. Aside from a Scottish Arts Council-Scottish Enterprise programme to support new developments in the distribution of printed works, does the minister have plans to support publishing in Scotland through the library system? Information that has come into our e-mail inboxes  today indicates that, although there are more than 500 public libraries in Scotland, fewer than five copies of most Scottish books are purchased by them—that is one book per 100 libraries. That suggests that Scottish publishing is not being supported from within the library service. We must consider that important issue. The motion rightly congratulates public libraries on the diverse service that they provide, but there is a huge danger in complacency. Funding for the people's network is ring fenced and provided by the new opportunities fund. The network's future will be in jeopardy if local government and the Executive are unwilling to build on its achievements, as new opportunities funding for the project will cease in April 2004. Can the minister comment on that? Local authorities have, down the years, certainly played a praiseworthy part in providing Scotland's library service but, given the immense pressures on their budgets and the increasing demands from what are seen as more essential services, libraries are in danger of being squeezed out. Local authorities' spending on libraries, as a percentage of the total amount spent on public services, is declining. The debate is an opportunity to celebrate libraries, but it is also an opportunity to do something. I had hoped that there would be a major announcement today, but sadly that does not seem to be the case. I do not take offence at the SNP amendment not being accepted when the other ones are being accepted. I did not want the debate to consist simply of platitudes, because there are important issues to talk about. I urge members to support the SNP amendment. It is proffered in a constructive manner rather than a negative one. I move amendment S2M-594.2, to leave out from "and, in particular", to end and insert: "; calls on the Scottish Executive to secure funding for the People's Network beyond the cessation of New Opportunities Fund support in April 2004; recognises the important part that local authorities have played, and continue to play, in providing library services, and urges the Executive to enable local authorities to reverse the recent trend of a decline in the proportion of funds spent on libraries."

I apologise for the fact that I might have to leave before the end of the debate. I congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing this debate. There is little with which I disagree in his speech or his motion. I did not sign the motion  because I was a bit concerned about there being an open-ended moratorium. If we were talking in terms of a more time-limited suspension of applications, I would have had no difficulty in signing the motion. We all recognise the need for the development of renewable sources of energy and I welcome the work that has been done to ensure that Scotland becomes a market leader for wave, tidal and offshore wind energy generation and hydrogen fuel cells. That will mean jobs and investment. However, I also recognise that wind farms are currently the only commercially viable renewable technology and have an important contribution to make to the mix of Scotland's energy generation. In last week's debate on rural integration, it was said that the lack of any real forward planning and the absence of clear, concise and coherent guidelines for the approval of wind farm sites is causing anxiety in many Scottish communities and uncertainty for developers. That fact must be evident to ministers and I cannot understand their complacency on this issue. Public support for renewable energy is being seriously undermined by the processes in which we are currently engaged. We are getting a concentration of applications. I refer members to the green leaflets that many of us were given by campaigners today. All the cases that are listed in the leaflet are in my constituency. There are specific problems with the Sma' glen, which is marketed as a tourist route through Perthshire. I am aware that not all the applications will be approved, but until decisions are made on them, immense damage is being done to community confidence. I wish that the Executive would take that on board. I believe that the Scottish Executive must urgently publish guidance on the criteria that are being applied to wind farm developments. That will help developers and communities to take positive steps to promote and assist community-led renewable energy projects, including wind farm developments, and to engage with the Ministry of Defence, in particular regarding its objections to wind farm developments on or near MOD property. I see that the minister is holding a planning note in the air, but that is insufficient. If the Executive took that step, developers would be encouraged to recognise their responsibilities to local communities so that such communities could benefit from developments on their doorstep and would be reassured that they would not end up with a wind farm being built despite strong—in some cases overwhelming—local objections.

The minister should be a little fairer. The difficulty lies in how we are able to quantify any potential impacts to ensure that any decisions on the various options are the right ones. Indeed, I posed that very question to the minister.

At the outset, I should say that I feel as if I have had to learn an entirely new language with the change of Cabinet brief. We will see how well I manage in terms of the linguistics. In a debate in the chamber last week, we recognised that there are serious problems in rural Scotland that go beyond those experienced in the agriculture sector. It is important for us to remember that one sector of rural Scotland cannot be artificially isolated from any other. That is overtly recognised in "A Forward Strategy for Agriculture", although the better document that has been produced in the past couple of years is "Custodians of Change". The working group that produced "Custodians of Change" pointed out some of the current difficulties in paragraph 93, which says: "because agricultural policy is predominantly developed within the context of CAP and environmental policy through separate EU directives, the arguments for change, particularly at an institutional level, remain polarised." The CAP reforms allow us to begin to address that polarisation. I believe that we should welcome the opportunity to do so. However, we also have to recognise that net farm incomes overall are low and that in some sectors they are disastrously low. While keeping the opportunities of reform in mind, we should not lose sight of the fact that we are also dealing with the livelihoods of individuals, their families and those who work for them. I hope that all of us recognise that we need to allow older farmers to remove themselves gracefully from farming and encourage younger farmers to succeed them.

Unusually, George Lyon is a farmer who looks on the bright side. My  experience is that farmers in general are very pessimistic about the way in which things are proceeding. Over the past few years, I know that the value of the pound has been an issue. I see that members are shaking their heads, but farmers' expectations are often connected to the way that things are going and to concerns about their industry. I meet farmers. Indeed, I met some pig producers not that long ago who had grave concerns about what was happening in their industry. That feeling is widespread. If George Lyon has no problems, that is an issue for him. I do not think that his situation can be applied across the board. That said, the Scottish National Party broadly welcomes the reforms. Reform was necessary because, given the imminent expansion of the EU, a policy that continued to link subsidy to production was untenable. Equally, it had become clear that food production had become distorted by the method of subsidy. Production had ceased to be linked to the market or to any real form of demand. We should also not lose sight of the international perspective. The direct production subsidy link created barriers to producers in the developing world. Over the past year or so, that was one of the drivers for change. The big new change that is to be brought about by the reform is that subsidy is no longer to be linked to production. Instead, the two are to be—in the jargon—decoupled. The intention is that that will allow farmers the flexibility to respond to the demands of the market. If rigorous cross-compliance requirements are put in place, decoupling will also allow a number of improved standards to be delivered, not least through the single farm payment, which will produce a much simpler support system. I note that the NFU Scotland in particular is in favour of full decoupling. However, I am also aware that, now that the option of partial recoupling will be made available in a number of sectors, there has been a debate in Scotland about whether it should be taken up. I make no comment on the specifics of that on-going debate, although I will say that fears were expressed about the effect of full decoupling, particularly on the beef industry. I understand that the jury is still out in some quarters and no doubt submissions are still being received. That said, one or two questions occur to me. For example, has the minister attempted to quantify the knock-on effect of full decoupling, particularly in the beef sector? By that I mean the effect not just on farmers but on the processing sector, the supply trade, the machinery trade, the auction marts and so on. Will any measures be introduced to ameliorate those effects and, if so, what does the minister have in mind?  Perhaps just as seriously, I had presumed that the minister was aware of comments made by both Margaret Beckett and Ben Gill of the National Farmers Union in England that retaining the link—by which I mean partial recoupling—would not necessarily be the best way forward. The English NFU is also "vehemently against" any use of a national envelope. Indeed, I have some detail about the extent to which Margaret Beckett has gone in implying that there should be a uniform approach across the UK on the question of decoupling or partial recoupling. Will the minister assure us that, notwithstanding the fact that the UK is the member state, Scotland will be able to take a different course or will we be forced willy-nilly down the road of UK uniformity regardless of what is best for Scotland?

I am grateful for that assurance. However, the problem is that farmers and people in the industry are still uncertain about whether that will be the case. They are concerned about ensuring that there will be the possibility of partial recoupling—if that is considered good for Scotland—or a different national envelope. People in the industry are still addressing that issue and perhaps the minister still has some way to go to convince them of the assurance that he has given to the chamber.

Once again, George Lyon seems to think that this is very funny. He clearly needs to communicate a little more with some of the farmers who are communicating with me.

No. I have already allowed the member to intervene. I will now move on. The question of how the single farm payment should be calculated is also giving rise to different responses. Both options—either to continue with single farm payments based on the average amount received over the past three years or to move to area-based payments—have their attractions. Obviously, making the payments simply on the basis of what has gone before has the virtue of consistency and stability. It is also supported by the NFUS.

However, I do not think that we can totally ignore the potential in moving to an area-based payment. The redistributional effect of such a measure is not necessarily a negative and it would be helpful if at some stage the minister could quantify for us the effect of such a redistribution. I appreciate that he will not be able to do so today, but such information would be particularly important given the current state of farm incomes in Scotland. I turn briefly to modulation, which has been voluntary but will now be compulsory. There is an argument about the rate that is advisable for Scotland, but it seems clear that the rate will be higher than that set by the EU. Environmental organisations are keen that the rate should be as high as possible to allow for the maximum transfer of money into agri-environment schemes. I certainly agree that additional rates should apply. Although farmers are not necessarily opposed to that, there are serious questions about the number of farmers who can get into the schemes and the minister's ability to ensure the widest possible opportunity for take-up. Concerns have also been expressed that the money held back through modulation will end up benefiting farmers elsewhere. Indeed, I think that John Scott made that very point in his intervention. Such criticisms were well canvassed in "Custodians of Change", particularly in connection with the rural stewardship scheme. Perhaps the minister will comment on those concerns in his closing remarks. In any case, most of us will agree that an expansion of agri-environment projects should be pursued if they can be made to work well. As a result, I wonder whether the minister would consider reviewing all the available EU rural development measures in Scotland as proposed by WWF Scotland—

Presiding Officer, if it is not possible for us to take interventions and complete our speeches, it will be extremely difficult to progress debates in the chamber properly.

Well, I took interventions because I was told that I had eight minutes. Interventions take a lot longer—

I shall take the matter  up separately.

I have made a proposal regarding the WWF. The NFU is not happy with the way things are, and the WWF thinks that things could be better. If it is what—

Notwithstanding today's debate, the minister's remarks about the European Union exemplify the serious issues about democracy in the EU that have to be addressed. I can add to Mark Ruskell's opinion poll evidence about the public's attitude towards GM. He missed out the Consumers Association research in May 2002, which showed that less than one third of those who were surveyed found the idea of food that was produced from a genetically modified plant acceptable. We know that the public are not happy. Why? There is a huge leap in cause and effect from selective breeding to the sort of genetic modification that is being done in laboratories today and which has resulted in field tests at various sites throughout Scotland. The public do not believe that there are sufficient safeguards to ensure the future safety of our seed stocks and food supply. For example, few will have been surprised by the Scottish Executive's recent revelation that an investigation of the GM seed used in farm-scale trials has uncovered further evidence of the use of unauthorised GM material that was not covered by the release consent. That puts the minister's comments about regulation into perspective. How many times does that have to occur before the minister realises that the great theory about managing to contain GMOs is completely impossible? Of course, that was the thrust of the Green party's opening speech. Important as it is to push the boundaries of scientific knowledge and endeavour, we must acknowledge that when we are dealing with such sensitive and emotive issues as our ability to feed ourselves safely in the future, it is essential that the public can trust those involved. The Executive should know by now how the public feel about GM food. Some companies deserve praise for their stance. In 1998, Iceland became the first retailer to remove GM ingredients from its own-label products, and the Co-op has recently banned GM food and ingredients from its business. It is clear that those businesses are responding to the message from their customers.

I do not believe that the two issues are entirely separate. The Liberal Democrat position on GM food is clear, at least in the countryside if not when it comes to making decisions in the Executive. The two issues cannot be easily separated because there is no public confidence in the science. Simply taking a scientific view and pushing ahead will not help the situation. When we are dealing with the unknown, or even the uncertain, in an area that has the potential to affect every individual in the world, it is obvious that the precautionary principle must be applied. That is particularly true in the case of GM crops, in which once a certain line has been crossed there will be absolutely no going back. The fear is that that line is already being crossed deliberately to pre-empt consumer resistance. The GM issue is not just a question of whether the technologies involved are safe. It is about allowing choice and ensuring that consumers retain the ability to purchase non-GM foods if that is their wish. It is also about ensuring that farmers who want to continue producing non-GM crops are able to do so. Application of the precautionary principle must ensure that such producers are not disadvantaged. All the evidence suggests that proceeding with the technology will mean choice being removed. We know that Tony Blair is in favour of GM foods, but the Liberal Democrats' position is appalling. Their leader opposes GM crops. At their Scottish conference last year, in my constituency, they passed a motion calling for an immediate moratorium, but it was a Liberal Democrat minister in the Scottish Executive who approved the trials in the first place. The Parliament must assert its right to speak out on the issue and we have to accept the public's views. The risk of pollution is too high, the risk to our high-quality reputation is too great, and the future of Scottish agriculture depends on our being able to maintain the integrity of GM-free crop production. I move amendment S2M-560.3, to leave out from "calls" to end and insert: "recognises the massive public opposition to GM crops; believes that the precautionary principle should be applied to any further development of GM crops, whether on a trial basis or for commercial planting, and considers that the future of Scottish agriculture lies in maintaining the integrity of GM-free crop production."

I represent a constituency that has a considerable  rural interest, but I am also a member of the successor committee to the Rural Development Committee, which carried out the inquiry in the previous session. I commend the members of that committee for carrying out a detailed and in-depth inquiry. It is fair to say that there is enough material in the report for at least half a dozen debates in the chamber; we may well have them over the next few months. I wish in particular to associate myself with Sarah Boyack's comments, especially regarding affordable housing, which is an issue that bedevils most parts of rural Scotland, including Perthshire. It is a huge problem, which needs to be addressed in the near future. What Sarah had to say about that was very important. The subject matter of the report is very broad. I cannot hope in the course of this speech to cover all the committee's findings and the Executive's responses to them, so I will concentrate on three specific areas: alternative energy, transport and rural businesses. The recommendation with regard to fisheries would normally be dealt with by my colleague Richard Lochhead, who it was originally intended would be summing up for the Scottish National Party at the end of today's debate. However Richard has other—perhaps more immediately important—matters to deal with at present. I am sure that all members will join me in congratulating him and his wife and in welcoming the safe arrival of their baby boy. [ Applause. ] I think that he is taking only a week's paternity leave and will be back next week. I have long been a supporter of renewable energy and believe that Scotland has the potential to become a world leader in renewables, as well as the potential—if we get it right—eventually to produce all of our energy needs from renewable sources, and quickly to meet and surpass any emission targets that might be set. Investment in alternative energy technologies can have a direct benefit for the rural and national economy of Scotland, as well as a direct benefit for the rural, national and global environment. However, the appalling way in which the present development of wind farms is being handled represents a potential threat to the whole future of public confidence in the benefits of alternative energies. The committee makes three specific recommendations, all of which are reflected in motion S2M-487, which I have lodged with the chamber office. I have added some further recommendations and urge members to support the motion. Onshore wind energy is in effect the only new renewable source that is currently commercially viable—wave and tidal energy are still approximately eight to 12 years away from viability, as I understand it. Meanwhile, the energy companies are required by the Government to  reach renewable targets, and they fear financial sanctions if they fail. That is the background to the huge number of wind farm applications that are being made the length and breadth of Scotland. Not all of those applications will be successful. I am told that, at present, the success rate appears to be one in eight, although I am unable to verify that information, and other sources suggest that it could be lower. That is an issue that must be addressed. In truth, the developers themselves seem to be no more satisfied with the process than are local communities. Both sides want a clearer indication of designated areas where wind farms would be considered appropriate and a far more strategic approach to the whole business. More clarity is needed. To be frank, it is time for the Scottish Executive to heed the concerns that are being expressed, not just in the Rural Development Committee's report but across the board by developers and communities alike, and to provide a more transparent and flexible process than is available at present. The Committee recommends the implementation of "a strategy on the location of renewable energy generation structures"; that the Executive and local authorities work together to identify specific "potential development zones ... in local structure and development plans", and "that local communities should have access to advice on proposed alternative energy developments independent of that of the proposal's developers. This should include the provision of advice on setting up of ... community funds". I support all those recommendations and would go further in recommending that the Executive actively promote and assist community-led renewable energy projects. That is what made wind power development in Denmark easier for communities to take on board and what made it the huge success that it is today. Those recommendations were published in January 2003. Since then, our postbags have started to bulge with letters from constituents about wind farms. If the Executive had acted on the advice of the committee at the time, it would have gone a long way to addressing many of the concerns that exercise so many of my constituents and, no doubt, people the length and breadth of the country. I would like to refer briefly to the Scottish Executive's response to the report. Its reaction was to say that "the issue of such guidance would not be a productive step at this time."  I have to say that I cannot begin to imagine anything less productive than the situation that we have at present. The response continues: "The Executive believes that there are dangers in such an approach; these include concentrating developments within particular areas". Well, developments are being concentrated within particular areas under the present system, and the whole issue must be addressed if we are not entirely to lose public confidence and public support for renewable energy in the future. I turn now to transport, which is another huge preoccupation of mine. I am not surprised that transport was found to be of great concern in every area that the committee visited. People in towns and cities may have complaints about the way in which public transport in their areas operates, but they pretty much take it for granted that it will be there. People in rural areas have no such security, and I cannot begin to describe the effect that that has. Nor should it be assumed that everyone in rural areas has a car. In my constituency, there are some wards where more than 50 per cent of households are without a car, while in others the figure is less than 10 per cent. In Crieff, where I live and which is 20 miles west of Perth, there are two council wards—one where nearly one household in three has no car and another where the figure is almost one in four. I do my best to travel around my constituency using public transport as much as possible, so I know how hard it is to do so. For people to try to commute daily by public transport must be almost impossible. We need a rural public transport system that meets the needs of people who have no access to a car and which also encourages those who are dependent on their cars to leave them at home. I am extremely supportive of campaigns by a number of communities in my constituency—mirrored, I suspect, in other constituencies—to open or re-open local train stations. That is something that the Executive really needs to get behind. When it comes to rural businesses, improved transport links would be a huge boost to the rural economy: it needs a huge boost. Walking the main streets of towns and villages in Perthshire and elsewhere brings that home with a vengeance. I see businesses closing down, "To Let" and "For Sale" signs sprouting everywhere and empty shops in the high streets of villages and rural towns. The committee has recommended that the Executive "examine a rural rates relief scheme for rural businesses",  as a short-term measure. In the longer term, it recommends "a review of the valuation system for assessing rural business premises." Rural businesses provide the jobs and services that keep rural communities alive. They must be supported and encouraged and the Executive must remember that the term "rural business" covers far more than simply a village shop, a petrol station or a hotel. Those forms of enterprise are extremely valuable, but the rural economy needs a much broader base than that, and it does not currently have such a base. In its response to those and to many of the committee's other recommendations, the Executive tries to claim that it is, in some way, already doing what the committee is calling for. The members of the committee were not stupid; they were taking evidence from people who said, "These are the problems we are currently experiencing." Nor were the people stupid who gave the believable evidence that led to those recommendations' being made. In many instances, the committee did not believe that what was being done was happening well enough, fast enough or widely enough. I am confident that the Parliament will indeed pass the resolution noting the recommendations that are contained in the then Rural Development Committee's report. More to the point, I want to see the Executive actually taking the recommendations on board and making some of the changes that rural communities so badly need.

Will the minister detail the socioeconomic criteria that are used in the Executive's job dispersal programme? Will he explain why my constituency, which has lower-than-average wage rates, did not make the list for VisitScotland? Will he indicate whether the overall strategy will contain provisions for smaller work units being dispersed to smaller towns?

The debate feels curiously flat, which surprises me because I thought that there might be a little more enthusiasm for what has finally happened after 60 years. I say to Colin Fox that I hope that we all recognise culture's economic importance to Scotland. I do not believe that there is anyone in the chamber who is not perfectly well aware of the vital contribution that is made the length and breadth of Scotland—and to the rest of the world—by all parts of our arts and culture. If Jamie McGrigor's speech was anything by which to judge, the Tories are already drafting their condemnatory press releases for the first modern and innovative piece to be staged by the national theatre of Scotland. His speech seemed to be a rather bizarre contribution to what I had hoped was going to be a slightly more enthusiastic debate. The Scottish National Party has long supported the establishment of a national theatre for Scotland. The national theatre debate seemed to start at about the same time as the SNP came into being. That may not be a coincidence because I know that long-gone nationalists—I am not talking about Mike Russell—were enthusiastic proponents of a national theatre and were involved in the debate all the way along. Scotland has a wealth of theatrical talent. A national theatre will be a wonderful outlet for the expression of our national culture and it will be able to showcase our theatrical talent. I hope that the national theatre will tour abroad. We should consider that point. Liz Lochhead said: "If we are a nation and not just a region, we don't have to apologise for it, it is something to celebrate ... And the  national theatre is something to celebrate." It is a pity that, like almost every sector in Scottish life, theatre has suffered from Scotland's curse—emigration—with the loss of some of our brightest and best in the past few years. I hope that the establishment of the national theatre will begin to reverse that. The national theatre project has the potential to be of great benefit to Scotland and I hope that it will acknowledge the importance of encouraging young people in the arts. It can be a showcase for Scottish talent young and old, established and emerging, so I hope that there are plans to ensure that that is exactly what happens. It is also extremely important that the national theatre encourage interface with the traditional arts and all the languages of Scotland. I am encouraged that the theatre is to be a commissioning body and that it will tour the country. I know that a large part of the debate in the past has centred on whether we should have a theatre in the sense of a purpose-built building with a chiselled granite thing over the top that says "The National Theatre for Scotland". That it is a commissioning theatre rather than one that is rooted in bricks and mortar should be a constant reminder that theatre can be staged anywhere. I will soon attend an open-air event at the Hermitage in Dunkeld called "The Enchanted Forest", which I believe may already be sold out. The success of the piece, which has been staged before—if staged is the right word for something that the audience moves through, rather than sits and watches—is absolute proof, if any were needed, that there is an audience for innovation in Scotland if we take it to them. Innovation is what will be important about the national theatre that we are setting in train for Scotland. Restagings of the classics of Scottish and world theatre have a place, but our national theatre must foster national creativity and produce work that can be taken to the smallest village hall in the land as well as to the larger venues, or that can be staged under the trees, if that is appropriate. I hope that there will be a good balance between old and new work, and I look forward to seeing some of that new work. It is regrettable that it has taken us this long to get to this stage. As tempting as it is to blame the Government it can, in truth, hardly be taken to task for the final four years' wait, given that there was a 60-year wait in total. I look forward to future debates with the new Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport—this is the first that we have had, I think. I know that his enthusiasm for the arts, although it matches mine, might not completely overlap with my interests. I hope therefore that, in future, our debates will be a bit more generally enthusiastic.  Part of getting the project right is to ensure that financial support does not ignore or, worse, exacerbate the serious problems that face regional theatre throughout Scotland. Funding levels for theatre in Scotland have been falling behind those in England. In December 2002, The Scotsman reported that the average grant to a grade 1 theatre in England and Wales was £1.35 million, compared to an average of £792,100 for Scotland's two leading theatres, but I know that the minister has genuine concerns about regional theatre. Smaller theatres, such as Perth Theatre in my constituency, get less than £300,000 annually, which compares with an average of between £441,254 and £585,749 for equivalents in England. I notice that the minister did not include Perth Theatre in his list of regional theatres. I hope that he will keep it in mind that it is an important small theatre in Scotland. Perhaps I can invite him to visit it some day. I know that problems in the funding of regional theatre have already led to the diversion of £1 million that was earmarked for the national theatre and I know that the minister is concerned about regional theatre. I hope that we do not end up robbing Peter to pay Paul, because that would be a great shame. Funding in future must be secure, but I have some concern about the funding plans. I am pleased that £7.5 million has been found for the next two years from the end-year flexibility funds, but I know that that is not a source of finance that can be guaranteed in future. The national theatre must not be expected to depend on whatever the Minister for Finance and Public Services can come up with after his annual rummage around in the back of the Executive sofa, especially as I have considerably less confidence in the commitment of the Minister for Finance and Public Services to the arts and culture than I have in the commitment of the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport. There is an argument that suggests that we cannot aspire to have decent culture as well as, for example, free personal care for the elderly. That must be quite wrong. Iain Reekie, head of drama and performance at Queen Margaret University College in Edinburgh, said that he regarded that argument as "daft". I note that Denmark and Finland allocate 16 times as much public money to their theatres as Scotland does to its theatres. I hope that we start to consider a level of funding that begins to approach what is provided in other parts of the world. I will give the final word to Brian Cox, that well-known Scottish thespian, who was quoted in The Scotsman on 21 December 2002. He said: "You have got to be able to nourish your own talent, acknowledge the extraordinary work people have done and not to have a hand-to-mouth situation ... we have been under the yoke of an English Parliament for 300 years"—  I stress that these are not my words; I am quoting somebody else— "and I think we have to get out of this negative mentality. We have had discussion about a national theatre for at least ten years." Enough said. I commend what is being done, and I commend the decisions that have been taken by the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport. I look forward to many more such decisions in the future.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-215)

I see that the First Minister is trying to deploy some of his allegedly legendary charm. This morning, the chief inspector of constabulary for Scotland, Sir Roy Cameron, was asked whether he could see custody services being owned and operated in the same way as private prisons. He replied in the affirmative. Will the First Minister take this opportunity to say that the privatisation of police custodial services is not, and will not become, the policy of his Government?

I am glad that the First Minister is saying that that is "not currently the policy". I also asked him whether he would rule it out for the future. Contracting out police custody services means contracting out what we in the real world call police stations. That was explicitly dealt with during the interview with the chief inspector this morning, so the First Minister must today rule out for any time in the future the privatisation of Scotland's police stations.

The difficulty for the First Minister is that the chief inspector of constabulary was asked explicitly about the privatisation of custody services this morning, and replied in the affirmative. If the First Minister's denials are correct, I ask him to explain why the Deputy Minister for Justice is on the record this morning as welcoming the comments made by Sir Roy Cameron. He said that Sir Roy's comments "are very much in tune with what we are talking about." Either the First Minister is repudiating the Deputy Minister for Justice—which I would gladly invite the First Minister to do—or he is repudiating HM chief inspector of constabulary for Scotland.

Speak for your own party.

I apologise to members in advance, as I will have to leave at 5.45, which might be before the end of the debate. I congratulate Sylvia Jackson on securing the debate. In our respective current circumstances, she will understand the constraints that restricted mobility places on one's ability to get from A to B in reasonable time. Like Sylvia Jackson, I welcome SEPA's publication of the Scottish European pollutant emission register. It may or may not be SEPA's role to act as some sort of bureaucratic Erin Brockovich but, as the motion states, it is an important aspect of access to information that all communities have a right to know about chemical emissions in their environment. It is extraordinary that we have come so late to absolute recognition of that right and that we still have communities that are struggling to find out what the position in their area is. However, a little caution must be exercised in responding to the publication of the register's data. SEPA makes it clear that the register is purely a factual reporting of data as required by European legislation and that inclusion in the register does not imply that companies have breached their limits for emissions. The very nature of their work is bound to put some industries higher on any register than other industries and that will always be the case. We must guard against regarding the register data as some sort of polluters' league table—I worry greatly that the media will jump to that conclusion. Instead, we must learn to use it as an information baseline for ensuring that emission levels are reduced. Sylvia Jackson made pertinent comments about other, in particular comparative, information that might be useful. That is a way of commending best practice and sharing expertise. I suggest that the Executive, either through the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development or the minister who is responsible for external relations, could have a word with the people who are responsible for the European Commission's web page on the European pollutant emission register, which has links to EPER information pages in member states. The link to the UK EPER home page, which is marked with a union flag, is a link to the site of the Environment Agency, which is responsible for England and Wales. The fact that there is no obvious opportunity to get from there to SEPA's  information on the subject is an important internet access issue. The present situation is far from helpful for individuals, communities or companies that seek information about pollutant emissions in Scotland. At best, the failure to realise that there are two different registers and set-ups in the United Kingdom represents ineptitude on the part of those who compile the website; whatever the reason for it, the relevant web page needs to be corrected. I commend Sylvia Jackson's motion and I look forward to hearing the minister's remarks at the end of the debate, if I am here.

I thank the minister for his remarks. The difficulty is that the proposals that are apparently contained within the end-to-end review would effectively remove something like a third of the current work that is pledged to DARA. If that is  removed from DARA as a whole, there is an undoubted threat to jobs throughout DARA; that is obviously why the Welsh are campaigning so strongly, because they have the lion's share of the jobs. If the end-to-end review is implemented, the likes of Almondbank may fall off the end of the table. That is why I want the minister to promise a visible and vocal campaign to defend jobs there. We have not really had that so far.

As long as we are in the UK and part of the UK structure, Scotland should get some of the economic benefit from the share of our taxes that go to defence spending. That is what the debate is about.

The text of the motion makes it clear why I requested the debate. The Defence Aviation Repair Agency at Almondbank is one of the most important employers in my constituency. Indeed, it also employs people from neighbouring constituencies, so the concern and interest about it go rather wider than just Perthshire. DARA Almondbank is the only DARA operation in Scotland, so it is important not just to Perthshire but to Scotland as a whole. For those who are less than familiar with DARA, I should make it clear that it maintains, repairs and overhauls aircraft, including helicopters, for the Ministry of Defence. There are four DARA sites in the UK—St Athan in south Wales, Sealand in north Wales, Fleetlands in Portsmouth and of course Almondbank. DARA came into being in 1999, but the Almondbank plant had already been in existence under another guise for many years. DARA as a whole is permitted to contract for non-MOD work and it does so successfully, including at Almondbank. There are a number of operational units in DARA and the components unit is based at Almondbank and services rotary-wing, hydraulic, pneumatic and fuel components along with the secondary power systems of fixed-wing aircraft and various winch equipment. Members will understand from that that the work that is carried out is specialised and technical. DARA Almondbank employs a work force of 325 on a permanent basis and about 25 others come in on a less permanent basis. Only last month, the Minister of State for the Armed Forces was at  Almondbank for the official opening of the new hydraulic test facility. That £5 million investment was supposed to guarantee the future of the plant and its employees, but the threat remains. DARA Almondbank's local economic impact cannot be over-emphasised. It is one of the largest employers in my constituency and the nature of its work makes it something of a rarity in the area, if not in Scotland as a whole. It is a measure of the local concern about the current situation that Perth and Kinross Council had Mackay Consultants prepare a report on the economic impact of closing DARA Almondbank. I sent a copy of the report to the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning; I hope that he has read it and therefore understands why there is such consternation at the current threat. The loss of DARA Almondbank would lead to a reduction of £28.8 million in the annual economic output of Perth and Kinross. The nature of the skills involved means that those whose jobs disappeared would be highly unlikely to find comparable work locally. Local earnings would be reduced significantly, and earnings in Perth and Kinross are already significantly lower than in the rest of Scotland and the UK. There are also 20 apprentices at Almondbank on engineering apprenticeships, which are in decline in Scotland, so that would be another loss for Perthshire and Scotland as a whole. It goes without saying that Perth College would suffer if those apprentice places were lost. Indeed, whole courses would be lost from that college. When DARA was set up in 1999 as a public-private partnership, its future was, in effect, guaranteed by project red dragon, which would be based at St Athan in Wales and include the building of the aerospace industry park at St Athan and a super hangar with 47 bays to allow work on military fast jets. It was hoped that, once underpinned by the MOD contracts, civil aviation companies and other aviation businesses would use the services at St Athan. Without red dragon, the future for DARA would be very dodgy indeed, and the future of the site at Almondbank in my constituency is bound up with the future of the agency as a whole. With that background, it should be clear why the BBC report on 18 July was greeted with such concern in all communities where DARA has a presence. The BBC reported that the MOD, in a secret review, was considering dropping the project and repairing planes at existing Royal Air Force bases. In Perthshire, the reaction was swift. Meetings took place, which included representatives of the relevant trade unions, Perth College, Perthshire Chamber of Commerce, Scottish Enterprise Tayside, the Westminster MP  Annabelle Ewing, council officials, councillors and me. It was clear that the threat was perceived to be real and that the response had to match that threat. That is why Perth and Kinross Council commissioned the Mackay report and why I wrote to the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning urging him to recognise the dire consequences of closure. I also invited him to join the local cross-party, cross-agency campaign to persuade the Westminster Government to reject the recommendations of the end-to-end review. In Wales, too, the response was swift, but there local campaigners were joined by the Administration in the National Assembly for Wales. Assembly members and MPs of all parties and the Wales Office were already working together to ensure the continuation of the DARA presence weeks before the minister even replied to my call for his support in Scotland. Unfortunately, when the response finally came, it did not inspire confidence that we were going to see the sort of urgency and combined determination that we have seen in Wales. The minister said in his reply that the Scottish Executive would do all that it could, but his plan of action seemed to involve little more than speaking to Adam Ingram. I believe that Almondbank needs a great deal more than that. It is not enough to be told that DARA will be saved. That does not mean that Almondbank will be saved. It is not enough to be told that Almondbank will not be closed. That does not mean that jobs will not be lost. Tonight, I am looking for an assurance that not only will the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and his department acknowledge the serious impact on Perthshire if jobs are lost at Almondbank—and God forbid that it should close—but he will meet the local campaign and make the strongest possible representations to the MOD and the UK Cabinet that the jobs at DARA Almondbank must be retained for Perthshire and for Scotland. I know that because the jobs are defence jobs this matter principally is in the hands of a Westminster department that is responsible for reserved matters, but in Wales that has not been seen as a barrier to mounting the strongest possible campaign to prevent any threat to DARA jobs that are based in Wales. We need exactly the same expressions of combined support and strong campaigning in Scotland and for Scotland, to ensure that DARA Almondbank does not fall through the net when the row over DARA ends.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We have spent the past 40 minutes dealing with the order with a degree of humour, if not outright levity, but I hope that you will reflect on the experience of the past 40 minutes and communicate to the powers that be the concern that allocating that amount of time to something that clearly could have been dealt with in a fraction of the time is a misuse of parliamentary time, and ought not to be encouraged.

This is his specialist subject.

It is a great pity that we were not able to consolidate this debate with the one that we had this morning. It appears to be about little more than dotting the i's and crossing the t's of the Water Industry  (Scotland) Act 2002. As far as I can see from the Executive note, the order does exactly what it says on the tin. First, it amends a number of bits and pieces of legislation that had referred to the former geographical area-based water and sewerage authorities, so that they now refer to Scottish Water. Ho-hum. Secondly, as the minister so eloquently explained, it modifies the Acquisition of Land (Authorisation Procedure) (Scotland) Act 1947; in other words, it deals with compulsory purchase. When I first looked at the order, I thought that it could surely have been dealt with by the Subordinate Legislation Committee. Did the committee spot something that I had missed? One does get a bit paranoid in this Parliament. I had a look at the Subordinate Legislation Committee's first report of the session and, sure enough, there in a long list of other Scottish statutory instruments and draft SSIs was the draft Water Industry (Scotland) Act 2002 (Consequential Provisions) Order 2003. However, the very head of the report states:  "At its meeting on 17th June the Committee determined that the attention of the Parliament need not be drawn to the instruments listed in this report." I therefore ask why the order is being brought to our attention in this debate when the instrument is perhaps more a "Whoops! We missed that bit" order that simply fixes an omission in the act which Scottish Water needs to have in place to allow it to proceed with works at Mugdock reservoir. Lest anyone think that my brilliant prescience is such that I was able to discern all that from the statutory instrument, I must say that that is not made clear in the order's explanatory notes. I wish that the matter had been brought to the attention of the Subordinate Legislation Committee—surely the Executive was not trying to hide its incompetence under a bushel—but I had to rely on Des McNulty, who enlightened me in the tea room this morning as to what was actually behind the order. Perhaps I am being just a little cynical—unlike me, I know—but I cannot help noticing that an extra half hour had to be shoe-horned into the start of this afternoon's business so that we could hear the First Minister's statement on the remit of the inquiry into the Holyrood building project. It is a pity that that debate had to be curtailed while this piece of bureaucratic tinkering has been allocated half as much time again. Here we are fixing an Executive oversight when we should be focusing on an issue on which the public want to see a debate and for which members would be queuing up to speak. Such a debate very much needs to be carried out in the public sight. The Subordinate Legislation Committee's report gave a long list of SSIs and draft SSIs. I sincerely  hope that this afternoon's proceedings are not a foretaste of what is to come, and that each and every one of those instruments will not need to be brought before the Parliament, clogging up business and taking up time that could be better spent.

I expected to begin my remarks with the comment that surely we all agree that the present situation cannot be allowed to continue without serious adjustment or intervention, but that was before I read the Executive amendment. Is the minister saying, despite his crocodile tears, that he is perfectly content that the present situation is not only tenable, but desirable, which is the clear implication of the Executive amendment? To be frank, the staggering complacency of that attitude beggars belief. The impact of the charges on Scottish businesses is absolutely dire and it is felt no matter how big or small the business is. The figures make depressing reading and show the effect on every high street, industrial estate and large manufacturing enterprise in every part of Scotland. We have heard reference to some of the price hikes that business must endure. Small businesses that use hardly any water are faced with 100 per cent rises—for example, Mr Barnes's Interproducts in my constituency has been faced with such rises from one year to the next—and bigger businesses are equally hard hit by price rises. Of course, there are also the invidious comparisons with water rates south of the border. Does the Executive just not care? That is the implication of what the minister said. Comparisons with other water rates illustrate starkly the competitive disadvantage of Scottish businesses when compared with similar businesses south of the border. The disadvantage seems to be most marked in the commercial and retail sectors, but businesses such as newsagents and restaurants also pay far more. Interestingly, the figures show that the one sector in which the Scottish average charge is lower than that in England and Wales is the brewery sector. That leads one to the conclusion that one thing that Scottish Water can do well is to organise the proverbial in a brewery. The difficulty is that people draw the conclusion that that might be the only thing that Scottish Water can do well.  That perception might be a little unfair, because even the critics accept that the problem is not only for Scottish Water to resolve. Bill Anderson of the Forum of Private Business recognised the need for Scottish Executive transparency when he said: "Everybody is blaming everybody else. The debt charges around Scottish Water's neck is a huge issue but if they had come to consumers and said we're going to have to increase water charges to pay for urgent work on the infrastructure, we might have understood. But to impose unfair extra burdens on those most unlikely to be able to pay by stealth shows a total disregard for open government." I do not want to absolve Scottish Water of all responsibility for the current situation. The truth is that we cannot continue with the existing levels of customer dissatisfaction, from both domestic and non-domestic customers, for much longer. Businesses do not know where to turn for redress, which leads them to compare their water usage with domestic usage. The business in my constituency that I mentioned is an example of that—its charges have increased from £223.59 to £451.93, but if the owner's small office were a flat, it would be in the lowest council tax band and he would pay around £210 per annum. He pays way more than twice that. It is understandable that businesses should react by comparing their charges with domestic charges, but the reaction ignores the likelihood of future price rises in the domestic sector, to which I will refer shortly. However, whether customers are domestic or business, the situation highlights the lack of a clear customer champion in the present set-up. Two years down the line, we are beginning to see the drawbacks of having a water quality regulator who is responsible for quality and enforcement but whose hands are tied because financial decisions are taken by the water industry commissioner. Perhaps the time has come to consider the amalgamation of those two posts with a beefed-up role that includes customer advocacy. That post would provide a better process for Scottish Water and for customers. I mentioned the potential for rises in domestic charges. My concern arises out of the Scottish Executive's published spending figures for the next few years. I listened to the minister's detailed defence of the Executive's spending plans. In 2002-03, spending was planned at £285 million; in the present year, it is to be £256 million; but for 2005-06, it is to fall to £207 million. Those plans beg the question how Scottish Water will make up the difference. Things are bad now, but it looks like they will only get worse. Will the minister guarantee that the difference will not be made up by a further increase in domestic water rates, which, at the moment, definitely appears to be on the cards? The Executive cannot just sit and do nothing in  the face of that issue. We urgently require a full and detailed review of the financial arrangements for Scottish Water with the remit of affording Scottish Water greater financial flexibility.

I am in my last minute and I have two more paragraphs of my speech, during which I will deal in part with the minister's point—my colleagues will also deal with it. Through legislation in the coming year, the Executive will allow local authorities to decide for themselves on an affordable and prudent level of borrowing for their financial circumstances. Surely that same flexibility could be granted to Scottish Water, so that it could make its own decisions. Is that even under consideration? If such a move is being considered for local authorities, are we going to consider it for Scottish Water? Scottish Water needs to be released from the constraints of Executive diktat, and the Executive itself is constrained by Treasury rules. I hope that the future funding of Scottish Water comes about not through privatisation, which is what I suspect the Tories—and perhaps Labour too—really want, but through a not-for-profit trust: a Scottish public services trust. Such a trust could serve as a means of levering in the investment that we all believe to be necessary. That does not mean a change in ownership, but a change in the way in which investment is levered into the sector. Ultimately, the solution to the high charges that are being faced by business is a sensible way forward for Scottish Water that involves precisely that. I move amendment S2M-162.4, to leave out from "acknowledges" to end and insert: "believes that the offices of the Water Industry Commissioner for Scotland and the Water Quality Regulator should be amalgamated to create a tough new champion on behalf of customers; further believes that a full and detailed review of the financial control arrangements for Scottish Water requires to be undertaken as a matter of urgency with a view to affording Scottish Water greater financial flexibility, and calls on the Scottish Executive to consider a not-for-profit trust to provide an appropriate vehicle for investment which would allow Scottish Water to be free of artificial constraints and keep charges under control."

We agree with the Executive's commitment to put in place an integrated transport system. The difficulty is that our public transport networks are still very far from being integrated, reliable or efficient. Many people's experience is of disintegrated, unreliable and inefficient public transport. For an example of the absurdity of the current system, I refer Brian Monteith to Perth railway station. Companies involved in activities in and around the station include ScotRail, Traincare, Network Rail, Spacia, Network Rail train operating company estates—which may or may not be about to go into Spacia—First Engineering and Serco. At a very basic level, that means that it is impossible to get the pigeon mess cleaned up or a broken window fixed because no one knows for sure whose responsibility it is and no one wants to take responsibility. How on earth does that reality mesh with either Brian Monteith's vision of a wonderfully privatised service or with the promises that the Executive makes? The truth is that it does not.

With respect, the reality of the experience was quite the opposite. Another disincentive is the timetable mishmash. During the debate on the Executive's programme for government, I highlighted the apparent impossibility of achieving a truly integrated transport system when the major operators are prepared to assert openly that they take no account of one another's timetables when drawing up their own. That means that buses do not feed into railways in any sensible way, a fact that extends total journey times considerably. The timetable mishmash is a major barrier to use of the system and, as Michael McMahon said, it also impacts directly on economic development. Despite the Executive's commitment in the partnership agreement document to timetable integration, I am still waiting for a clear indication of how that is to be delivered in reality. Perhaps the minister will enlighten us on the matter before the end of business today. Of course, transport is one of those policy areas for which some responsibility has been devolved  to the Scottish Parliament and some has been reserved to Westminster. If the Executive parties will allow me to give them the benefit of the doubt, I think that that might be where the problem lies. Scotland's transport network needs a strategic overview and a decent level of investment, neither of which can be provided properly by the Executive with the current powers of the Scottish Parliament. The reality is that the United Kingdom invests less than the European Union average of its gross domestic product in transport infrastructure. The UK is the worst in the whole of the EU in respect of support for public transport. That means that the UK has among the highest public transport fares in the EU, with a typical trip in the UK costing 15 per cent more than in Germany, 60 per cent more than in France and nearly three times as much as in the Netherlands. That is hardly indicative of a move towards a sustainable transport system. No wonder the latest statistics show that bus use fell by a quarter in the preceding decade and that rail numbers are down by 2.4 million on the previous year. Meanwhile, year on year, there were 3 per cent more cars on the roads. Although the commitments that the Executive has made are all welcome, the vast majority of them are urban based. That is a concern for those who live in the vast rural areas of Scotland. There are many, mostly rural, communities in Scotland that actively seek the reopening of passenger railway stations. Indeed, the Highland Rail Partnership is undertaking an appraisal of four such stations in my constituency, only one of which relates to a line with a current service. I assure the minister that he can look forward to further communications on the subject from me. It will be a major challenge for the Executive to respond to that demand, because any response will have to involve new track. I do not see where the investment for new track in the rural part of Scotland will come from, yet that is where it is needed most. In the face of demand, we continue to read about the threat of wholesale cutbacks in rural Scottish rail services. The Executive must commit to opposing such cutbacks at every opportunity, even when the cuts emanate from the Department for Transport down south. To be frank, to do anything else would make a mockery of any commitment to increase the use of public transport and to decrease the reliance on cars.

We can characterise the Tory position in this debate as follows: we are in, we do not like it, we want out, but we do not want to say that. That is the extent of the Tories' contribution.

That is just what I said. Murdo Fraser is obviously waiting for Iain Duncan Smith to tell him that it is okay to say that Britain should pull out of the EU. That is the difficulty that Conservative members face. Lib Dems and Labour members conveniently ignore all the divisions within and between their parties and end up unutterably confused in a debate such as this, as evidenced by the speech that we heard from George Lyon. Few subjects that are debated in this chamber better highlight the stark difference in vision and ambition that exists between members of other parties and members of the Scottish National Party. Some woeful speeches were made this morning.

There would be some debate about the figures on which the member is basing her argument. I would be happy to engage in a separate debate about those figures, but that cannot be done in this context because the member is putting forward a position that is arguable. A number of the speeches that members made can only be fairly characterised as covering up the fact that they do not want to be clear about their position or do not know clearly what their position is. Maureen Macmillan's was one such speech. I suspect that the entire speech was intended to cover up the fact that she does not know what side of the Labour debate she is on. I am sorry that Margo MacDonald has left the chamber, because although she spent six minutes and 43 seconds on her speech I am still none the wiser as to her position on Europe. I must say the same about Jeremy Purvis's speech.  The SNP, in contrast, would have Scotland's voice heard at the centre of Europe. Our position is clear. The Executive parties and the Conservatives are happy to have Scotland's voice muffled and distorted by diverting our representation through Westminster—the same Government that has consistently failed to defend Scotland's interests. Perhaps the big difference between our position and that of the other parties is that we want to participate in the development of the European Union rather than being stuck—mentally as well as geographically—at the periphery, half wishing that we were Americans, which is the problem underlying current Labour party policy on Europe. We look forward to our country being at the heart of European progress. We welcome the enlargement of the EU and the development of its constitution but we want to be directly involved in the process. In fact, the SNP's Neil MacCormick, as a substitute member of the European convention, is the only democratically elected representative of Scotland involved with that body, which demonstrates our commitment to its future. Despite the fact that the First Minister is chair of the group for European regions with legislative power—REGLEG—and despite the fact that 80 per cent of devolved Scottish functions are covered in some way by EU competence, the Executive has done little to promote Scottish interests, involvement or influence and has failed to get a place in the European convention. From what Tavish Scott said, we can see that he believes that the Scottish Parliament's role is simply to implement decisions made elsewhere by other people. Effectively, that accords second-class status to Scotland. We could not more fundamentally disagree with that view. The European convention and the development of a European constitution will give the EU a legal personality that will allow it for the first time to sign treaties and sit on international bodies. The usual suspects have, of course, started throwing their rattles out of their prams about that, portraying it as the loss of our identity—usually our British identity, whatever that is—and an erosion of the sovereignty of the member states. In fact, nothing could be further from the truth. The draft EU constitution enshrines the principle of conferral and entrenches the principle of subsidiarity. That means that the EU can exercise only those powers conferred on it by the member states and that it will act only if a policy cannot be implemented at national, regional or local level. Far from being eroded, the powers of national Parliaments will be entrenched. The only pity is that this Parliament is not on that list.

It should come as a surprise to no one that there are things that the SNP, like every other political party, disagrees with over Europe. We all have our debates about which is the best way forward and the areas in which we should regain or hold on to competence. There is no difference between the SNP and any other party in that all our members have views about specific issues. However, we are saying that Scotland should have the ability to debate those issues at the centre and should not sit on the sidelines, which is what everyone else in this chamber thinks is appropriate. Increased powers for the European Parliament across more than 30 policy areas will increase the amount of democratic input in the EU's decision-making processes. However, as with any major development of this nature, if we are not involved in making the rules, we are in danger of losing out. With Scotland not having a direct say in the European constitution, there is a danger that some serious issues of importance to Scotland will be omitted, overlooked or traded away. That is the point that Brian Monteith is making.

Irene Oldfather has been up and down all morning like a jack-in-the-box. Someone really should put a lid on her. The extremely important issue of exclusive competence on the common fisheries policy, which, as other members have said, the First Minister told John Swinney that he had asked the UK Government to oppose, would exacerbate the current ridiculous situation that results in land-locked member states of the EU having more say than this chamber has over the future of Scotland's fishing industry. Elliot Morley, the UK fisheries minister, says that he knows nothing about the Scottish Executive's objections or concerns. There is something fishy here and I can assure the chamber that we have not heard the last of this one. I am surprised, given the constituency that he represents, that Tavish Scott's view of the fishing industry is that everything is just fine and dandy and that fishing communities have scored great victories. Frankly, that is Alice in wonderland territory and I am surprised to hear that from him. The SNP has consistently argued that major constitutional changes should be put to the people in a referendum for approval. In Scotland, the people are sovereign—not the Crown or the Parliament. Therefore, it is the Scottish people's sovereign rights that are being pooled with those  of other member states. That cannot and should not be done without the Scottish people's explicit and specific endorsement. On the euro, Britain and Scotland are, again, being left at the starting post because of our reluctance to join with others. The SNP has put the case that the five tests should be considered individually for each of the nations and regions within the UK. That is because Scotland has distinctive economic conditions that require an equally distinctive assessment of the five tests. When we talk comparatively about the economy and growth rates throughout Europe in European debates, it is significant that the Tories choose to ignore the virtually zero growth rate of the Scottish economy. An independent Scotland would benefit from being in the euro zone. There would be lower interest rates, a stable exchange rate, control of tax—which we do not have at the moment—and control of borrowing. Scotland is being hamstrung by the application of five highly political and vague tests that are meaningless in the context of the Scottish economy and where it needs to go. A lot is happening out there in the big wide world and Scotland needs to grow up, get out there and be part of it. We are not a region; we are a nation and we need the full economic powers of independence to be able to compete properly in Europe and have the competitive edge that our economy needs to survive and thrive. We are not too wee or poor and, despite some of the evidence to the contrary that is offered up frequently from members in other parts of the chamber, we are not too stupid. Small countries in Europe are successful. An independent Scotland would be following a model that is becoming the norm within the EU. However, all the small countries that are coming in would no doubt be characterised by Tavish Scott as inward looking and living in the past. That would be news to Latvia, Lithuania, Slovenia, Estonia, Slovakia and all the rest. The economies of small EU countries, which are our closest economic competitors, have grown at five times the rate of growth in Scotland. That is the model that the SNP wants Scotland to follow. All the small countries to which I referred have a guaranteed seat at the top table, permanent representation in the Council of Ministers and the right to nominate a commissioner. They also have, per head, considerably more members in the European Parliament than Scotland has. Colleagues of many of the members opposite are extremely exercised by the Boundary Commission for Scotland review that is slashing the number of Westminster parliamentary seats in Scotland to ensure a so-called fairer reflection of our per capita entitlement within the UK. However, I would happily get rid of the lot and take instead our fair  entitlement to representation within Europe. The time has come to cut the connection with Westminster—which is a ball and chain, not an umbilical cord—and speak for ourselves in Europe. It is time for independence.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Is it proper for us to be debating when there is an empty Executive front bench? It is quite extraordinary—the front bench is entirely vacant. That does not seem to me to express any kind of courtesy to the chamber.

Sell out.

John Swinney has already promised the coalition partners a fair wind to pursue their agenda. The Scottish National Party intends to be positive and constructive about the ideas of others, but I hope that we will meet with some reciprocal acknowledgement that good ideas are not strictly the Executive's prerogative. On looking through the partnership agreement, I noticed that there was much "supporting" and "encouraging" going on and I can only assume that Cabinet ministers are all to be trained as counsellors. When the "supporting" and "encouraging" are taken out of the partnership agreement, there is a lot less in it than there appeared to be at first. On good ideas, the Liberal Democrats appear to have been more successful at getting bits of their manifesto into the partnership agreement than they were in getting bits of their policies into their manifesto. It is a pity that the agreement and the programme for government do not include a moratorium on the genetically modified crops field trials or anything on the abolition of the private finance initiative, both of which the Liberal Democrat rank and file would have welcomed as much as would the SNP. The Parliament has limitations and one of those is on dealing with the European Union. The fishing debacle has shown our powerlessness when it comes to exerting any direct influence on European decision making, dependent as we are on an unsympathetic Westminster minister to make the necessary representations. Nowhere in the partnership agreement or yesterday's statement is there any acknowledgement that the EU is now central to our ability to make our own decisions. Yesterday, when I asked the First Minister about that, I listened carefully to his answer—or non-answer. I was particularly struck by his woeful response to my colleague Richard Lochhead, who directly quoted the very minister who was supposed to be acting on behalf of Scottish fishermen in the recent negotiations. Notwithstanding the First Minister's reluctance to acknowledge Labour's shortcomings while he was on his feet in the chamber, I hope that he will take that matter up with Elliot Morley at his earliest convenience, so that when the issue is next raised in the Scottish Parliament—and it will be—the First Minister will have a rather better answer than he did yesterday. Yesterday's responses to questions on Europe  were indicative of a problem. The EU has a huge impact on what we can do. Sometimes the EU is cynically used as an opt-out on difficult questions. For example, Meacher's recent comments about not having any options on GM products conveniently ignored the fact that Belgium managed to deal with that issue on its own. The First Minister and his Government let Scotland down on that issue for four years and look set to do the same over the next four years. Arguably, the proposed changes to the European constitution will have a bigger impact than anything that we have seen so far. However, nowhere in the Executive's programme or the partnership agreement is there any recognition that that is the case. I see no difficulty with holding a referendum on the EU constitution although, given Labour's reluctance to hold referenda, I will not hold my breath waiting for the Executive to endorse the idea. However, we in the Parliament should lead the debate in Scotland. Not everything that emanates from Europe is bad, but all of it is important. I strongly believe that the Executive and the Parliament must bring European issues into the foreground and must be candid about what freedom of movement there is in many important policy areas. Members of the Executive must be far more candid about what they will be permitted to do by their Westminster colleagues. They must be proactive rather than just reactive.

We have been making those points all along, particularly for the past six to 12 months on the fishing industry. We have always said that there are issues about which Scotland should engage directly in Europe. The key issue is that we are not engaging directly in the European debate. There is also nothing in the programme that addresses the failures of some our key institutions such as Scottish Enterprise, the social inclusion partnerships and Scottish Water. Although I note that there is to be a consultation paper and a water services bill—I hope that that will have some impact on those services—there is little about Scottish Enterprise or the SIPs, despite recent concerns about their effectiveness. Those issues should be addressed. I will talk about the economy and enterprise. The first sentence of the new partnership agreement says: "Growing the economy is our top priority."  That is a welcome commitment, which we applaud. However, the people who are making that commitment lack the power to deliver on it. Let us consider the number of economic levers that are controlled by Westminster: income tax; social security; VAT; corporation tax; fuel duties; stamp duty; beer, wine and spirits duties; landfill tax; inheritance tax; aggregates levy; climate change levy; North sea revenues; betting and gaming duties; air passenger duties; and insurance premium tax. What do we in Scotland have? We have the council tax, business rates and the ability to vary the basic rate of income tax by 3p in the pound. The latest figures from the Office for National Statistics show that Scotland's economy did not grow at all in 2002. I noticed that the Deputy First Minister was keen to cite what seemed to be a slightly favourable independent report. Of course, he ignores all the other less favourable reports. The truth is that Government statistics from the Office for National Statistics show that Scotland's economy did not grow at all in 2002.

That statement would have been much more impressive if we had not had four years—and now we are to have another four years—of this Administration promising us heaven on earth with respect to the economy and failing to deliver. Manufacturing and production figures are down. Almost every other indicator of growth is down. How exactly does the Executive intend to turn that round? The partnership agreement says that the Executive intends to "use the powers of the Scottish Parliament to create the conditions for higher growth". I am interested to hear exactly which powers can be used to achieve that and how. What does "support businesses" and "value enterprise" mean in practice? What mechanisms does the Executive intend to use to "work with the UK Government to maximise the conditions for economic growth"? Does the Executive intend to bother reporting back to the Parliament on the so-called joint working or will that joint working just be Westminster letting the Executive know the score? What does the Executive intend to do to address the low-wage economy that exists in large parts of  Scotland? This might come as a surprise to many members, but Perth and Kinross has the lowest average wage of any region in the UK. I see nothing in the Executive's programme that will change that for my constituents or for Scots in general. In legislative terms, the Executive's commitments boil down to a bill on bankruptcy. As important as that might be, I am underwhelmed at its inclusion in a section dealing with the economy. It looks as if the Executive has laboured mightily to bring forth a mouse.

Perhaps the member should have waited until the end of my speech before he made his comments. The SNP's 1999 manifesto contained several ideas on justice that were not in either the Labour or the Liberal Democrat manifestos but were nevertheless enacted subsequently. Examples of those ideas are drugs courts and the lifetime supervision of sex offenders. Of course, the Executive was never going to acknowledge that those were SNP ideas, because the acknowledgement of constructive ideas in the chamber goes only one way. It is supposed to go only towards the Executive and never the other way. In the spirit of consensual politics promised by John Swinney, the SNP manifesto offers a few more ideas. How about weekend courts, guys? Let us get moving on that. I ask the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister to try not to wait so long before implementing the SNP manifesto this time, because we wasted a lot of time in the past four years while they havered and pretended that they objected to our ideas, when in truth they knew that they were good ones. I want to mention yesterday's crime statistics, particularly the shocking increase in drugs crime, which we can compare with the bland commitment to expand the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency. I am unclear about how that commitment will make the impact required. It is nothing but a pledge recycled from 1999, which at least then included a commitment to double to 200 the number of police officers involved, although that is notably missing this session. We have so far got no further, and it is difficult to imagine how that commitment will make the slightest difference to drug crime.  The partnership agreement states: "We will put in place an integrated transport system". Most of the rail proposals appear to be based in the central belt. Quite rightly, the areas that already have the widest choice of public transport links are to get more. However, those areas of Scotland with the poorest public transport provision can look forward to—well, precisely nothing. What is there for them? There is a review of existing bridge tolls and negotiations with a view to ending the discredited toll regime for the Skye bridge. I hope that John Farquhar Munro is not holding his breath on that one. Improved air links are important, and all very well, but people have to be able to get to the airports in the first place. The real changes in rural areas will come about when there are extensive bus and rail links that make using public transport a realistic option for people in rural areas, which at present it is not. The document also says: "We will continue to ensure that bus timetable information is easily available and that bus services offer convenient links between communities and other types of public transport." That makes it sound as if that happens already, when it does not. It makes it sound as if the Executive will be able to do something about it—I am not sure that it can. If the Executive is serious about that commitment, I invite it to use Perth and Kinross as a pilot. The Executive will have its work cut out for it. I have letters here on the very issue that might make the Executive think about the reality of what that commitment means. A letter from ScotRail says: "It would not be practicable for us to vary for the sake of bus connections our train timetables". National Express says that it takes "no account of train times when designing the National Express timetables", and Stagecoach UK Bus says in its letter that "bus operators are not usually consulted by train operators when timetables change". There is the question whether bus operators should retime their services as a result of train timetable changes. The challenge for the Executive is how precisely that attitude will be changed. It hampers integrated transport throughout Scotland. While we are on the subject of public transport, will the Executive now take the opportunity to buy out the ScotRail franchise? That is another idea that it is welcome to take from the SNP. The opening words of the section on rural issues in the partnership agreement laid bare the failure  of the Executive to recognise the serious difficulties facing our rural communities. The Executive is committed to maintaining strong, prosperous and growing communities in rural Scotland, but the reality is that 350,000 people in rural Scotland are believed to be living in poverty. The take-home pay of many low-paid workers in rural Scotland is little more than the amount of money that they would receive if they were on benefits. Eighty-four per cent of Scottish agricultural land qualifies as less favoured. Those are the realities of rural poverty in Scotland, which seems to be ignored by the Executive. The approach to our rural areas should not be one of maintaining the status quo but one of working towards economic growth and regeneration in our rural communities. There are other areas that can be addressed. Much of what is contained in the section on health is laudable, but the real question is whether the Executive has the ability to deliver. The past four years suggest that the answer is no. In the sphere of education, there are things that we can agree with—and indeed welcome and support—such as the scrapping of league tables and assessment for five to 14-year-olds, the expansion of breakfast and after-school clubs, and free music tuition for young people. However, as I made clear at the outset, the fair wind that we have promised to those aspects of Executive policy that we believe will be good for Scotland does not mean that we will not vigorously oppose those policies that we believe to be harmful. In education, one of those key areas is the private finance initiative. There is no doubt about the need to invest in rebuilding our schools—I know that from my constituency and from what people tell me elsewhere. However, the building programme that is proposed by the Executive is carried out under a system for which Audit Scotland found that "The higher cost of capital adds costs of between £0.2 million and £0.3 million a year for each £10 million invested in a project". How on earth does that constitute good financial management? It is impossible to address adequately all the areas covered in the partnership agreement and the statement in one short speech. My colleagues will no doubt deal with many other matters. The hallmark of the programme is what is not in it, because what is there is indicative of ambitions stunted by the constraints of devolution. It is an opportunity missed, and what there is suggests that the Executive knows that the limitations of devolution mean that it can have no impact on the really big problems facing Scotland. We should aspire to something far greater than this.

It is astonishing that only one line in the First Minister's statement referred to Europe. Given the changes in the European Union that are currently being debated at European level, is that not negligent? Will he indicate precisely how he will ensure that the Executive and the Parliament can respond to the impact of the EU on Scotland and to the challenges that Europe poses? Surely the First Minister does not intend to leave the question of Europe to others elsewhere.

Because I believe in the sovereignty of the people of Scotland, I make this affirmation under protest.  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Roseanna Cunningham (Perth) (SNP)

Scottish troops, including the Black Watch and the 51 st Highland Brigade of the Territorial Army, both of which have strong connections with my constituency, are in the gulf. What assessment has there been of the risk of reprisals against Army barracks and RAF and naval bases in Scotland? What steps have been taken to protect against terrorist attacks on military and non-military installations in Scotland that are provoked as a result of the war? What assurances have been sought or given that any and all relevant intelligence will be shared with Scottish police forces?

I apologise to the Presiding Officer and Mr McLetchie for my slightly late arrival. So far, the debate seems to have been one between Labour and the Conservative party about who is more Tory than who. The truth is that the past four years have been four years of failure by the Labour-Lib Dem Executive. It is a marriage of convenience that has been more than inconvenient for the Scottish people. As it prepares to leave office, it leaves behind it a record that makes very depressing reading. Its record shows that it has consistently failed the country and our people across all areas of government. Let us consider the reality. One in three Scottish children still lives in poverty. The Scottish economy is underperforming and there is low long-term growth. Violent crime, serious assaults, drug crimes and vandalism have all increased since the Executive came to power. Under the Executive, large class sizes mean that our schools cannot deliver the best education to children in their formative years and, because of a lack of staff and a lack of beds, people are waiting too long for medical treatment. Scotland is a rich country. It is blessed with great resources and great potential, but none of that potential is being realised. The Executive has had its four years; it is time for it to make way for real ambition. First, let us look at the junior partners in the Executive. We need only compare the Lib Dems rhetoric before the last election with the reality to see how their thirst for power has overcome any thirst for justice or for the real improvements to their lives that the people of Scotland need. The Lib Dems promised to abolish tuition fees, but all that they did was back-end instead of front-end the fees and hope that no one would notice. They promised to introduce maximum waiting times; they stated that they would "identify firm limits for waiting times in every specialty." The reality is that waiting times have increased by 16 per cent, waiting lists are up 10,000 and 85,000 fewer people are being treated by the NHS than in 1999.

I recognise that the Scottish Executive thinks that people are stupid enough to believe that if they pay afterwards instead of ahead of the game, that somehow means that they are not paying. That might be the  way that Mike Rumbles runs his finances, but it is not the way that the rest of us do. The Lib Dems promised to reform prisons and, specifically, to cut prisoner numbers. The most recently released figures show that the average prison population in Scotland has reached an all-time high. Tolls on the Skye bridge are still in place. Charges for eye and dental checks are still in place, despite the fact that the Lib Dems said that that was their first priority in a national health screening scheme. I notice that that pledge may make it back into their manifesto. People might suggest that the Lib Dems should save some money and reissue their 1999 manifesto, as clearly not much has changed. Of course, they cannot do that because what has changed is their former commitment to proportional representation. That must be their most baffling achievement of the past four years. Most of us thought that if they stood for anything, they stood for PR. However, astonishingly, they failed to support Tricia Marwick's bill to introduce PR for local government. They had a chance to vote for PR when it counted and they bottled it. If they are prepared to ditch that commitment, what would they not sell out? Perhaps they should list in their manifesto the things that they have no real intention of pursuing any more. I see that some of the Tories are sniggering at the Lib Dems—I grant that it is easy to do. However, while Labour and the Lib Dems have failed Scotland, the Tories have a cheek to criticise anybody else's record of governance in Scotland. The Tories are the party that brought us the poll tax and 18 years of Thatcherism, introduced privatisation into the public sector and destroyed our country's economic base. Despite David McLetchie's sweeping description of the establishment in this chamber, the truth is that the Conservative party is in administration in Perth and Kinross Council only because it is in coalition with Labour there. That is the real coalition that is beginning to emerge across the country. Scotland has not forgotten—and will never forget—what Tory rule means, which is precisely why the Tories are flat-lining in the opinion polls.

On the evidence of Patricia Ferguson's example this morning, the plan is to bore the electorate into submission in the upcoming election. Labour somewhat belatedly kicked off its election campaign with a document that boasted of "Four Years, Forty Real Achievements", but all it did was expose the failure of the Labour party. In truth, the record is not so  much top 40 but top of the flops. Even the most cursory examination shows up that document as nothing more than a collection of weasel words and a litany of lies, which is what we have come to expect from the Labour party. People cannot trust the Labour party. Crime is up, but rates of prosecution are down. People feel the truth of that and, consequently, confidence in our criminal justice system is eroding rapidly. On health, Labour crows that it has guaranteed new jobs for all new nurses and midwives, but there are 1,869 nursing vacancies in our hospitals, which is an increase of 12 per cent on last year and 46 per cent since new Labour came to power in 1999. Meanwhile, the drop-out rate for student nurses is one in four—it is easy to guarantee jobs for new recruits if one knows that one has not recruited anywhere near enough in the first place. Labour should try offering a decent wage and see whether that makes a difference. On the economy, Labour claims that unemployment is down by a quarter to its lowest level in 25 years, but the fact is that massive levels of unemployment in Glasgow, Dundee, Lanarkshire and elsewhere are concealed within the headline figures. Those figures do not include the massive numbers of people who are excluded because, instead of signing on, they receive other state benefits. Labour politicians used to complain about the Tories' fiddled figures, but they have learned more than one lesson from the Tories. Scotland has suffered decades of low growth and relative economic decline. We are a nation of huge potential, but our economy is structurally geared for low growth and our most disadvantaged communities are paying the price for that underperformance. Labour knows that it has failed Scotland on the economy and that only the SNP has the policies to release Scotland's economic potential—the Labour party has admitted that to itself and it should admit it to the Scottish people. It is a pity that the First Minister is not here, because the Scottish Executive's record is very much Jack McConnell's record. He is the longest-serving—perhaps that should be "surviving"—Labour member of the Cabinet and, as he is First Minister and former Minister for Finance and Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs, the buck for much that is wrong in Scotland must stop with him. His sticky fingerprints are all over the Executive's successive failures—it is too late for him to plead that it was not him, he was not there. He might not be in the chamber very often—he has obviously been taking lessons from Tony Blair on how to deal with parliamentary chambers—but he has been at the heart of the Executive all along. His culpability is self-evident. In Patricia Ferguson's amendment, the  Executive has managed to distil the 327 so-called policy commitments in the Executive's glossy document "Recording Our Achievements" and the Labour party's "Four Years, Forty Real Achievements" down to what it presumably believes to be the top 10 from its top of the flops. The amendment claims "record investment in the health service", but with waiting lists and waiting times soaring, patients would be right to ask where that money is going. The amendment mentions free personal care for the elderly but, as I recall, some members of the Labour party had to be dragged kicking and screaming into supporting that policy, which was a victory for the Parliament, not the Executive. The amendment mentions nursery places, but in Scotland parents still pay for 75 per cent of their child care overall, compared with 17 per cent in Sweden, 20 per cent in Spain and 15 per cent in Finland. The amendment states that there are "record numbers of police", but we should consider the facts: in December 1997, there were 15,050 police officers in Scotland and, by June 2002, there were 15,324. It is true that that is a marginal increase, but it should be compared to the figure of more than 16,000 that there will be when the SNP forms the Government. The amendment mentions "freezing business rates" and "rates relief for small businesses", but when Jack McConnell was Minister for Finance, he increased business taxes twice.

I would be astonished to discover that I have ever indicated a like for the Liberal Democrats. Members would be wise to wait for the results of the election before making coalition agreements. The Executive amendment also claims "a substantial programme for long-term investment in transport", but, of course, a programme is not delivery. Hundreds of millions of pounds of public money left the railways as private profit under the Tories' failed privatisation project. Devolution gave the Scottish Executive the responsibility for funding trains but not for the rails on which they run—a better metaphor for the whole devolution settlement would be hard to find. Perhaps the Executive's biggest and most significant failure is its apparent indifference to the almost despairing response of the people of  Scotland to the Executive's performance. Time after time we see evidence that ordinary people feel desperately let down—and so they should. The Executive gives no indication that it gives a damn, which is the most damning indictment of all. In contrast, the SNP has consistently won the debate on fiscal autonomy for Scotland by having "a clearer, stronger and more consistent" economic message than the Labour party's. It was heartening to know that people within the Labour party recognise that point; it is a pity that we will not hear a similar recognition on the record in the chamber. The SNP is winning the argument and the Labour party knows it. According to an NFO System Three poll last year, 70 per cent of Scots want financial independence and that call for full financial freedom has been backed by leading voices in Scottish academia. The Labour party cannot afford to ignore such voices and Scotland cannot afford to wait much longer. The Tory motion notes: "four years of government by Labour and the Liberal Democrats in Scotland have not achieved the better public services and stronger economy that people in both our urban and rural communities were led to expect", which is true. However, having identified the problem, the Tories fail to propose the obvious solution, which is to give the Parliament the powers that it needs: the powers of a normal parliament in a normal nation to shape its own future. That is why my amendment recognises that "a change of government is essential to reverse the decline in public services", and expresses the belief that "only with the normal powers of an independent Parliament will Scotland be able to release its full potential." I move amendment S1M-3986.1, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "regrets that four years of government by Labour and the Liberal Democrats in Scotland have failed to improve on the disastrous record of 18 years of Conservative rule; notes that since the Labour/Liberal Executive came to power, hospital waiting lists have grown longer, violent crime has risen, one in three children live in poverty and the economy has recorded the lowest level of growth anywhere in the European Union; recognises that a change of government is essential to reverse the decline in public services, and believes that only with the normal powers of an independent Parliament will Scotland be able to release its full potential."

At stage 1, I expressed my concern that the bill represented a return to the bad old days of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Bills. The past two days have proved my point. As we have worked through the amendments, we have jumped between sections that do not seem to relate to one other. The members of the Justice 2 Committee deserve praise for their hard work in  following those many jumps in committee. I am pleased that the passing of the bill will mean the introduction of lifetime supervision of sex offenders, which was a key recommendation of the MacLean report and has been SNP policy since long before that report. George Foulkes might have felt that the MacLean report's recommendations were "uncosted nonsense", but I am pleased that Labour members of the Scottish Parliament seem to disagree with the ex-minister. Drugs courts are another SNP policy that was at first derided, and then adopted, by the Executive parties. The bill acknowledges the success of the operation of the pilot courts, the first of which opened in Glasgow in November 2001. That was an important step. The introduction of victim statements to our judicial process means that the court will hear of the impact that a crime has had on the victim. Issues remain to be addressed. I hope that the pilot project will be evaluated and that, if it is not successful, the idea will be dropped or seriously amended. The most contentious part of the bill was undoubtedly section 43, which deals with the physical chastisement of children. There has been considerable change on that since the bill was introduced. There are still problems to do with the practicality of the provisions, rather than the message that they send. Everyone concentrated on the message, but the practicalities are equally important. Only time will tell who was right. As I indicated earlier, I continue to have concerns about police custody and security officers. One of the consequences of such a wide-ranging bill is that it leaves the door wide open to an even more wide-ranging set of amendments. The amendment that Donald Gorrie lodged to introduce the concept of offences aggravated by religious prejudice was a prime example. Although I do not believe that the bill's provisions on that will achieve what the minister, the Executive or Mr Gorrie wants them to achieve, I do not doubt their sincerity, nor do I oppose their worthy intentions. In conclusion, the bill contains many changes for which my party and I have been pushing for some time—in some cases, since long before members of the Executive parties had been won over. In spite of the fact that the bill has some failings, it has the support of the SNP.

It is not the Scottish National Party's intention to support amendments 71 to 73. Those amendments seek to reverse a change that was made at stage 2 and that we believe was appropriate. The change was supported by the convener of the Justice 2 Committee, Pauline McNeill, and by the deputy convener, Bill Aitken, which shows the extent of cross-party concern about the general issue. At stage 2, Pauline McNeill and Bill Aitken both voted to ensure that PCSOs would be under the direct control of the chief constable. The SNP is conditionally in favour of chief constables having the power to employ civilians to guard courts and to move prisoners around, if the chief constable believes that that is an appropriate use of the funds at his disposal and if it frees up  police officers for other duties. However, concerns have been raised and they must be addressed. The Scottish Police Federation was concerned that PCSOs would have to be paid for out of the police budget. That would mean that the number of police officers available for other duties would be reduced, which would give chief constables less flexibility. Furthermore, sheriffs expressed concerns about safety in courts if no police officers were present. The proposed transfer of powers from the police to civilians is substantial and includes the right to deprive a member of the public of their liberty and to use force to do so. As has been pointed out, the police are trained carefully in the use of force and there is concern that PCSOs should be trained to the same standards. The Scottish Police Federation also questioned whether the employment of PCSOs would lead to any savings. It is important that the Parliament should have assurances from the minister on those matters, but I am not sure that what he has said so far gives those assurances. As I said, the SNP opposes the contracting out of PCSOs. The fact that there was broad cross-party support at stage 2 shows that there is wide concern about whether that role should be privatised. If police powers to search and restrain prisoners and to keep people in custody are to be transferred to civilians, it is appropriate that there should be a sufficient guarantee of the training and proper behaviour of those civilians. Civilians who are employed directly by a chief constable are accountable to the police board and to HMIC. Private security forces are not. I will talk briefly about our amendments 100 to 107, which deal with some of the problems of accountability in private security forces. Generally, the amendments would introduce basic standards for the training of PCSOs, require PCSOs and the companies that employ them to be open to inspection by HMIC, require the companies to report on misconduct by their officers and ensure openness by bringing the companies under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. Without the guarantees, the contracting out of PCSOs is flawed. I know that the minister addressed one or two of the issues in his opening remarks and I will deal with what he said as we go through. I am a little puzzled by amendment 73. I would be interested to hear more detail about it from the minister, because it appears to be almost contrary to the whole idea of contracting out. I am not quite sure where it fits within the general parameters of the way in which the minister is proceeding. The amendment almost suggests that there will be two categories of PCSOs—the truly contracted-out ones who will deliver the prisoner to the court  building and the civilian security officers who are employed by the chief constable in the court building, presumably to take delivery of the prisoner. There now seem to be two, almost separate categories of civilian officer. That is strange, but it is certainly better that the handover at least is to people who are under the direct control of the chief constable. Amendments 100 and 101 are about training and are fairly self-explanatory. The officers should be trained in searching—that must be clear and up front from the start. They should also be trained in the use of handcuffs and other means of restraint—that, too, should be clear and up front. I have referred to some of the concerns that were expressed on the issue at stage 2. I do not understand why the minister is so against amendments 100 and 101. I suspect that ultimately we will have a group of people involved in restraint who are not trained to the same level as the police. Amendments 102 and 103 are also about training. I want to hear rather more from the minister than the bland assurances that he gave about the basic standards that will be required of the officers. We are moving into a situation where we will have a two and even three-tier system of security officers. Although it is important that we free up properly trained police officers to do as many of the jobs as possible that they are required to do, it is equally important that the people who are involved in control and restraint in particular are trained to the same standards. Amendment 104 would require private providers of PCSOs to give an annual report on numbers, salaries, staff turnover, complaints against officers and disciplinary offences committed by officers. Individual police forces report on those matters in their annual reports and are scrutinised by HMIC. It is in the public interest that that information should be made available so that people know how their public services are performing. I am afraid that, with privatisation, those matters have a way of becoming secret, especially if the figures look embarrassing. One only has to examine the experience with Kilmarnock prison, where staff turnover, staff numbers, grievance procedures and bullying are all matters of secrecy. The fragmentation and privatisation of the justice system means that public accountability tends to be lost. Amendment 104 is an attempt to stem that tide.  Amendment 105 would make those PCSOs who are employed by private companies subject to inspection by HMIC. I think that I heard the minister give an assurance that that would be the case. If that assurance is repeated at the close of  the debate, I will reconsider pressing amendment 105, but I seek a categoric assurance that privately employed PCSOs will be subject to inspection in the same way as the police force is. On amendment 106, I think that I heard the minister making a commitment in respect of inspections. Once again, if I hear categoric assurances at the end of the debate, I will not press amendment 106 but, at the moment, I am not sure whether the assurance has been categoric. I regard amendment 107 in the same way. The amendment would make private companies that employ PCSOs subject to the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 as public authorities. If ministers do not wish to accept amendment 107, I will be looking for something cast iron from the minister that the Scottish ministers will use their powers under section 5 of the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 to designate the private providers of PCSOs as public authorities. During the passage of the bill, we have repeatedly sought assurances that that would be done. I know that the Minister for Justice said: "Major private sector suppliers of public services—such as those involved in Her Majesty's Prison Kilmarnock—should, arguably, be candidates for designation under the bill ... It is our intent that that provision will be used to bring within the scope of freedom of information legislation private companies that are involved in significant public work, such as private companies that are involved in major PFI contracts."—[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee , 5 February 2002; c 3162-64.] I want a categoric assurance today that the PCSO companies will be made subject to the powers under section 5 of the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. If I get that categoric assurance, I will not press amendment 107.

I have considerable sympathy with many of the points made by Bill Aitken—and I suspect with some of the points that were being made by members on the Labour back benches, judging from the activity that looked like it was going on while Bill Aitken and Donald Gorrie were speaking. To be honest, I am getting a little tired of banging my head against a brick wall on this issue. It is my view that section 59A will deliver fewer prosecutions and fewer convictions than there are at present. The minister seems to be content with that. We have dragged the debate on for so long now that the SNP will simply go along with what the Executive appears to want, although I do not think that the measures will achieve it. [MEMBERS: "What?"] Conservatives may look askance at that, but the debate has gone on for too long. If the minister's view is such, so be it. I will simply go along with it. Robin Harper's amendment 1 is precisely where we start to get into difficulty. Paul Martin has an amendment on offences against firefighters and ambulance personnel in pursuance of their duty, which we will support if it goes to the vote, as the amendment is very clear. However, I am starting to think that what we need is a piece of legislation that defines who can simply be assaulted in an ordinary fashion. There are now so many  exceptions and groups who are to be the subject of aggravations in assaults that there will be hardly anyone left. Robin Harper makes a persuasive case for some of the people that he has mentioned, but equally, there are other groups of people who might ask, "Why am I being left out?" At some stage, we have to say that enough is enough.

The SNP is a great supporter of the European Union, but even we would never say that everything that emanates from the European Union is right and should not be argued against. We must take a few steps back. The SNP will not support amendment 1, because it would extend the provisions for aggravation in assault cases to too many groups. At the current rate, there will be no ordinary assault left. We must question the way in which we are dealing with Scottish criminal law.

I am content with the assurances that have been given. I seek leave to withdraw the amendment.  Amendment 98, by agreement, withdrawn.

The effect of amendment 98 would be to establish the information on rights that would be provided to persons volunteering samples for retention in an investigation under section 47. The SNP supports the principles of section 47. However, giving police a sample—especially a DNA sample—is a substantial incursion into the liberty of the individual, particularly when the sample might be retained and used in any subsequent investigation. When a police officer asks for a sample, it would take a brave person to say no, even if they did not really want to give one. It is not clear in section 47 that people who give samples will even be informed that the samples are to be retained. When people are arrested, they have a common-law right to be informed of their rights, and when a person is detained, he or she has rights to  information about detention. I am looking for an assurance from the minister on police procedures for providing information on rights to persons who provide samples. I move amendment 98.

Yes. There would simply be a pre-prepared written statement.

I have some sympathy with Bill Aitken's comments and those of my colleague Duncan Hamilton in addressing themselves to the generality of section 43 and to the question whether we should really be having such debates. Once we open up the debate on definitions, we get to precisely the problem that we were all concerned about, arguing about what is in, what is out, how it will be construed and what it will mean in court. With respect to Brian Fitzpatrick's intervention, the situation that is being cited as the most serious one—the serious shaking of infant children to their severe injury or indeed to their death—is already dealt with in our courts from year to year. It is not entirely fair to use the most extreme, emotive example, particularly when it is one that the current law deals with, when we are trying to consider some of the definitions of what is already in section 43.

With respect to Richard Simpson, that is not what the bill says, nor what the sheriff will be looking at, and it is not what amendment 95 says. Amendment 95 uses the phrase, "with use of unreasonable force". Reasonableness is something that will take into account all the facts and circumstances. I suspect that no reasonable force could be used on a six-month-old child, but that reasonable force might very well be used on a 15-year-old child. There is a difference. The test of reasonableness is used daily in our courts and is a test with which all our judiciary and all those who practise in our courts are comfortable and familiar. It does not come out of left field. What amendment 95 proposes is not particularly unusual. The courts are already completely familiar with the test and will accept it as perfectly legitimate in the legislation, as it means that the test will always be in the face of the facts and circumstances that are before them in particular cases. I heard the general argument on the issue at an earlier stage in the bill's proceedings and am not entirely sure that there is much point in going down the line that Bill Aitken is going down or indeed that my colleague Duncan Hamilton wants us to go down. We need to focus on specific areas  in which there is dubiety and real, concrete concern that has real legitimacy behind it. I commend amendment 95 as a way through such dubiety and concern. I suspect that the vast majority of us wish that we were not having such debates at the moment, as it seems that we are getting into a mire that perhaps the Parliament would have been better not to have got into in the first place. However, as we are debating the issue, let us try to put in the bill something that looks like it has some sense for all sides of the argument. I wish to press amendment 95.

I rise to support the three amendments in the group. The intention behind amendment 109 is very good and the SNP will support it. It might have been more helpful if we were not preparing ASBO strategies but implementing them—we might have to return to that issue. Amendment 93 is very important. I know that the social landlords in my area want the provisions  that are contained in the amendment and I am sure that that is the case across Scotland. I thank the minister for explaining why my colleague Stewart Stevenson's equivalent amendment to amendment 4 was not accepted at stage 2. The minister's explanation about the ECHR was important, as there was a bit of a puzzle over why amendment 4 was accepted when Stewart Stevenson's amendment was not.

We are in the same position as we were with the previous amendment. The three-strikes-and-you're-out approach ignores the reality of what we are trying to achieve with drug testing and treatment orders or drugs court orders. Bill Aitken wants, in effect, to introduce automatic sentencing, which is an enemy of rational sentencing. The sheriff in the drugs court or who deals with the DTTO already has the power to revoke the order and send the offender to prison. I do not see what could be gained if the Parliament were to decide that it will force the sheriffs to do so even in circumstances in which they believe revocation to be wholly inappropriate. Amendment 38 is not helpful. If anything, it would wreck the system and set us back rather than move us forward in attempting to achieve what we are trying to achieve—to get drug users away from their drug habits. The SNP will not support it.

Bill Aitken must be given marks for persistence, because he seems to be trying to revisit the whole drugs court debate. What he proposes in amendment 33 should be resisted. The drugs courts are a pilot scheme and it would be strange to tinker with the scheme as it went along. To do so would make it difficult to make a reasonable assessment at the end of the pilot, because we would be dealing with different regimes from different points of the pilot's history. I do not see how that could be helpful. Similarly, I do not see how the proposed restrictions on the drugs court process could be helpful. I am not sure why Bill Aitken feels that there should be an age limit for diversions to the drugs courts. A drug addict's age is irrelevant. People can become drug addicts at any age and need not necessarily have taken drugs previously. Moreover, I do not understand why the amendment proposes to restrict referrals to the drugs courts to those whose offences do not exceed a certain number. To do so would remove from the group of people who might benefit from going to the courts folk whom we would want to be diverted there. I wonder what Bill Aitken really wants. It is clear that locking up drug addicts in prison is not achieving anything, so amendment 33 must be resisted.

Are we not moving straight to the vote?

No. I think that enough has been said on amendment 85. I want to withdraw the amendment.  Amendment 85, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendment 86 not moved.  Amendments 18 to 23 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to. Amendment 87 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham].

Is not the relevancy or irrelevancy of evidence an issue for the judge to decide in court? The minister seems to suggest that our sheriffs and judges would allow irrelevant evidence; I do not think that that is the case.

Is the minister saying that the victim can be cross-examined on something that is in the victim statement if, in the view of the prosecutor, some of the information might be of relevance to the defence? Is he saying that, in that case, the information would have to be disclosed so that it could be raised during the course of a trial, but that otherwise none of the information would come out until the trial was over?

I might have missed something here; that would be entirely possible, given the size of the bill. What will happen when—post conviction—the prosecutor puts up a victim statement and the defence says, "Hang on, why wasn't that bit disclosed to us before, because in our view it should have been?"

The amendments to the section that deals with victim statements are part of a continuing debate about how those statements are to be used in court and how they will work in practice. There are a number of SNP amendments—85, 86, 87, 88, 89 and 90—which I will address in order.  The effect of amendment 85 would be to place a time limit, to be prescribed by ministers, for piloting the victim statement procedure. Thereafter, ministers may by order elect to continue to use victim statements, but we want to set a fixed time for the pilots so that there is a distinct point at which we will revisit the issue. In principle, it is right that the victim should have greater knowledge of, and a greater say in, what happens in his or her case—we all agree with that—but if the basic requirements of justice are to be met, it is also right that victim statements be examined in a pilot. It is also appropriate that the legislation that would introduce the pilot should make it plain that it is a pilot, and that Parliament should, at the end of that pilot, have a proper chance to consider any potential expansion of the scheme. Children's hearings for 16 and 17-year-olds were specifically called pilots in the bill before the Executive removed them by amendment at stage 2. It is interesting that the section on victim statements is not written in such specific terms. We all know that there are difficulties with victim statements, some of which amendment 86 seeks to deal with. What is the status of a victim statement? Is it evidence? If not, what is it? If the statement is made before the verdict, will the defence be allowed to examine it for consistency with the Crown case? If it is made after a guilty verdict, but it is inconsistent with the Crown case, what will happen? Will a victim statement constitute new evidence for the defence to use to seek a retrial? If the court must have regard to victim statements in sentencing, how will that relate to the sentence that is imposed? The Minister for Justice states that it is not intended that the victim will have a direct say in sentencing, but that leads to the question about what say the victim will have. There is a need for clarity for the likely participants in the process, including social workers and lawyers. Another consideration will be the age of the victim statement—I do not mean the age of the victim, but when the victim statement was taken. How current is the statement in reality? Will it have more influence on sentencing if it is made near the time when the offence was committed, or if it is made nearer the time of sentencing? It is regrettable that, in our courts, there can be quite a long time between the two. What happens to a victim statement if the court accepts a reduced plea, or if the accused is convicted on a lesser charge? What crimes are likely to elicit a victim statement? I realise I am asking a list of questions, but they must be answered if we are to be clear about the use of victim statements in court. Although we all agree that we want victim statements to be brought in,  we need some clarity about what their introduction will mean. Will it be difficult for some victims to make such statements? We should also take on board the fact that some victims might not feel that they can make such statements. Will they be penalised in some way because they have been unable to make such a statement? Will victims be under pressure to make the statements? There is a lot of concern about such questions and we need more clarity, which is why we are suggesting that some time limits be imposed. Many other questions can be asked, but I dare say that other members will ask a number of them. Amendment 86 is a probing amendment that deals with further problems relating to cross-examination. Apparently, the Minister for Justice believes that a victim may be cross-examined under existing procedure regarding victim statements. All sorts of issues arise about the effect of such cross-examination on a victim—questions are being asked about whether the statement should be withheld from the defence. Cross-examination on proof and mitigation is extremely rare now, but I wonder whether the introduction of victim impact statements might open that up a great deal more than has been the case in the past. Many matters in victim statements might be completely irrelevant, so there is a question about how such information will be handled. My other amendments are amendments 87, 88 and 89. I understand that the minister intends to accept amendments 88 and 89. If I am correct about that, I will not speak to them in detail. Amendment 87 would make it possible for informal carers, such as neighbours, to make victim statements. Although it is a rather broad amendment, it seeks to deal with the situation in which an informal carer has a strong relationship with a child victim. We saw that in the recent case of Chloe Bray, where an individual who had no formal relationship with the child had, in fact, brought her up for three years. Given the way in which the bill is drafted, the informal carer would be denied the opportunity to make a victim statement. If amendments 88 and 89 are to be accepted, that is as much as I will say at the moment. I move amendment 85.

You said, "Ms Alexander's amendment", Presiding Officer.

Amendment 84 would require the risk management authority to include in its annual report an account of directions given to it by the Scottish ministers. We seek some assurance from the minister—I hope that he will address some of these issues when he winds up—about the exercise of the powers of the Scottish ministers to give direction to the risk management authority. It is proposed that the RMA will be a non-departmental public body. However, section 12(3) states: "The Scottish Ministers may for the purpose of or in connection with the exercise of the Risk Management Authority's functions give directions to the Authority; and the Authority is to comply with any such direction." The policy memorandum, in considering the various alternatives to setting up the RMA as a quango, states: "The final alternative would be for the role to be carried out by a body under the direct control of the Scottish Ministers. However, it was felt more appropriate that these functions should be carried out at arm's length from the Scottish Ministers, which cannot be achieved by a body under their direct control". It is difficult to see how the authority is not under the direct control of the Scottish ministers if it has  to follow their directions.  The system has the disadvantages both of the additional bureaucracy of a quango and of direct control. I am not sure why the option of making the RMA an agency was dismissed, given that both the Scottish Prison Service and the Scottish Court Service are executive agencies. We are concerned about the authority's independence. One of the authority's roles is to examine and approve risk management plans that local authority criminal justice social work departments or the Scottish ministers have prepared. Surely the independence of the RMA is vital. It is an oddity that the Scottish ministers will require approval from a body that they will be able to direct. What happens if the Scottish ministers take a particular attitude to risk management plans? They could say either that plans should require constant close surveillance or that they should involve as little expenditure as possible. Because of the way in which politics works, both are distinct possibilities. If Scottish ministers wanted to dictate what an offender's risk management plan should be, they need only direct the RMA not to approve any other. Ministers might be so influenced by a media panic about an offender that they acted in that way. What price then the arm's-length body that the bill is supposed to establish? I am seeking an assurance that ministerial powers will be used only for purposes of efficient management and will not be used to influence policy with regard to risk management plans or individual risk management plans.

The SNP has no difficulty with amendment 11. However, we want to raise the issues that amendments 82 and 83 encompass. Although I accept the minister's comments about what happened at stage 2, I understand that the committee's decision fell to the convener's casting vote. That does not suggest that the committee had an overwhelmingly strong opinion one way or the other on the matter. As a result, it is worth taking a more detailed look at the arguments that were made at stage 2. Effectively, we are suggesting that detail from  the MacLean committee report should form part of the bill in order to narrow and clarify the risk criteria by which orders for lifelong restriction are assessed. Section 1 introduces orders for lifelong restriction into law and lays out the whole procedure in that respect. Amendments 82 and 83 seek to change the wording of the risk criteria. We know that the MacLean committee proposed orders for lifelong restriction, although in fact they were first suggested by the SNP some years before the committee was set up—indeed, I recall raising the issues at Westminster. At stage 1, the Parole Board for Scotland, the Faculty of Advocates and the Law Society of Scotland expressed fears that the risk criteria were too broad. As a result, the Executive lodged amendments at stage 2 to restrict the original outline. Amendments 82 and 83—as I said, the same amendments were moved at stage 2 but were rejected on the casting vote of the convener of the Justice 2 Committee—would introduce into statute the precise risk criteria that the MacLean committee proposed. New section 210E states that the risk criteria are "that the nature of, or the circumstances of the commission of, the offence of which the convicted person has been found guilty either in themselves or as part of a pattern of behaviour are such as to demonstrate that there is a likelihood that he, if at liberty, will seriously endanger the lives, or physical or psychological well-being, of members of the public at large." Amendment 82 would replace the words "is a likelihood that he" with "are reasonable grounds for believing that the convicted person". That terminology has been used frequently in criminal-law legislation and is absolutely acceptable. I do not understand the objection to it. Professor David Cooke of the British Psychological Society said that it was not clear what the word "likelihood" would mean in this context. He asked whether it would mean more than 50 per cent or 95 per cent likely, for example. There is a question mark over how "likelihood" would be construed, whereas courts and lawyers would be better able to understand and consider the phrase "reasonable grounds". "Likelihood" is a much vaguer term, which is not usually used in law. The terminology that we seek to introduce is a test with which courts are far more familiar, so I believe that members should consider it. Amendment 83 would replace the words "seriously endanger" with the phrase "present a substantial and continuing risk to" before the words  "the lives, or physical or psychological well-being, of members of the public at large". The Parole Board for Scotland said in evidence at stage 1 that it hoped that the bill would make it clear that orders for lifelong restriction should be imposed only in cases where psychological factors were identified that indicated a high risk of someone seriously reoffending. Except in the most extreme circumstances, indeterminate sentences are incompatible with proportionality, so there is an argument about whether the concept of "seriously endanger" complies with the notion of extreme circumstances. Amendment 83 would place the emphasis on the criterion of the continuing nature of danger to the public. It is not proportionate to place an order for lifelong restriction on someone who might pose a serious threat at one point, but would not do so for the rest of their life. Neither of the issues that are raised by amendments 82 and 83 was properly addressed by the ministers at stage 2. The committee was split three-three, so it is important that we return to the arguments. The minister's position at stage 2 is similar to his position now, which is that the Executive believes that it has provided in the bill accurate legislative interpretation of the relevant MacLean recommendations. Instead of the recommendations being interpreted, we would prefer them to be included in the bill in the way that we suggest. Given the concerns that have been raised by organisations such as the Parole Board for Scotland and the Law Society of Scotland, we should seriously consider including the MacLean recommendations in the bill.

I am not sure whether I am required to say it, but I had better say that I continue to be an advocate. That means that, from time to time in the past, I was on the prosecution side of the bench, rather than the defence side. It cannot be denied that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has been seriously under-resourced for years. That has meant that aspects of our justice system have been failing. The current shake-up in practices is long overdue and the recommendations in the Justice 2 Committee's report are important in that process. I commend the committee for its work. At long last, those of us who have called for such changes are starting to see progress. I welcome the progress that has been made, but much more could and should be done. I am sure that disagreement on that score is unlikely. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has been so under-resourced that it has been a factor in the slowing of the whole justice process over the years. It is not the only problem, but it is a key difficulty. It is difficult to see what other conclusion can be drawn from the figures that the Executive published in December. Since 1997, the number of crimes and offences has soared to 945,716, yet the number of prosecutions has plummeted to 139,596. The figures are diverging markedly, instead of following each other. The Solicitor General shakes her head, but those figures were produced by the Executive in response to questions. While crime is increasing and police clear-up rates increase proportionally, the number of prosecutions is falling, which means that the number of convictions falls, because that number is bound to follow proportionally the number of prosecutions. When our constituents tell us that they do not feel that crime is being taken seriously enough, they are almost subconsciously aware of what those statistics reveal. In January, I revealed an analysis of the statistics that showed that, since 1997, prosecutors have prosecuted fewer of the crimes of indecency and sexual assault that the police have cleared up and fewer convictions have been obtained. That picture prevails for many offences, including vandalism and fire raising. The divergence is stark. The police have been doing their job and their clear-up rates have increased with the increase in the number of crimes and offences, but the prosecution system has failed to keep pace. Why should that be? There must be a reason for such a marked divergence in the rate of prosecutions as compared with the number of crimes and offences.  In a parliamentary answer to me, the Solicitor General admitted that the number of court cases that have been dropped because of delays in the justice system has doubled in the past four years. According to the figures, the number of cases marked "no proceedings" rose from 4,214 in 1998-99 to 8,409 in 2001-02. According to newspaper reports, officials said that cases had been dropped because of delays by the police or other reporting agencies, delays by the procurator fiscal or because the time limit on bringing cases to court had been breached, which is basically the same as a delay, although it is a separate category. That is the reality of what people are experiencing and complaining about. Our justice system is creaking at the seams and the figures show that the situation has been worsening. Between 1998-1999 and 2001-2002, the number of cases that were dropped because of delays by the police or another reporting agency rose by 112 per cent and the number of cases that were dropped by the procurator fiscal went up by 123 per cent. Another major problem with the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service is the inability to get any sort of information from it about the reasoning behind its decisions. This is not the first time that we have acknowledged that in the Parliament. I know that I am not alone in being incredibly frustrated by the number of times that I have to pass on to constituents the stock answer from the Crown Office, which is in effect that it does not have to explain its actions, which equally often means its inactions. That leaves members of the public who have been victims of crime utterly bemused by the workings of the system and its inability, in their eyes, to deliver anything even approaching justice. That is a real problem. Both of the law officers know that it is one thing to announce from the top that things will change, but quite another thing to ensure that a harassed and overworked member of staff at the end of a phone call to a victim does not respond to a request for information with, "What do you want to know for?" I have had to deal with that experience in my constituency. I believe that some of the sentiments and detail that are contained in paragraphs 20, 22 and 23 of the report are key to the problem. Those paragraphs make it clear that long-term under-resourcing has been, and continues to be, a major factor in inhibiting the staff in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service from functioning at their best. I was particularly struck—for personal reasons—by the report of the committee's visit to Hamilton sheriff court last year. When the committee paid its visit, up to four ad hoc fiscals were operating at the court each day. In my early years as an advocate, I practised as an ad hoc fiscal—the  practice was very common at that time. Let me tell members what that meant in reality: I turned up at 9 am, got handed a stack of cases for trial—easily up to 12 or so. By 10 am, I had to be in a position to confront the long line of defence agents—referred to by my colleague Fergus Ewing—who were offering pleas, giving reasons for not being able to proceed and asking for agreements about this, that or the other—all on cases with which I had no familiarity. All that I knew was that not all of the cases could go to trial. Courts operate on the basis that the majority of cases will not, for whatever reason, go ahead. As an ad hoc fiscal, I had to make snap judgments about which plea it was okay to accept, which case was to be assigned to another day and which trials could—perhaps—go ahead that day. All of that had to be decided on cases that I had seen for the first time an hour previously. Then, and only then, could I go about releasing the various witnesses in all of the cases that were not going to trial that day. They included police witnesses, some of whom would have to wait on the chance that some of the cases that were purportedly going to trial would go ahead when, as members also know, that does not always happen. I have been assured in a separate discussion that the process of ad hoc fiscalling has fallen away. I am prepared to accept that it is not as extensive as it once was, but in the report, I read that it was being used extensively in Hamilton sheriff court only last year. I note in passing, from subsequent assurances that are contained in the report, that its routine use was eventually eliminated. However, the fact remains that the service is still having to fall back on that practice to get itself out of local difficulties. The problem that I have with that is that I suspect the experience of ad-hoc fiscalling was not much at variance with the experience of the regular fiscals then and now—except, of course, for the fact that regular fiscals would also have had to undertake all of the work that led up to getting the cases to court. The 10 am line-up would certainly be the same. Speak to any defence agents and they will tell you that it can be difficult to get hold of a fiscal to make a decision in advance of the date of trial. Pauline McNeill is absolutely right when she said that defence agents often do not even attempt to do that. That is not always for the cynical reason that defence agents are trying to operate the system, but because they have been unable to get hold of the fiscal in advance of the court date. There is cynicism about the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. There is a serious culture problem within the service that needs to be dealt with, which involves management and staff. If we expect staff to change, management's  attitude to them has to change. Given that we expect them to make some of the changes that we are demanding of them, it would be unfair to do otherwise. I commend the report to the Executive. It should not simply be put on a shelf. An SNP Government would take the recommendations seriously and I hope that the current Executive will also take them seriously.

The minister's reply to Kenneth Macintosh was interesting. The minister will be aware of the difficulties that are being faced by Perth and Kinross Council in attracting a teacher for the Gaelic-medium unit in my constituency. In effect, the unit has been without a teacher since September. The children are being integrated into English-language classes, they are no longer taught together and, at most, they get one or two hours of Gaelic tuition a week. That is Gaelic-medium education in name only. Do other units in Scotland face that problem? What practical steps can the minister take to help to resolve the situation that is developing in my constituency, where, for the want of one teacher, Gaelic-medium teaching has disappeared?

Dennis Canavan reminded me a few moments ago that it has taken us three centuries to get to this point. We should be vastly relieved that we are here, but we should also remind ourselves that this would not have happened at Westminster, despite the fact that the general principles of land reform have long been supported by the SNP, Labour and the Liberal Democrats. That support reflects the views of the vast majority of the Scottish people—despite some of the nonsensical assertions that I hear and read. Commitments to significant land reform were given prominent positions in the manifestos of all three parties for the 1999 Scottish Parliament elections. I was therefore disappointed at the initial slow progress of the bill. When the draft bill was originally published, it gave us great cause for concern, as the legislative proposals on access were a bit of a dog's breakfast. Thankfully, the proposals were significantly improved and have now been further improved in the past few months and days. The right of responsible freedom to roam on the land of Scotland is a right that has long been asserted and dearly held by the Scottish people. I am glad that we have taken steps to secure that right. There is no doubt that communities across Scotland want to take more control over the management and use of the land on which they live and work. There is a widespread agreement that an overhaul of the pattern of land ownership in our country is long overdue. We very much hope that the bill results in a significant change in the pattern of land ownership in Scotland. I have expressed some concern that that will not happen, but this is one occasion on which I hope to be proved wrong. Other countries have taken far more radical steps than Scotland will do today. Let me provide some examples. In 1973, Denmark banned the ownership of land for recreation or hobby uses. Non-residents are banned from buying land. In some parts of the Netherlands, only local residents are allowed to buy houses for sale in order to stop them being purchased by absentees. In Norway, the purchaser of a farm must promise to live on it for five years and must manage the farm in the approved way. The Tories should be warned that much more radical measures could have been proposed. Perhaps the Tories should quit while they are ahead.  There has been a general agreement among progressives in the chamber on the need for the bill. The exception has been the Tories. As a party, they are fast becoming an anachronism—like some of their positions during our proceedings on the bill. As far as the SNP is concerned, the bill may not be perfect, but it has our support.

The minister was not at Westminster when the subject was debated. At that time, his party opposed the provisions in the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994. In summing up, I will simply repeat the words of John McFall, who, speaking for the Labour party, said of the measure: "It is inappropriate to Scotland; it has no place in Scotland. When a Labour Government are elected we will make sure that the law is repealed."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 13 April 1994; Vol 241, c 364.]  Is what we have heard today the worth of a Labour promise?

Amendment 210 would remove the offence of aggravated trespass from the law of Scotland.  Sections 68 and 69 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, to which the amendment refers, relate directly to aggravated trespass. Section 68 created the offence of aggravated trespass. It states: "A person commits the offence of aggravated trespass if he trespasses on land in the open air and, in relation to any lawful activity which persons are engaging in or are about to engage in ... does there anything which is intended by him to have the effect— (a) of intimidating those persons or any of them so as to deter them or any of them from engaging in that activity, (b) of obstructing that activity, or (c) of disrupting that activity." Section 69 gave powers to the police to direct someone to leave land if they reasonably believed that that person was committing, had committed or intended to commit the offence of aggravated trespass. Anyone who fails to leave the land in those circumstances is guilty of an offence. Why repeal the offence of aggravated trespass? We believe that it is obsolete, inflammatory and confused. It is obsolete because the legislation was a Tory measure that was originally aimed at protesters who were trying to prevent fox hunts. The banning of fox hunting in Scotland seems to render the offence obsolete. The provision does not appear to have been used often. Since 2001, two cases involving contraventions under section 68(1) have been reported to the procurator fiscal—I do not think that there were any cases at all before that—and trials have been fixed, but it seems that matters could have been dealt with under other provisions. The provision is inflammatory, because the criminal offence of trespass in Scots law was imported to deal with a situation in England and is out of place with the tradition of the law of Scotland on access and trespass. It is confused, because the power for the police to direct people to leave land because they are regarded as trespassing is inappropriate in the context of the bill. Trespass has always been a problematic concept in Scotland. I do not know what it means in terms of the bill. When the provision in the 1994 act was about to be introduced, I understand that senior police officers in Scotland advised against it, because they felt that existing powers were adequate to deal with any such activity. Of course, those powers are still available. There is another good reason why we should repeal the provision: Labour, the SNP and the Liberals promised on the record to repeal it. The relevant sections of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 were strongly opposed by the Scottish Labour and Liberal parties and the SNP when they were dealt with at Westminster. In  the debates, Jim Wallace said: "Although a member of the Faculty of Advocates and of the Scottish Bar, the Minister"— who was Lord James Douglas-Hamilton— "quite clearly fails to appreciate that there is a distinctive legal system in Scotland. We may be a United Kingdom, but we are a United Kingdom that contains different legal systems. The Minister has not addressed that point. In this clause we are grafting on to the Scottish system measures that the Minister has made perfectly clear are not justified in terms of the mischief that the clause is meant to address. The Minister said that very few incidents have occurred in Scotland. He has not told the House where the pressure has come from within Scotland to bring forward such a measure. There have been some suggestions that the measure was forced upon the Scottish Office. There has been no openness whatsoever." Sam Galbraith, who was a member at Westminster and later in the Scottish Parliament, said: "I am sure that the Minister must be somewhat ashamed of himself in having to introduce the amendment tonight. He knows that it offends the tradition of Scottish law and also the Scottish tradition of access to the Scottish countryside, be it high in the mountains or low in the plains." John McFall, who was then Labour home affairs spokesperson, said categorically: "It is inappropriate to Scotland; it has no place in Scotland. When a Labour Government are elected we will make sure that the law is repealed."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 13 April 1994; Vol 241, c 364-79.] The Labour Government was elected in 1997 and the Executive has been in power in Scotland since 1999. Let us repeal the law. I move amendment 210.

Amendment 208 is fairly simple and straightforward and its effect should be obvious to all members. It would require the Executive—whomever it might comprise—to produce a report every four years on the diversity of land ownership and what it is doing to address the concentration of land ownership. I have previously reminded the chamber of the current land ownership pattern in Scotland. The bill's title shows that the bill is intended to bring about change. A report once a parliamentary session is not too much to ask for our monitoring of the change that the bill will bring about. If the rights that the bill confers do not bring about change in the balance of land ownership, the bill will have failed. Greater diversity of land ownership would mean more people living in the countryside. It would enable Scotland's poorer land to perform nearer to its production potential and would mean that Scotland's natural resources were distributed more equitably. I think that we all agree that the current situation is unacceptable. Many benefits can be achieved if the bill's purposes are realised, but we must know that they are being realised. What the amendment asks for is neither unrealistic nor unacceptable. I respectfully ask the minister to accept amendment 208. I move amendment 208.

Is the minister reassuring us that, in future, reports will be issued on changing patterns of land ownership in Scotland as a result of the bill? Will they be published openly so that we can all see them?

Amendment 214 made the cut. That suggests to me that, notwithstanding the minister's final comments, it is in keeping with the general principles of the bill that the amendment be discussed and, I hope, voted into the bill. I am hardly surprised by the Tory opposition to amendment 214. However, even for the Tories it is a little odd. There are 1,252 owners of two thirds of the land in Scotland; the current system is of benefit to very few people. What we are trying to do is to make the situation of benefit to a great many people. The bill does not go far enough in achieving that aim. All along, we have been consistent in supporting the bill as far as it goes, which is not very far. I have worked in local government, not as a councillor, but as a legal officer in a legal and administrative department. I have progressed compulsory purchase orders, so I know that the system is complicated, time-consuming and easily got wrong. However much I might wish compulsory purchase—even in the terms of amendment 214—to become much more widely used in achieving the aim of changing land ownership patterns, it is highly unlikely that there will be constant, rolling compulsory purchase. Despite the comments that have been made, I have talked about a public interest test. I make it clear that an interest would have to be registered for five years before the power was triggered. That would be followed by a ballot and a public interest test, plus confirmation of the ability to pay. There is also provision for an appeals procedure. That does not seem to me to be the kind of exaggerated system that members have described.

That is a semantic difference. If the argument is that amendment 214 would be an extension of compulsory purchase powers, what is the problem? To achieve the bill's aim, which is a change in the pattern of land ownership in Scotland, I am prepared to take a radical step and change the compulsory purchase power. The public interest test should be applied as is suggested in the amendment. If that is different from what is done at present with compulsory purchase, so be it. I would rather that we change the provisions of compulsory purchase to achieve the real ends of the bill than do what we may have done today and yesterday, which is spend a great deal of time, effort, energy and words to achieve not terribly much. I want a real change in the pattern of land ownership in Scotland and amendment 214 would help to achieve that.

The minister wants to intervene just as I am on my last word.

It is interesting that the minister seems to confirm that local authorities can already use the compulsory purchase power to achieve the bill's aim of effecting a change in the pattern of land ownership in Scotland. If that is the case, every local authority in Scotland should be challenged to achieve that end. Unfortunately, that has not happened and, as a result, we have the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill. If local authorities already have the power, why was the bill introduced in the first place? We know that local authorities do not really have that power. The SNP wants them to have it because we want to effect a real change in the pattern of land ownership. However, at present, the bill will not achieve that. The SNP is committed to extending the powers in the bill and amendment 214 is an attempt to do that. We will return to the issue in Parliament again and again until we see a real change in land ownership in Scotland.

Amendment 214 is a substantial amendment. In fairness to members who are operating with the papers they had previously, amendment 214 was substituted for amendment 205 and there are some fundamental differences between it and the amendment that appears in the first marshalled list for stage 3. A new marshalled list that was distributed this morning takes account of that. The effect of amendment 214 is to introduce a compulsory purchase power to the bill. If community bodies have an interest in land registered for at least five years and the right to buy has not arisen, they might hold a referendum under the terms of the bill and if successful, they might apply to the local authority to purchase the land in which it has registered an interest compulsorily on their behalf. That is what we want to happen. The local authority has discretion in deciding whether the compulsory purchase is appropriate. The conditions that apply are that there must be no prospect of the land coming up for sale in the next 10 years. The compulsory purchase may not be against the public interest and the community body—prior to the compulsory purchase—must show that it is able to pay for the land and the transaction costs. The basic scheme is that, where a community body has registered an interest in land, the right to buy has not been triggered for five years and there is no prospect of the right to buy being triggered in the next 10 years, the community body may hold a ballot under the terms of the bill. If the people of the community vote in favour of purchasing the land, the community body may apply to the council for a compulsory purchase. For that to happen, the council must consider that it is appropriate to carry out the compulsory purchase, that the purchase is not against the public interest, that the community body is able to pay for the land and the transaction expenses and that it will use the land in a way that is compatible with sustainable development. Finally, amendment 206 provides for an appeal process for landowners, community bodies and members of the community. Amendment 214 is supported by Highland Council and a similar amendment was lodged by Alasdair Morrison at stage 2. However, there are some differences between amendment 214 and Alasdair Morrison's stage 2 amendment. There is no reference to the non-existent Local Government in Scotland Act 2002. Community  bodies must wait five years before seeking a compulsory purchase from a local authority. A new public interest test will be introduced to allow the purchase to go ahead and communities will be required to pay for the land—it would not be transferred free of charge by the local authority. The Land Reform (Scotland) Bill is certainly a step in the right direction, but it is still rather timid. In Scotland, a quarter of the land is owned by 66 landowners, a third by 120 owners, half by 343 owners and two thirds by only 1,252 owners. There are local land monopolies that can strangle the development of communities for decades and that has been seen in Eigg, Mar Lodge, Assynt and elsewhere. The bill provides that it is only if the community has continually indicated its willingness to buy, set up a company, registered its interest and re-registered every five years, that it may, at such time that the owner becomes willing to sell, purchase the land at the market value. Amendment 214 reverses the timidity of the bill. It gives community bodies leverage on owners who hoard land. It cuts through the difficulty that a landowner might wish to hold on to land simply for the capital receipt, but not wish to invest in the land or the community. It cuts out all the technicalities relating to transfer of land by transfer of shares in a landowning company—which we have discussed—and avoidance by transfer to trust or transfer of pro indiviso shares. Its principle is simple and it fits in with the principle of redistributing land and redressing the balance of power in the countryside to the people who live there. That was the point of the bill in the first place. Amendment 214 is considerably more moderate than the crofting community right-to-buy amendments that we will vote on later. Alasdair Morrison lodged a similar amendment at stage 2 that sought to provide the local authority with compulsory purchase powers to buy land for the well-being of the community and pass it to a community body free of charge. At stage 2, he stated: "The Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 gives local authorities powers to acquire compulsorily any land in their area that is suitable for, or required to secure, development or improvement, or required for the purposes of the proper planning of the area. However, those powers relate to the planning function of the local authority."—[ Official Report , Justice 2 Committee , 5 November 2002; c 2053.] Alasdair Morrison's amendment was criticised on a number of grounds. Allan Wilson pointed out some technical flaws, including a reference to an act that does not exist, and he questioned the use of public money by local authorities. Stewart Stevenson supported that amendment  but pointed out that there was a lack of clarity over whether the community body to which the land was to be transferred was the same as the community body that made the application for a compulsory purchase. Duncan Hamilton said that he believed that the amendment would shift the balance of rights unfairly in favour of the community body and against the landowner. Amendment 214 seeks to deal with those criticisms. The technical flaws that were pointed out by Allan Wilson and Stewart Stevenson have been removed. The lack of balance has been addressed by requiring the community body to have its interest in the land registered for five years before it can ballot the community on purchase of the land. Under the amendment, the local authority, which has been elected to represent a wider area than the community body, will have discretion as to whether to go ahead with any compulsory purchase. It would not be able to act against the public interest if there was a prospect of the land coming up for sale. That addresses the issue of balancing the rights of the community and the landowner. The issue of the use of public funds has been addressed by requiring the community to pay for the purchase and any transaction costs. The deputy minister gave a commitment to examine the principle of compulsory purchase to release land for rural communities. In a letter that he wrote to the Justice 2 Committee on 14 January he stated: "The Executive have maintained a clear policy line that the community right to buy in Part 2 of the Bill depends on there being a willing seller. This has remained consistent since the publication of the White Paper ... I believe therefore that there is no basis for any divergence from this towards a specific compulsory purchase power. Also, the purpose of the community right to buy is to provide opportunities for communities to buy land when it comes to be sold, and not to enable other bodies to compulsorily purchase land and pass it on to the community body if they so wish." He also stated that he saw no reason to change what was already in the bill. I am disappointed, because I suspect that that is what the minister will say again today. That suggests that, although we are passing a land reform bill, we are not doing so with any great ambition. When the Scottish Parliament set out to work on land reform, I had hoped that our ambition to change fundamentally the pattern of land ownership in Scotland would be realised. I do not believe that the bill will realise that fundamental change. It might make a start, which is why we are supporting it. Opening up local authorities' compulsory purchase powers would take another step on from the start made by the bill.  Amendment 206, also in my name, is consequential to amendment 214. It provides for an appeals process to allow the landowner, a member of the community or the community body to appeal to the sheriff against a decision by the local authority to carry out a compulsory purchase. I do not need to speak any further on that. I move amendment 214.

In general, we support amendments 146 and 147. However, I invite the minister to provide clarification on amendment 146. Although it certainly seems appropriate that, as part of the application process, the use to which land is to be put should be public knowledge, it is possible that the community will have a business plan that requires confidentiality. It should be clarified whether ministers may still withhold information on the use to which land is to be put that is contained in a business plan that requires confidentiality, on the ground of commercial confidentiality. Is that possibility being ruled out altogether?

I have listened with interest to members' comments. We do not object to reregistration, which is essential for the reasons that we have outlined. However, are we saying that every five years community bodies must reinvent the wheel? That will be costly and time consuming. The process will act as a disincentive to reregistration. Instead, we should try to ensure that, once the original, detailed, costly work has been done, the work involved in reregistration is minimised. We are not saying that reregistration is unnecessary.

On the contrary, assignation ought to be permissible. Amendment 204 would allow the assignation of the right to buy land by one community body to another community body at the time when the right to buy was triggered. The amendment envisages a situation where a community body registers an interest in a larger area of land and, when the right to buy is triggered, assigns its right to a community body dealing with a smaller area of land. I point out that Highland Council supports amendment 204. The process of setting up a community body and registering an interest in land is cumbersome. The community body has to reregister its interest in each landholding by the same cumbersome procedure every five years, as we have just confirmed. Changes in land ownership in rural Scotland, in particular in the Highlands, are often piggybacked on an existing body, which is often a statutory body. For example, a local authority or a community council might wish to establish and oversee a community body for its entire area or a large part of it. When the right to buy is triggered, it may not be appropriate for a community body that covers a large area to pursue the purchase—the body may wish to assign the right to a more specific community body that covers a smaller, more defined area. Amendment 204 complements previous amendments to allow community councils to act as community bodies. We are trying to widen the scope, not narrow it. Those previous amendments were not agreed to, but amendment 204 is still important. At stage 2, Allan Wilson said, with regard to assignation, that he could not "think of circumstances in which two community bodies would be close enough to each other to have a registered interest in the same piece of land."—[ Official Report , Justice 2 Committee , 30 October 2002; c 2016.] However, two community groups were involved in a bid to purchase Glencoe—Ballachulish and  Glencoe community council and Friends of Glencoe. The Strathcona Glencoe estate was finally bought by a third party, which has established another community body—the Glencoe Heritage Trust Ltd. Assignation of any registered interest from one community body to another might conceivably have been useful in that situation. That is a concrete example of the kind of thing that can happen. At stage 2, the Justice 2 Committee passed one of the necessary amendments on assignation of the right to buy, but did not pass the other. The minister is now seeking, through amendment 142, to remove the amendment that was passed. As a result, we will oppose amendment 142 and press amendment 204.

At present, registration of an interest in land has effect for five years and thereafter lapses if the community does not reapply to register its interests by the same procedure as obtained for the original application. Amendment 203 would simplify the procedure by which reregistration may be made. Where a community body has registered an interest in land, that interest must be renewed every five years. Given that much land in rural Scotland rarely comes up for sale, it will frequently be necessary for a community body to reregister a number of times. It is in the nature of rural communities that community bodies will be fragile entities that are dependent on the hard work of perhaps one or two individuals for their continuing operation. If just one or two people die, take on other commitments, move on or lose enthusiasm, that could cause the community body to cease effective operation. If that happens, the community interest could be allowed to lapse after five years. The reregistration process should therefore be made as simple as possible in order to relieve the burden of administration on volunteers. In the bill as it stands now, a community body will have to complete and submit a full application form every five years, including a full specification of the land on which it is registering an interest. It will also have to advertise in local newspapers if the landowner cannot be found, respond to comments made to it and carry out a further test of community opinion. That is very onerous for a community body and could deter the necessary renewal of the registration from taking place.  A stage 2 amendment sought to simplify registration procedure by requiring reregistration by ministers if they received notification that circumstances had not materially changed. The amendment was rejected on the ground that the community body must show serious intent in seeking to purchase the land. Amendment 203 seeks at least to lighten the load, in the following ways. First, the community body would not be required to specify the land to which its interest related when that had already been specified in a previous application for registration of an interest. Secondly, the community would not be required to advertise for an owner who could not be found the first time the community interest had been registered, unless ministers had received a representation that the owner could be found. Thirdly, if ministers were satisfied at the first application that members of the community had sufficient connection with the land, they would not need to have that confirmed every five years, unless they had received an indication that members of the community did not have sufficient connection with the land. Finally, if ministers were satisfied at the first application that there was sufficient support in the community for registration of an interest, they would not need to have that confirmed every five years, unless they had received an indication that there was not sufficient support for registration of an interest. The amendment seeks to reduce the continual and cyclical burden that the bill would place on community bodies, which will consist almost entirely of volunteers. It seeks to simplify the procedure for reregistration, to make things easier and, in the longer term, perhaps, to ensure that the land-ownership pattern that we are trying to shift through the bill is in fact shifted. I move amendment 203.

Stewart Stevenson will speak to the amendments.

Amendment 196 would remove the word "Ministers" from line 23, page 18 and insert "the local authority in whose area the land lies". The amendment would pass to the local authority the power to define rural land, and so to define land that is registrable. That is a substantial power, because it means, in effect, deciding which land is registrable. The decision about which land is registrable is analogous to a planning decision. Local authorities handle planning issues, and are likely to know their local areas rather better than Scottish ministers and their civil servants are. If land reform is about anything, it should be about empowering local communities. Therefore, it seems more appropriate to give the power to define which land is registrable to local authorities, which are directly answerable to local communities. As far as I am aware, ministers have not produced plans showing which land is rural and which is urban, or defined the factors that they will use, other than population, to define which is which. I ask the chamber to agree to the amendment to allow local authorities to make such decisions. Amendments 197 and 198 are consequential on amendment 196. I move amendment 196.

That still does not answer the point about local knowledge. Ministers will not be in the same position as local authorities are to make reasonable decisions about what can and cannot be defined as rural and urban in a specific area. I have listened to the minister's comments and there is some merit in what he says, but local authorities know far better than anybody else what the situation is in their area. It is interesting that the minister raises the issue of consistency, because the result of some of the debates that we have had about handing local authorities powers is to introduce some of the inconsistencies that he now thinks are not appropriate. In a sense, everybody, including the minister, is trying to have it every which way. I press amendment 196.

I am glad that the minister has accepted some of the amendments. The reduction of the review period from five to two years will improve the proposed new section, although we do not believe that it fixes the situation. If amendment 92 is passed—the SNP is opposed to the amendment in its entirety—we would prefer the review period to be reduced to one year. The argument that the minister used does not hold up; after all, some of the establishments to which he referred must apply annually for drinks licences. They cannot guarantee that they can sell alcohol to their customers from one year to the next, so I do not see why the situation with regard to access should be any different. Amendment 188 deals with the general power for local authorities to make byelaws that will exclude land from access rights. At present, a circularity seems to have crept into the legislation. The situation is complicated. Sections 6(1)(k) and 12(1)(b) refer to each other and appear to give local authorities a general power to make byelaws that will exclude land from access rights beyond the powers to regulate access in section 12(1)(a) and the powers to prohibit access for various purposes in section 12(1)(c). Section 12(1) will grant the power to local authorities to make byelaws. There are three subsections, each with separate powers. Section 12(1)(a) will allow authorities to make byelaws that will provide for "the responsible exercise of access rights" and "the responsible use, management and conduct of the ownership of the land". Section 12(1)(c) will allow authorities to make byelaws for  "the preservation of public order and safety ... the prevention of damage ... the prevention of nuisance or danger" and "the conservation or enhancement of natural or cultural heritage." Section 12(1)(b) will allow local authorities to make byelaws for the purposes in section 6(1)(k), but section 6(1)(k) allows land to be excluded from access rights by byelaws. Byelaws that are made under section 12(1)(b) are therefore not subject to the conditions in sections 12(1)(a) or 12(1)(c). That is indicated by further reference in section 12(2) to section 12(1)(c) as a separate byelaw-making power.  We therefore need clarification of what section 6(1)(k) is for, because there is a circularity that means that any land could be exempted through byelaws. Perhaps the minister will clarify that and explain why he thinks that sections 12(1)(a) and 12(1)(c) are not broad enough without further powers. As I said, the SNP has general concerns about amendment 92. We do not believe that local authorities should be allowed to use provisions in the bill in order—in effect—to reverse the bill's intent, but that is precisely what amendment 92 will allow. We have seen plenty of examples in which local authorities make decisions that people find incomprehensible. For example, recent decisions about taking photographs at school Christmas plays indicate some of the ways in which local authorities can interpret provisions. Amendment 92 should be agreed to, but if it is to be agreed, I would prefer that it were amended as the SNP suggests in amendments 92H and 92J.

I will try to be as brief as possible. The minister has indicated his acceptance of amendment 83A. I thank him for that. Amendment 85A has a similar intention and we do not see that there is a problem with it. I suggest to the minister that the taking away of fruit rather than the crossing of land would be outwith the right. My concern is that if people cross land in order to pick fruit for profit or to go mushrooming, where the activity does not take place on the land that is being crossed, those people will end up being challenged. As the minister will know, mushrooming is becoming a major activity in some parts of Scotland, so I urge him to consider accepting amendment 85A. I am astonished by amendment 42. As a walker, I am concerned that agreement to amendment 42 would mean that I would be in trouble if I woke up a cow when I was walking. That is the import of the amendment. It is amazing that amendment 42 provides no definition of what it would mean to disturb any wild or farm animal. The biggest disturbance that a rabbit is likely to experience is terminal disturbance at the end of a farmer's shotgun. I am sure that being disturbed or frightened by a walker pales into insignificance in  comparison with that prospect. I am not sure what the Tories are on about with amendment 42, which is a daft amendment. I commend the SNP amendments to the Parliament.

Amendment 184 is a probing amendment. We are seeking to establish the Executive's true position in respect of tracks that run through farmyards. Many tracks—especially tracks up hills—start in farmyards. Under the bill as it stands, those tracks would be excluded from the right of access. In response to an amendment in the name of Scott Barrie that sought to deal with this issue at stage 2, Allan Wilson stated that he wanted to nail down access to tracks that run through farmyards and that he was willing to discuss the matter further. However, the Executive has not lodged an amendment to deal with the problem. Amendment 184 seeks to protect the existing right of access under common law, which we discussed separately, from change as a result of the establishment of statutory rights of access. Farmyards provide very good routes—often the only route—into the countryside behind the curtilage. Members who are walkers know that to be the case. There is concern that continued access along such routes will be restricted in future if access rights do not apply to them. In its report, the Justice 2 Committee noted: "there are many places where access to open land can only be gained through farmyards. This is particularly so in relation to access on horseback of bicycle. However, farmyards will fall within the definition of curtilage in section 6 and so not be included within access rights." The committee indicated that the issue needed to be addressed. Amendment 184 is a probing amendment. We are seeking assurances from the minister that the public should expect to be able to continue to take access through farmyards, as they do at present, rather than just on rights of way. Limiting access to rights of way would restrict hugely the access that is currently available in Scotland.

It is always charming when a minister accepts one's amendments—but it always throws one right out with regard to what one was about to say. Nevertheless, I am happy—

In fairness to my colleague, he was the one who lodged an amendment to remove the word "structure" at stage 2. He has sought at this stage to remove other redundant instances of that word, in keeping with his stage 2 amendment—although the purpose was slightly different then. As amendments 182 and 183 have been accepted by the minister, I think that I can save the chamber's time by coming to a close after that brief explanation of the situation in which Stewart Stevenson found himself.

The SNP intends to vote for the Executive amendments in the group, but we think that some aspects need to be clarified. Amendment 177 was lodged because, if amendments 61 and 62 are agreed to, the public will have a right of access to private land for recreational, educational and some commercial purposes, but—arguably—not for scientific or artistic purposes. The minister asked for examples of what we were talking about. Under the scientific heading might fall scientific work that is undertaken by several non-governmental organisations and which cannot be regarded as educational, recreational or commercial. For example, such work could include an NGO monitoring animal migration or the occurrence of pollutants in a river or soil. As for artistic purposes, the question is arguable, but would all artistic work fall within the three categories of educational, recreational or commercial activity? I know that that debate cannot really be held in the context of land reform, but I assume that we all accept that an argument exists over art for art's sake, not primarily for any other purpose. If George Wylie were to decide to float another paper boat down the Clyde, would that be a recreational, commercial or educational activity? I am not sure. That is what we are considering and I am interested in the minister's response. I intend to support Dennis Canavan's amendment 66A, which is part of the argument about extending clarification, particularly on educational visits. Amendment 66A would rectify weaknesses in the Executive's amendment 66, which deals with educational visits. Many such visits are not solely for the purpose of understanding natural or cultural heritage. They may be aimed at educating the public in the practice of skills that are required for various activities that have been mentioned, such as hillwalking and horse-riding, or in how to exercise access rights responsibly and safely. I assume that we all hope that such courses can take place. A school might organise a Duke of Edinburgh's award trip to the outdoors to practise navigation. Such activities must remain within access rights; otherwise, landowners might try to restrict them or to argue that they do not fall within the categories in the bill. Failure to expand access rights in such a way might make it difficult to educate the public about responsible or safe exercise of access rights.  The comments that I made about amendment 66A also apply to Dennis Canavan's amendment 66C. My amendment 178 is consequential on amendment 177. I have asked the minister for further clarification. We are trying to make it clear in the bill which activities are excluded and which are not.

This has been rather a mixed debate. Some MSPs have risen to the occasion, but some have stooped to their usual standard—then there was Ben Wallace. It is just as well that David McLetchie and Annabel Goldie were absent for Ben Wallace's speech, as they would have been red-faced with embarrassment. If I thought that Ben Wallace was in any way representative of the Army, I would be in despair, but luckily, I know that he is not. Labour members should be concerned that he will vote for the Labour amendment.  The Labour stance, as expressed by the party's spokespeople this morning, is astonishing. They have said that the matter can be debated in the pubs, living rooms, churches and cafes of Scotland but that the one gathering that should not have the debate is the Scottish Parliament. That is barely credible. The Scottish Parliament is nothing if it is not the voice of the Scottish people. That does not mean to say that it is the only voice, but it is the voice of the Scottish people. Labour's position today, as articulated by Tom McCabe and some others, does him and his party no favours. There have been honourable exceptions. I note in particular the contributions made by Elaine Smith, and by Bill Butler, who made an admirable speech. In effect, his was a speech against the Labour position, even if he is voting for it, and it must be commended. However, other Labour members—the usual suspects—have lined up to whinge about the SNP making this poor old Parliament debate matters over which it has no control. What on earth are they afraid of? The Scottish people want the Scottish Parliament to debate the matter. The SNP believes that it is to the Scottish people that members of this Parliament owe allegiance—our oaths made that clear in 1999. I strongly believe that, individually and collectively, we cannot absolve ourselves of moral responsibility. In that regard, I commend George Reid's speech. We know from polling evidence that the people of Scotland want this debate and they want it to take place in Scotland. The vast majority are opposed to Britain and America acting alone and 68 per cent of the people of Scotland believe that Westminster should consult the Scottish Parliament before launching an attack on Iraq. Fat chance—Blair is not even going to consult the House of Commons, much less the Scottish Parliament. That is, unfortunately, what Johann Lamont and her colleagues have to accept. I wish that my Westminster colleagues had had the opportunity to vote on the matter at Westminster, but thus far they have not. So much for democracy. However, that is all the more reason for us to tell Blair what we and the Scottish people think about the prospects of war against Iraq and, in particular, about military action being taken without further reference to the United Nations.

No. It is a pity that Tony Blair could not turn up today, given that he is in Scotland, to hear the debate for himself. Like all other members, I have had e-mails about today's debate. One constituent, who put it very well, stated:  "I think the most frustrating thing is a feeling of disenfranchisement, a feeling that decisions have been made and there is nothing that can be done and that the views of the electorate are being dismissed and ignored. I hope the Scottish Parliament backs Mr Swinney's motion and at least we may have had some voice against the Government's seemingly 'inevitable path to war'." Scotland's voice must be heard in this important international debate.

No.

If the member wishes to take that view, she can. As Tony Blair is in town this morning, what better way could there be to ensure that he hears Scotland's voice? It seems likely that the Royal Scots Dragoon Guards, the 1 st Black Watch armoured infantry, HMS Argyll and other Clyde-based ships, as well as military aircraft from RAF Lossiemouth, will all be involved if an attack on Iraq is ordered. If Scotland's troops are to be involved in a war, we—as Scotland's Parliament—must assert a position and we must be confident that the war is legal and just. Things in the United States are not as members might think. Polling in America has found that although the Bush Administration, with Blair as back-up, continues to assert that it could act without additional UN approval, the American people are less convinced. Let us not be conned into thinking that caution will let down America. It may let down Bush, but that is not the same thing and we should not confuse the two. I say to one or two of the Labour members who have spoken that a litany of religious anxiety has been expressed about what is currently happening and to pretend that such anxiety does not exist is to fly in the face of what everybody knows is the reality. I turn to an issue that has caused much concern this morning. Despite the opposition that a great many people throughout the country, including various church leaders, have expressed, there is an undeniable military build-up, the scale and manner of which puts us on an inevitable path to war. There has been much comment about the word "inevitable". To use an analogy, if one sets out on a road with no exits, reaching the road's destination is inevitable, unless one comes to a grinding halt or hacks out a new road. I can hope, but right now, neither of those options seems to be on the mind of Blair or Bush. The clear message is that it does not matter what the UN weapons inspectors find because  Bush knows that Saddam deserves a kicking and Tony is going to help him do it. That macho posturing would be pathetic if it were not so dangerous. I think that I heard a reporter on BBC News 24 describing HMS Ocean's departure from port as issuing to Saddam Hussein the challenge: "Come and have a go, if you think you're hard enough." Great stuff. Perhaps the plan is to provoke Iraq into doing something. A letter in today's edition of The Scotsman from somebody who describes himself as Colonel Dunlop states: "If Saddam adopts the same logic we are using to justify pre-emptive war, he will have better reason than we do to start it, for we have the capability to attack Iraq and have declared our intent to use it." While HMS Ark Royal is steaming off with other ships, reservists are being put on notice and the US is amassing forces for possible military action in the gulf, US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld has this week signed an order to send a further 62,000 troops to the gulf region, which will nearly double the size of the American forces there. Military analysts say that the expected deployment of 150,000 personnel in and around the gulf by the second half of February would be enough to launch what the Pentagon calls a rolling-start attack. In the face of that, some of the optimism that has been expressed in the debate seems unwarranted. If somebody would like to intervene, they may do so now.

We are debating the motion that is before us and the important word in that motion is "currently". If Karen Gillon listens to the rest of my speech, she will hear what we believe is necessary before we are to go to war. As has been stated repeatedly, resolution 1441 gives a clear mandate to the weapons inspectors and puts a clear responsibility on Iraq to comply. The resolution also makes it perfectly clear that the UN Security Council is to convene on receipt of a report from the inspectors. It does not mention attacking Iraq, but states that the Security Council will meet to consider the situation. The UK ambassador to the UN seemed to understand that point when he stated: "If there is a further Iraqi breach of its disarmament obligations, the matter will return to the Council". That seems clear and straightforward. Labour members are nodding their heads, but that is not  the position for which they have argued in the debate. The UK ambassador's statement makes it all the more puzzling that Bush and Blair think that they can ride roughshod over international opinion and that is why Tom McCabe's amendment should fail. We must be clear about something that might easily be overlooked among the preparations for war that are going on around us. The weapons inspectors, who were appointed by the UN, have to date found no evidence to provoke the serious consequences that are threatened in resolution 1441. The chief UN arms inspector, Hans Blix, expressed that position clearly when he said: "We have now been there for some two months and been covering the country in ever wider sweeps and we haven't found any smoking guns". Mr Blix suggested that there are unanswered questions, and that is precisely why he and his team must be given the time and space that they need to complete the job that we have asked them to do, without the constant threat hanging over their heads that their work could be interrupted by war.

I will tell members the circumstances in which we will support the war, but first I will finish with what Hans Blix has said. Yesterday, he said that his team might have to stay in Iraq until March. That is a bit out of line with Bush's February timetable. There are several amendments to the motion, and I await 5 o'clock to find out how members will vote on them. I hope that members in other parties will not follow the usual patterns of voting. In particular, I remind all members who share our concerns that the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament has urged support for the SNP motion. It is not enough to say that we should leave it to Westminster because, frankly, Westminster is so far stifling debate. Even that arch opponent of the Scottish Parliament's existence, Tam Dalyell, thinks that it is ironic that the Scottish Parliament can find the means of having this debate while the House of Commons is refused it. Labour members will be well aware that there is far from a unanimous view on the issue even in the UK Cabinet, far less in the wider party. I believe that the First Minister has behaved very discourteously this morning by coming in to listen to the Labour front-bench speech and then leaving. His silence is short sighted and parochial. It lets his party down; it lets the Parliament down; and, more to the point, it lets Scotland down.  I commend George Reid's eloquence on the humanitarian aspect of what we are debating. I suspect that I am not a pacifist any more than most people in this chamber. However, the SNP is committed to the principles of international law and the primacy of the United Nations. We cannot and will not support military action against Iraq unless three clear conditions have been met.

It is called a conclusion. The first condition is that the UN inspectors must have been given sufficient time to produce a comprehensive report for consideration by the UN Security Council. The second condition is that the UN Security Council must have received and published clear and compelling evidence proving that Iraq has weapons of mass destruction. The third condition is that a new mandate for military action must have been agreed by the UN Security Council, containing clear terms on which such action should be taken and a clear objective for any such action. The Parliament must be the voice of the Scottish people and send the message to the Prime Minister that he must take the UK off the path to war that he has set us on and root all his actions in relation to this matter in the legitimacy of international law and the United Nations. I urge members to support the SNP motion.

The minister may be aware that, although Network Rail and all the other relevant bodies and individuals, including himself, profess to want an increased use of the rail network, community calls for the reopening of mainline passenger stations such as those at Greenloaning and Blackford in my constituency often result in a never-ending circuit of buck passing? Where there are clear expressions of customer demand, which I presume is to be widely welcomed, will the  minister clarify precisely how he will ensure that supply, which in this case includes trains, stations and accessible timetables, meet that demand?

I say at the outset that Scotland has one of the best justice systems in the world—that extends to the legal profession—but that does not mean that any of it is perfect, hence this bill. As with any measure that refers to legal technicalities, I know that there will be a temptation for those members who are not lawyers or members of the justice committees to allow their eyes to glaze over and simply leave it to those in the know. I advise the chamber that sometimes even lawyers' eyes glaze over. We are not immune from that reaction. I urge members not to let their eyes glaze over today, because the bill is one of those rarely sighted beasts—a truly cross-party bill. David McLetchie proposed it, but it is no accident that Donald Gorrie, Pauline McNeill and I support it. Before the bill was introduced, much work was done to ensure that there would be cross-party support and that bodies such as the Scottish Consumer Council and the Scottish legal services ombudsman would welcome the bill in the main. Much of the credit for that work goes to Michael Clancy, who is a director of the Law Society, and to his colleagues. He is well known to all of us and I applaud him for his work on the bill. The bill's genesis was in three proposals by the council of the Law Society of Scotland to amend the council's powers, which it requires legislative action to do. The bill will promote awareness, improve efficiency and formalise non-lawyers' involvement in the council's decision-making process. If the wider public think about the matter at all, they want non-lawyers to be involved in the  processes. Through the bill, the Law Society seeks to be open about the regulation process. The Law Society views the bill as part of that process. The bill will allow the council's functions to be delegated to committees, sub-committees or individuals and will provide for the appointment of sub-committees. It will provide for the appointment of lay persons to committees or sub-committees of the council and for such lay persons to form a majority on the committee or sub-committee to which they have been appointed. That is important, because it means that committees and sub-committees of the council might have a majority of lay members. Non-lawyers might be surprised to hear that, in general, lawyers want the regulation of their profession to be considered as fair and as open as possible. The bill is one small way to achieve that better. I emphasise that, as David McLetchie said, the Law Society is legally bound in its present operations. Perhaps that is not widely known. It is assumed out there that the Law Society operates on the basis of rules that it made up itself. In fact, the Law Society does not operate in that way. Much of what it does is dictated by statute and it cannot move outside those statutory boundaries. Because the council is barred by law from delegating various functions, it gives the impression of being a closed-shop, star-chamber kind of operation and the council as a whole must decide on almost every quasi-judicial function that it has. That slows the process considerably and makes it unwieldy. That matter needs to be addressed. If we allow the council to delegate its functions, it will be able to devolve its decision-making power to committees, which will speed up the process and make it more consumer friendly. That is what the bill is all about. With the aim of making the council's processes more consumer friendly, one of the bill's most important aspects is that it will enable the Law Society to involve non-lawyers more widely in its decision making in a more formalised way than is currently permitted. The society has lay members on some committees. Even at present, it is not the case that no lay members are involved. With the bill, the society wants to expand its ability to appoint more lay members and to allow lay members to form majorities on some committees. Each of the society's five client relations committees has 10 members, four of whom are lay members. Non-lawyers are also members of the society's mental health and disability, tax law, intellectual property, law reform and admissions committees and of its pensions law working party. The society greatly values non-lawyers' contributions to the decision-making process. If the bill is passed, it will provide a solid basis in law  for the further deployment of non-lawyers in the society's committees. Crucially, it will also allow lay persons to form a majority on any Law Society committee to which they are appointed. It is probably the Law Society's consideration of complaints that causes most people concern about the way in which the society discharges its business—that has been mentioned. The legal services ombudsman has argued strongly for the majority of members of complaints committees to be lay people and recommends 75 per cent as the ideal figure for lay involvement. The Scottish Conveyancing and Executry Services Board has 75 per cent lay representation in its complaints procedures, and as the board is soon to be abolished, with its functions transferred to the Law Society, it would be incongruous and unacceptable if the practitioners who are registered with the board were subject to a different regime simply because of an administrative change, as the board has said. The Scottish Consumer Council was clear in its evidence to the Justice 1 Committee that the council should not consider conduct complaints and it shared the legal services ombudsman's view that they should be a task for a specialist committee or sub-committee. The Scottish Consumer Council supported the bill, because it will mean that complaints are dealt with more quickly. The ombudsman's view in supporting the bill's general aims was that, as things stand, the council could not manage its amount of work without the power to delegate. That alone should be enough to convince anyone of the bill's necessity.

The legal services ombudsman has concerns about the way in which the Law Society operates. David McLetchie explained that other discussions are being held. The bill was produced before the Justice 1 Committee had finalised its report on the regulation of the legal profession, so it might not be fair to say that the bill fails to deal with some of the criticisms. The legal services ombudsman—who is a she—has made some fair points, which I am sure that the Law Society is examining carefully. The bill is not the end of the process. In effect, it is the start of a process. We should welcome that,  but not imagine that we can change everything overnight so that everybody is satisfied. All members are approached by people who have concerns and complaints about solicitors or how the Law Society operates. Some of those complaints might be justified and some might not be. It is often difficult for us to ascertain where the initial fault might have lain, particularly with situations that might have continued for more than 10 years. A bigger issue needs to be considered carefully. I am sure that the Law Society will do that. The bill is a useful and welcome small measure. It is not the be-all and end-all of changes. It will permit the Law Society to function more effectively, more speedily and more openly. I think that we all welcome that, however small the changes might seem. It is almost inconceivable that we could have introduced the bill at Westminster, because it would never have been considered a legislative priority. Perhaps it is not considered a legislative priority even here, but because it has widespread support, we can get it through our parliamentary process. It would not have reached even the starting blocks at Westminster. We must remember our ability to undertake smaller but nevertheless important measures speedily. I commend the bill to Parliament. I hope that its initial cross-party support and the consensus in the debate will result in overwhelming support for the bill at decision time.

It is a shame that Des McNulty chose to lower the tone of the debate. I suggest to him that his speech was nothing other than a carefully crafted waste of everybody's time. He might want to rethink his speeches in future. The subject of today's debate crosses portfolios, as we have discovered only too graphically this morning. Obviously, we have talked mostly about social work and there were times when I thought that the debate was more like death by buzzword—when one is not accustomed to the jargon, it can be impenetrable. I will speak about youth justice, because that is what I am most concerned about. Some members touched on the issue, but only Ken Macintosh chose to highlight it as the main subject of his speech.  Although we recognise that only a minority of young people are involved in offending, youth crime and youth disorder rank extremely high on the list of things that people come to see me about in my surgeries. On Monday night, I was at a local meeting in Perth where the issue was raised. It is raised by communities right across my constituency and I know that that is the experience of other members in their constituencies. Of nearly a million crimes and offences committed in Scotland, somewhere between 40 and 66 per cent are committed by under 21-year-olds. That is a huge percentage. In 2000, 34 per cent of young people owned up to having committed an offence in the previous year. That is up from 22 per cent in 1993 and 28 per cent in 1996. Even if we allow for some macho bravado, the figures are still way too high. The number of offenders under 16 who have committed 10 offences or more rose between 1998-99 and 2000-01. Vandalism is at a 25-year record level and 42 per cent of vandalism offences last year were committed by 16 to 20-year-olds. There is clearly a problem that needs to be tackled. The motion refers to the Audit Scotland report, which was published only within the past week. The report shows that a problem has been identified but is not being tackled. Courtesy of Nicol Stephen and his leaked media plan, we already had a fair idea of what would be in the report. Nevertheless, it makes grim reading for the Executive. It highlights the failure so far to deal with offending by young people and reveals the system as being slow, uneven, lacking in proper monitoring and starved of resources. Let us look at some of the report's findings. It takes too long for young people to proceed through the children's hearings system and the criminal justice system. We in the SNP have certainly asked about time intervals for persistent young offenders both in children's hearings and in the criminal justice system as a whole, but we cannot get the answers because there is no centrally held information that allows us even to assess what the problem is. There are significant variations in the decisions reached on young people accused of offences. The report praises the quality of social inquiry reports in the criminal justice system and we should acknowledge that praise. However, that high quality now appears to be under threat from the lack of social workers. Just last Friday, Sheriff James Farrell was reported in The Herald to have spoken of the growing credibility gap between what the Scottish Executive is introducing and the ability of local authority social work departments to deliver on the ground. The day before, apparently, he was forced to continue six cases because social inquiry reports were unavailable. He was  told in three instances that there would be a delay of two to three months in the implementation of community service orders. We have spent a lot of time this morning talking about problems in social work, but that is the end result on the ground of the wider problems. Because of the difficulties, many young offenders do not get the services that they need to tackle their offending behaviour. There is a lack of specialist services and social workers to deal with young offenders, as we have been saying over the months as well as this morning. There are some good projects, such as Matrix and Freagarrach, which members from all parties support, but the minister must accept that delivery is patchy.

I hear what the minister is saying, but we must recognise that we are a number of years down the line of a Labour Administration—since 1997 at Westminster and since 1999 here. We seem constantly to have the same debate and we constantly hear reassurances, but we do not see results.

When a sheriff talks openly in court about a credibility gap, that is a serious matter and the Executive must take it on board. The problem is that the Executive's main concern was how to spin its way out of the indictment that it knew was coming rather than how to implement the recommendations that were made in the report. Words are fine, but the problem is that they have not resulted in action that makes a difference. The Scottish Committee of the Council on Tribunals report on the children's hearings system in Scotland has also highlighted poor resourcing of the system for dealing with young offenders. The report found that the shortage of resources led to  poor accommodation—even new purpose-built accommodation was found to be cramped and there was not always suitable access to it—and to reports not being received until hearings took place, which led to delays and inconvenience to panel members and families. Sheriff James Farrell's comments may have arisen in the context of the sheriff court, but the same criticisms could equally apply in respect of children's panels. The shortage of resources has led to the delayed allocation of social workers, which in turn has led to a lack of support for vulnerable families. Problems are still not addressed long after necessary support should have been in place. In addition, the shortage has led to a scarcity of locally available programmes or placements to provide early help for children and to a lack of secure residential places. There is real concern that, in certain circumstances, a hearing might have to tailor its decision to fit the resources that are available within the local authority rather than reaching a decision that might be in the best interests of the child. No member would agree that that is a satisfactory way of proceeding. Both reports call for a specific commitment of resources, particularly to supply services to tackle offending behaviour. The Government has promised resources, but has so far failed to deliver, even by its own yardstick. As for progress on the so-called 10-point action plan that was announced in June, the Government scores nothing out of 10. The Audit Scotland report specifically mentions the crisis in criminal justice social work. There has been much discussion of social work this morning. Alternatives to custody cannot be expanded without social workers to provide those alternatives. Social workers are an absolutely integral part of the entire system. According to last year's statistical bulletin, there were vacancies for 10 per cent of criminal justice social work jobs. Three years ago, the ADSW asked the Executive to upgrade training for social workers, but the Executive has only just promised to do so—whether it will get round to fulfilling that promise is another matter. Another confession in the leaked spin document that I mentioned is that the extra secure accommodation places that the Executive announced will be nowhere near enough, even if we knew when and where they were to become available, which we do not. I am sure that we all agree that the priority for youth justice is to ensure that we address offending behaviour before it sets the pattern for a youngster's adult life. However, less than 40 per cent of youth justice spend is directed at tackling such behaviour. At the start of the debate, the minister made a thoughtful speech and I accept much of what she  said. However, she dodged a number of issues. She skirted around the issue of poverty by acknowledging that there were problems but pretending that the damning reports on poverty levels in Scotland did not apply in the way that they said they did. She did not address the collapse of social work morale, which was exacerbated by the First Minister's comments. Those comments are on the record and were widely reported, but he has not repudiated them. Like her colleague Jackie Baillie, the minister is right to say that the problems in question are everyone's problems, but there is a difficulty with that line of argument. The problems must be someone's responsibility; something that is everyone's responsibility ends up being no one's responsibility. We must be careful not to fall into that big trap. I listened with care to Bill Aitken. It was seven minutes and 35 seconds before he got anywhere near a substantive point, which was—in the context of this debate—a rather misplaced attack on comprehensive education. He then called for the children's hearings system to be beefed up—I suspect that the chamber is in unanimous agreement about that—and for more realism. After that, he sat down. He did not make much use of the 12 minutes that he was allocated. The best that can be said is that perhaps he was not quite as well prepared as he usually is. However, I listened carefully to Murdo Fraser's summing up, so perhaps all that those members did was confirm that the Tories have nothing to offer the debate. Some members made interesting comments. I say to Donald Gorrie that my colleague Irene McGugan is still reeling from the damage that he did to her political career in the SNP. I do not doubt that she will need counselling to get over that. The SNP would deal with the youth justice crisis by increasing police numbers, providing 100 new secure accommodation places and introducing parental compensation orders. I say to Jamie McGrigor that that idea was drawn from other jurisdictions that have far better youth justice records than Scotland's. However, I welcome the clarity that he gave to the Conservative party's opposition to the proposal. He can be sure that every voter to whom I speak will know of the Tories' opposition. I also mention the developing idea of family courts, which would deal with some of the issues that relate to the mid-teen range and which are beginning to cause concern. Members have heard Irene McGugan's comments about child protection services. We want more urgent action and supportive leadership from the Executive to help to resolve the acute recruitment crisis; consideration of and action on  the recommendations of the child protection audit and review as a minimum measure; and legislation to provide a statutory basis for child protection committees—I welcome the minister's positive response to that. The SNP supports more integrated children's services, provided that they are properly resourced and that we do not have another credibility gap of the sort that sheriffs on the bench are recognising. Perhaps more generally, we should consider how to make Scotland more child friendly. We cannot escape the fact that child poverty is at a scandalous level. It is impacting on young people's physical, emotional and intellectual development and is clearly linked with youth crime. The Executive has failed to turn that around. Whether serious inroads will be made as long as the Parliament lacks the powers that it needs to tackle the core problem is a moot point. Perhaps the governing coalition could at least acknowledge that truth, but I will not hold my breath.

The SNP does not hesitate to support the wording of the Executive's motion, but our amendment makes it clear that we believe that there are issues that require serious attention. The minister probably does not disagree with us. I want to digress briefly to defend—uncharacteristically—Mike Rumbles. A man who had been a victim of domestic violence visited my surgery. He had suffered clear physical and psychological distress. If that distress were quantified across Scotland, it would not approach the distress suffered by women, but it was equally devastating for that person. Perhaps we ought to recognise that. We all know that the incidence of domestic violence against women is high. I am never sure about using the word "domestic"—it worries me slightly, as it makes matters a bit too cosy. I do not want to get into the complicated argument about statistics. There might or might not have been exaggeration on the Executive's part, but that argument is not worth getting into today. However, we know that, as with rape, the majority of offences go unreported and that most women take their problem to others—much less to the police or  anyone else in authority—only after they have been victimised on a number of occasions. The longer that situation continues, the more disempowered the woman will become. Equally, the longer it continues, the more likely it is that any children of the relationship will become abused. Indeed, often the eventual violence against children rather than violence directed against women triggers their motivation to deal with the problem. I welcome the money that the Executive has pledged to deal with the issue and the money for refuge spaces in particular. However, it is not enough to say no more than that no amount would probably be enough. Today, I am not concerned with the amount; instead, I want to address some of the issues raised by how the money is being disbursed. First, the requirement of matching by local authority funding reinforces the patchiness of service provision that arises out of different policy priorities being chosen by different local authorities. Secondly, I understand that a significant proportion of new money available under the development fund must now be spent on capital funding because of the requirement to sustain a larger work force, which is, of course, the corollary of increasing the number of refuge places in the first place. Thirdly, there is a question that is specifically related to the funding for the "Respect" scheme. The pilot cost £50,000 and I have been advised that the Executive believed that it would cost only another £50,000 to roll out the scheme nationally. That would certainly be supported by the SNP. However, there seems to be a question about the sufficiency of the money available for roll-out. There might be specific reasons as to why the pilot and the roll-out would cost the same. If that is the case, I hope that I can hear from the minister on that. Fourthly, on a much more specific issue, last year, Shakti Women's Aid, which deals with black and ethnic minority women, helped a total of 167 women, 23 of whom had no recourse to public funds. That means that helping them is very difficult indeed. For one reason or another, those women are prohibited from accessing social welfare benefits and so find themselves in effect trapped in abusive relationships. They represent a very high level of unmet need within a specific community. There are other gaps in that area of provision and I hope that the minister will be able to say something today that will give Shakti some confidence that the extra funding that it feels that it needs will be forthcoming. I will discuss the impact of domestic violence on children. An estimated 100,000 children and young people have had experience of domestic  violence. A huge percentage of them go on to be assaulted themselves, but it seems that only 10 out of 32 local authorities are to receive funding for workers dealing specifically with children's issues. That statistic appears to come from local authorities themselves.

I hope that what the Executive is doing deals specifically with the situation that we were advised of, which is that local authorities believe—on the basis of recent announcements, I think—that only 10 local authorities would get funding for children's workers. Perhaps there is an on-going argument about that issue. That shortage of children's workers mirrors the shortage of social workers across Scotland and so is part of a much bigger issue. The shortage of social workers affects many areas of our justice system, including the domestic violence area. There are significant and increasing numbers of vacancies in key social work sectors. I am aware of the Executive's campaign to promote recruitment into the caring professions, but it is a little difficult for me to understand whether the responsibility for that lies with the Minister for Social Justice or the Minister for Education and Young People. I wonder whether the minister can advise members of the likely outcome of the campaign. Indeed, could she indicate what would be a measure of its success, so that we can establish whether it is successful? The president of the Association of Directors of Social Work has gone on record with the view that the increasingly pressured work load of social work services is a function of the "enormous range of initiatives" that have been introduced by the Executive. I do not want to criticise the Executive for those initiatives, but perhaps it could be criticised if it has failed to ensure that the affected services have sufficient resources to deal with the increase in pressure and work load. There has been discussion of domestic violence courts. I look forward to the Minister for Justice, as the minister responsible for our court system, initiating a debate on the specific proposals so that we can see how domestic violence courts are expected to work. The SNP is broadly supportive of the idea that a different way has to be found to deal with domestic violence within the criminal justice system. We agree with Lord Carloway that  "Domestic cases ... are usually very complex, sometimes involving children ... and at times the judicial process is not flexible enough to deal with all the possibilities that might arise." It is precisely for those reasons that we now feel that a more radical approach needs to be considered: setting up family courts to deal with all the aspects of civil and criminal law that can be defined as being within the ambit of the family. That would cover domestic violence, divorce, custody and access disputes and would perhaps even be extended to include the 16 and 17-year-olds who have given rise to such controversy in another policy remit. Those sitting in a family court build up specialist expertise in the way that the sheriffs in the drugs courts have done. That would enable them to deal far more effectively with domestic violence cases and to deal in a more unified fashion with the consequences of domestic violence. That would be beneficial to everyone concerned, particularly the women who are victims. I move amendment S1M-3468.2, to insert at end: "but nevertheless calls on the Scottish Executive to ensure that funding of services dealing with domestic violence is equalised across Scotland, to recognise and meet the needs of children affected by domestic violence, to address, as a matter of urgency, the recruitment crisis in social work services and to reform the justice system so as to allow the development of family courts which would include inter alia powers to deal with domestic violence."

I welcome the Deputy Minister for Justice to his new responsibilities. He has perhaps been thrown in the deep end and I dare say that he is having to stick fairly closely to his brief, but I hope that he enjoys his time in the justice department. When I read the Tory motion, my immediate reaction was that the Tories have simply not understood the point of the drugs courts in the first place. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton received a written answer that showed that there are far fewer breaches of orders in drugs courts than there are in non-drugs courts. In fact, of 59 orders made since November 2001, only three have been  breached, resulting in imprisonment for the offender, which is exactly what was meant to happen.

I am absolutely aware of the difficulties that the drugs courts face. I have sat through drugs courts proceedings. I also know that it is important that we allow the sheriffs who are there to gain specialist knowledge and expertise and make their decisions and use their discretion as to what is appropriate. I have visited and sat through an entire day's proceedings of the drugs court in Glasgow. I was very impressed by the hard work that was being done by the sheriffs, the staff, the drugs workers, the social workers and fiscals, on whom a heavy work load has fallen. That has meant that a degree of court expertise and specialist knowledge has been built up, which is vital and should be built upon. What most impressed me were the considerable advances made by a number of the offenders. We should remember that getting free of drug addiction is very hard work indeed and that there are bound to be setbacks. We have to allow the space for that to happen. It was pointed out to me quite forcefully that when offenders received encouragement from the sheriffs and social workers that was often the first time that any of them had received praise of any kind at all. The fact that we can achieve that within the criminal justice system is a huge step forward. I would have thought that it was worthy of commendation instead of condemnation. The scale of the problem that we are dealing with in Scotland is only too well known. Recent figures suggest that as many as one in 50 people in Scotland is misusing drugs. According to some estimates, an addict will commit an average of 26 crimes a month to support a £1,500-a-month drug habit. Getting just one addict cleaned up will mean that there are 26 fewer victims of crime and that there is considerably less work for an over-stretched police service. That is not to say that there are not problems. There is evidence that referrals from the police have been fewer than expected, not because the police do not support the concept of the drugs court but because they feel ill-equipped to make the decision about suitability. Perhaps work needs to be done to address that issue. There is also, apparently, a problem with solicitors who are beginning to feel that for them the drugs courts work is simply not profitable enough to be involved in. There are specific reasons why that is the case and I will raise the  matter with the minister separately. The problem has just been flagged up and we do not want to see such problems getting in the way of the good working of the drugs courts. There is under-resourcing, but the source of the difficulty is not within the court itself. The bottleneck appears to be at the level of the drug treatment and supervision team, which also handles the DTTOs that are handed down by other courts and is severely stretched. That needs to be addressed. We also know that the waiting times for non-court related drugs services can be very lengthy. In Aberdeen, waiting times for access to the medical drug problems service was nearly 14 months in 2001-02; in Dundee, the wait is frequently seven to eight months and can be as much as double that; and in Fife, as I understand it, the wait is nine to 10 months. The irony is that such lengthy waiting times can mean that treatment is more likely to be forthcoming if drug users are caught committing crime, by which time the addiction is probably even more difficult to address. That is not a reason for attacking the drugs courts; it is a reason for addressing the problem of under-resourcing in those other services. DTTOs are the one way, apart from the drugs courts, that drug offenders can be dealt with in the community at a considerably reduced cost compared with sending them to prison. Even so, DTTOs are available in only a few areas of Scotland. I welcome the announcement today of the extension of DTTOs to Lanarkshire and Ayrshire and I look forward to further extensions in the near future. In spite of what the absurd Tory motion says, the truth is that limiting such interventions to those who have committed very few crimes will restrict their usefulness and will increase harm to society. In conclusion, I caution all members, particularly the minister, not to evaluate the drugs court purely on the basis of a cost evaluation that considers only the money that is spent on the court and its attendant services. Unless that expenditure is measured against the benefit to the community that is achieved as a result of there being fewer victims of crime, fewer crimes to investigate and less pressure on the health service in the long run—a benefit that is much harder to calculate—we will not see the true worth of the experiment and the need for all the advantages to be extended to the whole of Scotland. The alternative would be simply to give up on rehabilitation. I strongly hope that no member wants to go down that route. I move amendment S1M-3641.1, to leave out from "regrets" to end and insert: "welcomes the work of the drugs courts in diverting users  into effective rehabilitation programmes; acknowledges the dedication of the fiscals, social workers, drugs counsellors and sheriffs who have worked to make the drugs courts successful; considers that further resources are required to ensure the continued effectiveness of the drugs courts, and calls on the Scottish Executive to ensure the early roll-out of drugs courts and the provision of the necessary resources so that offenders in all areas of Scotland will have equal access to the same rehabilitation opportunities."

The minister no doubt agrees that the number of secure-unit places available in Scotland is integral to any programme on tackling youth crime. On 18 September, she announced 25 extra secure accommodation places, which, as we already know from the Executive's own admission, will be taken up immediately. However, on 8 October, she replied to a written parliamentary question from me, saying that she knew neither where nor when those places would become available. Can the minister give us any further details today, or can we expect a repeat announcement, coincidentally just before the election?

The minister must be wishing that his summer recess had never ended, as his return to the chamber has been fraught with difficulty. Fraught is probably the right word to use in describing a Liberal Democrat minister in the Executive. We have become accustomed to the Executive ensuring that bad  news stories and U-turns are dealt with by their Lib Dem so-called colleagues. Here we are: another week and another justice U-turn from the Executive. It is less than a week since the First Minister adamantly insisted that there had been no change in Executive policy towards its proposed legislation on the physical punishment of children. Yet, the Minister for Justice—with his ears still burning, no doubt, from the embarrassment of his forced climbdown over the closure of Peterhead prison—is announcing the abandonment of yet another Executive policy. Clearly, this Liberal is for turning. It is a pity that we have to go through so much grief in the process.

That would be an understandable intervention if the proposals were not announced as dogma and then run as dogma for the entire period of the process. Several specific issues require to be addressed in the debate, but I shall begin by expressing general concern at the way in which the Executive has begun to deal with changes to Scotland's criminal justice system. From the start, the bill has been a mishmash of miscellaneous measures making a diverse range of legislative changes, many of which are highly controversial, lumped together without rhyme or reason. That inevitably makes it extremely difficult for the bill to find a focus. Amendments can be lodged on an incredibly wide range of subjects. Any area overlooked by this supposed catch-all bill will cause understandable concern among those interested in a specific bit of legislation. We know that several members have plans, understandably, to lodge amendments that deal with their particular interests. We also know that the Executive might lodge amendments that widen the bill's scope. That is bound to happen with a bill that is not designed to deal with a specific area of the criminal justice system but which is the legislative equivalent of the conversational "and another thing". It is no wonder that the Executive stated its intention to introduce a variety of amendments to the bill including, but not limited to, provisions on the outlawing of trafficking in human beings; disposals in cases of insanity; enabling a person in custody to appear in court by television link; enabling foreign convictions to be taken into account in criminal proceedings in Scotland; and amendments in relation to wildlife crime.  Those may all be worthy moves, as may be the proposals that are likely to emanate from members, but is this the best way to go about making changes to Scotland's criminal justice system? Devolution was meant to sweep away Westminster's tradition of passing bills that lacked coherence and which left the law a mess of different acts. The Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill is a reversion to the infamous Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Bills that frequently made finding the law of Scotland so difficult. We should have seen the back of that lazy way of Westminster working. I am sad that we seem to be dropping back into old ways.

I would be very happy to see an abolition of Brian Fitzpatrick (miscellaneous provisions) bill. However, I am certain that any member who has had to deal with the law of Scotland knows that the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Bills were the wrong way in which to do things. We have repeated that process in the Scottish Parliament. It is to the Justice 2 Committee's great credit that it worked through the bill in the time that it was given and did so with care and sensible deliberation, when it could easily have been swamped. I will follow the example of the committee report and concentrate first on parts 1, 2 and 7 of the bill. I have argued for years for the introduction of lifetime supervision of sex offenders and I am pleased that that has eventually been included in a bill. I first proposed that measure several years ago in Westminster during the passage of a much earlier bill and long before the MacLean report. At the time ministers appeared to think that the idea had no merit. It is interesting that so many Scottish National Party policies that are frequently derided by Labour spokespeople turn up after a time rebranded and adopted by Labour. Again, on the issue of lifetime supervision, where the SNP has led the Executive eventually follows. I wonder what George Foulkes, the former deputy to the Secretary of State for Scotland, has to say about that idea now, given that when we called for the implementation of the MacLean report's recommendations he dismissed that report as uncosted nonsense. I notice that Labour members  are silent. On part 2, on victims' rights, there has been much talk in the chamber about the rights of victims, but there has been little change in the experience of victims in our criminal justice system. Victims should have better access to information about the progress of a case or the release of individuals convicted of committing offences against them. There must also be room for victims to be more involved during trials. However, I have serious reservations about the practical implications of victim statements as provided for in the bill. The Sheriffs Association proposal that the Crown should mediate the information might be a way forward. That would go some way to removing the concern that the length of sentence or the conviction would depend on how the victim performed when giving their statement. Different people react differently, cope differently and present different public faces. It was interesting that Victim Support Scotland's initial response to the proposal was lukewarm. The section of the bill that caused the greatest controversy was section 43, which relates to the banning of the smacking of children. In an example of the minister's confused approach to the proposals in the bill, it seemed that he was insisting that the bill was only making a statutory offence out of something that was already an offence in common law, which raises the question of why we should bother, while saying that the change would not necessarily result in prosecutions, which also raises the question of why we should bother. All that was said despite the fact that he was in no position to say that the change would not necessarily result in more prosecutions as he could not direct the procurator fiscal's office one way or another—that is, unless he had already done a deal with the Lord Advocate that, as soon as the legislation came into force, "advice" was to be circulated recommending against prosecution. However, even if we had taken the minister's assurances at face value, the idea seemed like a recipe for confusion right from the start. However well-meaning the proposed change and however appropriate the culture change might have been, it seemed bizarre to enact a change that, from the outset, was not intended to be implemented—bizarre, though, is a word that springs to mind now and again when contemplating the Executive.

As he has not quoted me, I have to tell Lord James that I have not changed my mind. As Michael Russell will speak in the debate later, perhaps he will answer the member's question directly. However, I can say that every statement that Mr Russell has made on the bill has been consistently opposed to the proposals that the minister brought forward. We were about to enact something that parents did not want and which the police did not want, fearing that it would vastly increase their work load. Criminalising parents hardly seemed to be the most effective way to persuade them that using physical punishment may no longer be appropriate. Instead, from the outset, the approach should have been to help them to be better at what is a tough job. The Executive's proposals were never going to work and I hope that the Executive listens to the committee's recommendation that it should put in place the educational programmes and parental support that will help to prevent inappropriate treatment of children. That is a far more constructive way to effect the change. Another area that the Executive was warned from the start would be unacceptable to the public relates to the youth crime pilot study. The proposal was also unacceptable to the committee. Children's panels cannot cope at the moment so they are unlikely to be able to cope with further increases in the number of young people appearing before them. If anything, the proposal runs directly counter to the direction that I suspect the majority of the public would want to be taken and, indeed, seems to run counter to the ethos behind the youth court idea that was given a lot of publicity by the First Minister. I know that the Deputy Minister for Justice thinks that youth courts were—what was his phrase?—"an absolute disaster", so it may be that there is some tension between the justice department and the First Minister's office on this area of criminal justice. We wait with considerable interest to see who wins the argument. However, in our arguments in the chamber, we are in grave danger of leaving the public behind us. If we do that, the public will lose all confidence in the criminal justice system. I share the committee's concerns about anti-social behaviour orders not being sought by local authorities, not being granted by some courts and not being enforced once granted. I have been approached about that problem by constituents. The introduction of interim anti-social behaviour orders is probably a necessary move in that it might help to ease the complexities of the process and could help to tackle the first two of the committee's three concerns. The third concern,  however, remains an issue that needs to be addressed. I want to deal with a matter that the Deputy First Minister did not address. Buried in part 12, which is entitled "Miscellaneous and General", is a proposal to extend police powers to non-police officers. To release police officers from other duties is all well and good. I certainly want more police officers to be on the streets and more police time to be spent tackling crime. However, I have serious reservations about the plans to give statutory powers to civilian staff who carry out roles such as prisoner escort and court custody officers. I am not alone. I hope that the Minister for Justice read the letter from Douglas Keil, general secretary of the Scottish Police Federation, that was printed in the most recent edition of Holyrood Magazine . He put the situation succinctly when he said: "If any particular duty requires police powers then we should all accept that a police officer is required to do it. It is difficult to escape the conclusion that this is an attempt to achieve policing on the cheap at the expense of the rights of the people of Scotland." Sheriff Hugh Matthews, secretary of the Sheriffs Association, is quoted in an article in the Sunday Mail as saying that every sheriff in Scotland is against the use of security guards in courts and that they would refuse to sit if there were no police on duty. In fact, he sends a stark message to the Executive with the uncompromising statement that "the general view is that there will be no sheriffs in the court if there are no police". I hope that the Executive is not on the verge of provoking the first strike by sheriffs in the history of the Scottish judicial system. Those are extremely serious warnings issued by people who know what they are talking about. The Executive must listen. The same Sunday Mail article contained a quote from a "spokeswoman for the Executive Justice Department" that concerned me greatly. Confirming plans to have security firms take on escort duties and the policing of courts, she apparently said: "The tendering process has begun." I know that we cannot necessarily believe all that we read in the papers, especially from unnamed spokespeople, but I sincerely hope that the Minister for Justice will tell us that the tendering has not begun. To start tendering before the Parliament has even discussed the bill, let alone passed it, is presumptive in the extreme and an affront to the democratic process. The bill and the way in which the Minister for Justice has handled it merely confirm my view that  his credibility is in tatters. He was forced to climb down over Peterhead and now his flagship Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill has been savaged by the Justice 2 Committee. In normal circumstances, a minister who was performing so poorly would face the sack, but competence does not seem to be a measure of fitness for office under Jack McConnell. If it is any help to the Minister for Justice—I wish to be of some help—I can confirm that he played no part in meetings that I have had to discuss the drafting of amendments for the bill.

We are now nearly three years into what has been one of the worst conducted parliamentary reviews I have  ever seen. Three years of shambles is no credit to the minister or the Executive. I welcome the proposals on Peterhead. However, they are a statement of the blindingly obvious. It has been blindingly obvious—to Scotland, if not to the Executive—right from the start that this would be the result. I congratulate my colleagues Stewart Stevenson and Alex Salmond for the work that they have done in representing the views of their constituents in the face of the threat laid down by the Executive. Closing Peterhead should never have been under consideration in the first place. It is a disgrace that the community in Peterhead has had to put up with that threat for three years. I have three major questions for the minister on the rest of his statement. He talks about "modern flexible working practices". That theme ran through his whole statement. Will he clarify exactly what he means? Does he mean the dangerously low staffing levels at Kilmarnock that the chief inspector of prisons identified in his report yesterday? Does he mean worse employment conditions for those working in prisons? Does he mean lower wages for those working in prisons? Does he mean less training for those working in prisons? I turn now to the proposal for two new prisons. The minister has proposed a privately built and privately run prison, despite virtually unanimous opposition—the only person whom we could identify as being in favour was a prisoner, I think in Shotts. Is the proposal not outright privatisation? Is that not what the minister is doing? If the minister is prepared to listen to Peterhead objectors, why was the virtually unanimous opposition to the rest of the review simply set to one side? If one group is to be listened to, why not the rest? Or is it a case of everyone being out of step except Oor Jim? That is how it seems. On the proposal for the second prison, it is stretching credulity to the extreme to accept that the SPS, as currently managed, and given its track record in terms of its attitude towards public versus private, will come forward with any proposal in which we can be confident. Will the minister confirm that his proposal means market testing? If it does not, it must be compulsory competitive tendering. Which is it? To the Scottish National Party, it looks suspiciously like one or the other.

Westminster will have the opportunity to do that, not us.

I congratulate Gordon Jackson on securing this debate and Epilepsy Action Scotland on its work. Many members are using briefings that have been obtained from EAS. Recently, I attended a question-time panel in my constituency, which was set up by the local Perth and Kinross epilepsy support group. Mary Scanlon is trying to ensure that a support group works well in Inverness. An enormous amount of work is done behind the scenes to try to make awareness of the condition greater. Dr Richard Roberts was there—I assume that he is the same consultant neurologist who works at Ninewells hospital and whom other members have mentioned—and he talked about epilepsy as more of a symptom than an illness. Epilepsy can be triggered by many things and the objective is to try to manage the symptoms. How little I and others knew about the condition was interesting. Like everybody else, I knew that a person's having epilepsy meant that they had greater or lesser fits—fits do not have to be the massively disturbing type that members have described. I knew that driving restrictions could be imposed because a friend of mine had recently been diagnosed with epilepsy, which meant that he lost his licence. I had not absorbed that epilepsy would have that impact. Equally, it was only through my friendship with that person that I understood that epilepsy could develop in adulthood. I had always thought that people either had or did not have epilepsy and that one could not get it as an adult. We need to remember that any one of us could have epilepsy for a number of reasons at any time in our lives. I suspect that I was at one with the vast majority of people in not realising that epilepsy can kill. When we realise that, we realise how incredibly important the issue is. Moreover, I did not realise the extent of employment restrictions or the extent  to which people's lives and socioeconomic circumstances can be directly affected. If we are being honest, we admit that we all have a certain degree of ignorance about the matter. Epilepsy has been in the shadows. It is important that it is brought out of the shadows—to use a phrase that EAS has used. There is a patchwork of provision. The situation in Tayside has been mentioned. The panel discussion in my constituency made it clear that we have better provision than any other area. That is probably down to an accident of interest: the consultants in Ninewells happen to be interested in epilepsy, so they are driving provision in Tayside that is not happening elsewhere, perhaps because consultants elsewhere do not have that particular interest. It is unfortunate that health care provision in Scotland depends on that kind of accident of interest. I say to the minister that we must eradicate the accidental basis of provision, which is basically what it amounts to. A person who has epilepsy does not wait long to be seen in Tayside, but in Forth Valley it is a whole different ball game. That is profoundly unfair and it must be addressed.

The First Minister is in trouble.

The First Minister should just sit down.

The motion in Lord James's name was hysterically worded and a little inappropriate.

If David McLetchie wants to impress in Parliament, he should use more parliamentary language than he used in that rant. There is scope for populist appeals, but we must be careful, because youth crime and disorder tend to be in one's face.  We must deal with that difficulty. We are talking about the graffiti scarring our urban environment, the groups of under-age drinkers or drug-takers losing their inhibitions and respect for the law in public places and the petty vandalism that people see daily. It is not behind closed doors; it is out on the street and that is the biggest problem with which we are dealing. We have reached the stage at which any group of youths, however law-abiding, causes emotions ranging from basic nervousness to genuine fear and alarm in passers-by. We must accept that that is the response of ordinary people. The sight of police on the street restores confidence. It is a rare sight, as many of our constituents tell us, yet visible policing is the most effective deterrent to disorder and we must return to it. I suspect that all members who are present agree. We must address the perception in society that youth crime is on the increase, despite what the statistics might tell us, and that the system is not dealing well with young offenders, if at all. That is another apprehension of ordinary people. So what is being done? As ever, there has been much talk but little action. There has been a ministerial committee and there is now an advisory group on youth crime, an action plan—10 months late—and another ministerial committee. What all that has produced amounts to precious little—a great deal of talk but few practical results. I know that people from urban areas have particular concerns, but even small rural towns simply do not know how to cope with the problem. The children's hearings system seems to be so under-resourced that there has been a complete collapse of confidence in the system—among the public and the police. That is damaging. While concern about the resourcing of children's hearings remains, the Executive's current proposals are a little premature. If we have a children's hearings system that is not coping, giving it more work will not help. Again, there has been much talk, but no action. The Executive's confusion on youth crime appears to go right to the top. On 15 May, Jack McConnell suggested the creation of a juvenile courts system for 14 to 18-year-olds—an idea that was rejected the next day by the ministerial group on youth crime. Of course, children can already be prosecuted from the age of eight and special provisions already exist for juvenile courts for under-16s. However, as a matter of Executive policy, decreasing numbers of children are sent to juvenile courts.

Juvenile courts are probably a very good idea indeed, but the point that I am making is that Jack McConnell did not seem to realise that we can have such a system right now. We do not need to introduce the idea as a brand new policy. While the Executive dithers, a real problem faces the youth justice system—the problem of secure accommodation, which Cathy Jamieson spent a little time on in her speech. From time to time, but with increasing regularity, I am contacted by the press for a comment when a child, perhaps as young as 14, has been held in an adult jail because of insufficient places for young people in secure accommodation. Ministers have repeatedly acknowledged the problem and, before the Parliament even existed, it was pledged that sending children to adult prisons would be a thing of the past. However, here we are, still having to talk about it. The lack of places means that children under the age of 16 are being sent to secure units in England, placed in adult prisons, or given other wholly inappropriate disposals. That is not good for them and it is not good for society. On 29 April this year, Colin MacKenzie, the convener of the Association of Directors of Social Work, while talking about 13 children awaiting places in secure accommodation, said: "This does not simply translate into a need to have 13 new places. What is required is a range of residential placements with the capacity to provide varying levels of security depending on the particular needs of the child." That is precisely what the SNP is calling for. In the longer term, the focus surely has to be on intervention—long before placing a child in secure accommodation seems the best option. That is why the SNP has proposed the option of parental compensation orders. That would put responsibility for the actions of a child on his or her parents as well. It would also introduce an element of restorative justice to the system. That is a workable idea and one that is already being made to work in many other countries.

That is an interesting comment, but the reality is very different. Again we have the difference between talk and action. The parental compensation order idea is being made to work in 10 other countries—from Canada right through to Italy. The idea has not simply been  pulled out of nowhere. It would make a difference in Scotland, especially to the perception that, when a young person commits a crime, no one seems to take any responsibility—neither the young person nor their parents. Responsibility is the key to the issue—getting young people to take responsibility for their actions and getting their parents to take responsibility too. That does not seem too much to ask in 2002. I move amendment S1M-3194.1, to leave out from first "notes" to end and insert:  "recognises continuing public concern about the levels of youth crime; regrets the failure of the Scottish Executive to take effective action to tackle such crime; believes that tackling youth crime effectively and appropriately is a key element in reducing overall levels of crime and fear of crime, and calls upon the Executive to introduce practical measures to prevent youth crime and to ensure that there are sufficient places so that those young offenders who, for their own sake, need to be looked after in secure accommodation are held in conditions appropriate to their age."

I listened to the minister's reply with interest. He will be aware that one of the big issues in a constituency such as mine is access for slow-moving traffic joining roads such as the A9. That is also a huge problem on the A90. I want to raise an  issue on which I have corresponded with the minister, which is the Middlebank to Inchmichael link road. Many people want that road, including the local roads department, the police and the National Farmers Union of Scotland. I think that the minister's department accepts in principle that the road would be a good thing, even if it does not translate that into practice. Can the minister give any hope to my constituents about the future of that proposal? Will he agree at least to meet them, rather than simply suggest that they meet the local project director?

SNP members will not disagree that the Executive's priorities should be, to quote an Executive motion, "to deliver first class public services that help create a Scotland full of opportunity, where children can reach their full potential", but that is where we must part company, because, since day one, the Executive has failed to deliver those first-class services and has failed Scotland's children. It has also failed today to convince anyone otherwise, or to convince anyone that anything is about to change. What is needed from the Executive is not a trite restatement of its supposed priorities or a tick-box approach to government—but it appears that that is its philosophy, for which Duncan Hamilton was looking. Even with such a tick-box approach, there are the many gaps that members have mentioned. A draft nature conservation bill is planned for next spring. I wonder whether the minister can confirm that the Executive will not legislate to increase penalties for wildlife crime, despite the fact that that was promised soon. The proposal for a draft bill next spring suggests to me that that is not going to happen. The Executive should acknowledge its failure in respect of public services, and its programme should contain a genuine commitment to change. However, the words genuine and new Labour do not fit easily into the same sentence—and new Labour calls the shots here, regardless of what the Liberal Democrats like to think. Effectively, what we have heard is the Executive's new year resolution—a bit late in the year—which will, no doubt, go the way of all new year resolutions. It might try to hide the fact from the rest of us; it might even try to convince itself otherwise; but in reality all that the Executive is offering are more of the same empty pledges that have been made throughout the short life of the Parliament. Sometimes, it feels as though the only things that the Executive has delivered on have been SNP policies, which it first derides, then thinks about and eventually adopts. The Executive's refusal to acknowledge that shows that, when Jack McConnell talks about consensus, he is using a  different dictionary from the rest of us. Never mind how much has been spent here or what review has been undertaken there; what has actually been achieved, and has the Executive kept the promises that it has made? Let us consider just a couple of its justice pledges. A youth crime strategy was promised by March 2001, but the Executive has failed to produce one. No further evidence of that failure is necessary than the newspapers from the past fortnight. The recommendations of the youth crime advisory group, which were accepted, were funded at only 60 per cent of the level of finance that was necessary for their implementation. One of the other pledges was to develop more effective community penalties for offenders. However, Tuesday's debate showed that despite the rhetoric, on which most of us agreed, the picture is one of failure. The prison population reached record levels in 2001 and the use of community disposals remains highly variable. For example, community service is used by courts in Dundee twice as often as by courts in Glasgow. Even the Minister for Justice expects continued failure, as he thinks that prisoner numbers will rise even further. If the Executive does not have confidence in its policies, why should it expect anyone else to have confidence in them? What have we had? Broken promise upon empty pledge upon hollow words. Members should not take it just from me, however. We have heard today a guddle about PR. Frankly, the Lib Dems appear to be in a desperate state on that. They seem to be relying on Tricia Marwick's member's bill to deliver their key policy. What does that say about them and their input into the Executive? On health, I quote Gavin Tait, a consultant orthopaedic surgeon: "Short termism, penny pinching, parochialism, and micro-management by government are all preventing rational and rapid development of the [health] service". On children, I quote Henry Maitles of the University of Strathclyde: "As the Scottish parliament enters its third year, virtually no impact has been made on child poverty". On transport, I quote David Begg: "We had one of the lowest levels of investment (as % of GDP) in transport". Finally, as John Swinney pointed out, poverty—which underlies so much of what we debate in the Parliament and which is the root cause of so many problems—is one of the Executive's most abject failures. Yet so much could be done. The Executive has adopted a huge number of SNP policies, whether it wants to admit that or not. Perhaps it should go the distance and adopt a few more, such as the  idea of a public service trust. Maybe the Executive will introduce that anyway—maybe that is what it will use to get itself off the hook of the prison estates review and to make a real difference to Scottish health and education. John Swinney dealt in detail with the issue of public services. However, the biggest and best thing that Executive members could do, in adopting an SNP stance, would be to start to behave like grown-ups and take on the responsibility of grown-up Government. Some of John McAllion's comments were relevant to that. Andrew Wilson did well to remind members of the facts about the economic reality facing Scotland; it is a reality of decline that the Executive seems to think is just fine by it. Well, it is not. The only way to make a change is to stop playing about with money handed over by Westminster and start governing Scotland the way it should be governed—as an independent nation. One part of the problem is the Executive's incompetence; another is that Parliament does not have the power that is needed to transform Scottish society. The First Minister may have no ambition for his country, but if we want to create a Scotland that is full of opportunity rather than be content with a land of disappointment, and if we want to create the circumstances in which our children can reach their full potential, rather than be content with a country that is unable to fulfil its potential, then the only way forward is with independence.

There are also weekend jails.

I remember the debates on that subject in 1996 and assure Mr Gallie that the SNP did not set its face against tagging. I know that because I was the person speaking for the party at the time.

I suspect that there is a great deal of agreement in the chamber this afternoon. There is obviously a custody crisis in Scotland—we know that because we have higher prisoner numbers than ever. That is rightly seen as a problem that must be addressed. However, before we talk about alternatives to custody, we must consider why we imprison people and what kind of people we imprison. We need to be clear about what we expect from our penal system. That part of the equation is sometimes missing. Everyone understands the concepts of punishment, protection of society and deterrence. However, prison is by far the most expensive form of punishment that is employed by our criminal justice system. Many prisoners are repeat offenders, so it is not clear that prison is much of a deterrent. The truth is that unless rehabilitation is at the core of a prisoner's experience in prison, the benefit that is gained through protection of society from an offender for a limited period is just that—limited. If the system is just going to turf him—it is usually a him—out of prison unaltered, other than perhaps to be made worse, there has been only a short-term gain and no long-term benefit, either to that individual or to society. As far as punishment is concerned, recent figures show that 41 per cent of all those who are sent to prison are there because they defaulted on fines. That is a massive percentage. It means that almost half of all prisoners in Scottish jails at any  one time are there because they have not paid fines, although I appreciate that they are in prison sometimes for only short periods. In case Dr Simpson is wondering, I said "sent to prison" and not "in prison". There is a distinct difference between the two. That figure is in stark comparison with the situation in England where, in 2000, only 2 per cent of those who were sent to prison were fine defaulters. In England, sentencers are required not to send offenders to jail for non-payment of fines, unless there is no alternative.

That still adds up to a great many prisoner days per year being taken up by fine defaulting. We must consider the matter in that context. Payment supervision orders are used in England and have made a significant impact on the jailing of fine defaulters. In effect, many people—but not everybody—end up in prison because they are poor. There is something of an irony in the fact that fining those who are well enough off to pay is not much of a deterrent, whereas fining those who are too poor to pay is, in comparison, a disproportionate punishment. We already know that prison is the most inefficient way of punishing. It would cost £100 a day less than putting them in prison if we were to give fine defaulters supervised attendance orders—our equivalent of payment supervision orders—which have not yet even made it past the pilot stage in Scotland. I think that we are all agreed that that would be far more effective in the long run. Right now, Strathclyde police alone holds more than 27,000 warrants for fine defaulters. Obviously, many people who default are not caught. What other alternatives to custody are there? The minister mentioned several. There are probation orders, community service orders and compensation orders. Those are the three most common disposals after fines, but their use is low, at 6 per cent, 4 per cent and 3.9 per cent respectively. The total numbers are relatively small. In addition, those disposals all predate the Parliament by a considerable time—in the case of probation orders by 90 years. We have the newer restriction of liberty orders, which are known colloquially as tagging, but they still are not in  widespread use. We also have drug treatment and testing orders, which have been around since 1998, but they are still geographically restricted. I look forward to their evaluation next month, and to their subsequent roll-out over a much wider area of Scotland. Those last two disposals exemplify one of the problems with alternatives to custody, which is the fact that they are not available in every jurisdiction. That generates a great deal of frustration, with the potential for accused persons to be dealt with very differently, depending on what is available where. I know that sheriffs do not like that, and if more accused persons were aware of the situation, I dare say that they would object, too.

We need a vastly expanded infrastructure to deal with the problem at every level, whether it is a health or justice problem that we are addressing. Although we can say that alternatives to custody have not yet resulted in a reduction in the number of people who are sent to jail, we can also say that one of the reasons for that is that the alternatives can often be more apparent than real.

I appreciate what the minister says, but sometimes the pilots last a long time and we often wait for the roll-out for even longer, if it happens at all. The problem is that the alternatives are often not available in all jurisdictions—that is before we enter the debate about resourcing of existing alternatives, to which Keith Raffan referred. At lunchtime today I visited the Safeguarding Communities Reducing Offending programme in Aberdeen, which is working extremely well. It offers in Aberdeen things that are not available in other cities. In other cities, things will be offered that are not available in Aberdeen. That disparity in the Scottish justice system concerns me ethically. On 15 May this year there were 6,661 prisoners in Scotland's jails, which is the highest figure ever. It is the third highest prison population per capita  in western Europe, after England and Portugal. It does not seem that the powers that be envisage the prison population getting smaller, because a projected rise in the prison population to 7,700 is the basis of the prison estates review. That means that the minister is accepting in advance that alternatives to custody will continue to fail—either that, or we are planning to build prisons that we do not need. We cannot have it both ways. Is custody achieving its aim? In many cases, custody is plain wrong. In one case that I have just come across, and about which I will be writing to the Minister for Justice, a drug addict who is a double amputee has been sent to jail for six weeks for possession. That prisoner must spend his time in prison in a hospital bed. He also spent two days in solitary at HM Prison Aberdeen at Craiginches, because there was nowhere else to put a wheelchair user. He will be unable to participate in a drug rehabilitation programme while he is inside for probably no more than about three weeks. We know that short-term prisoners are the least likely to have access to such intervention. We must ask: what on earth is the point? That man comes from north-east Scotland. Perhaps if a drugs court operated in north-east Scotland, the outcome would have been more sensible for him and, in the long run, for the community. That case highlights the absurdity of much imprisonment. Imprisonment is too expensive and ineffective and can store many problems that the justice system must deal with later. To compound the problem, nearly 14,000 people were placed on remand in 2000, which is the most recent year for which I have a total figure. That is an average of 894 people on remand on any day. Half the people who are placed on remand do not receive a custodial sentence; that must be addressed. Bail offences create much negative publicity, but we must be more creative about minimising their likelihood. Custody has a necessary place in our criminal justice system, but it should not have its current predominance. We should do much more. Many more alternatives to custody should be available to the courts in practice and throughout the whole of Scotland. The courts should make better use of existing alternatives. The low use of such alternatives is a matter of some frustration for the minister, but it has been suggested to me that sheriffs in particular would make more use of them if they were more readily available in their areas. All the arguments about reducing the number of people in custody in adult jails apply several times over to young offenders. That is a separate issue that relates to places for secure units, which is not part of today's debate. Overall, the high number of people who are in custody is causing an immediate accommodation  problem that must be addressed but, for the long term, I ask the minister to have more confidence in his plans for alternatives to custody and to rethink the new prison set-up that he has in mind. The minister talked briefly about public attitudes to sentencing. Often, we ignore those attitudes. When we have such debates, we talk about the professionals rather than the public. Much negative reaction can be expressed about the use of alternatives to custody, particularly by members of the public who are not fully aware of the effectiveness and usefulness of many alternatives. Much of the negative reaction is media driven, and most of us agree that public education is an issue. There is some good news. The minister referred to the Justice 1 Committee's report. That was set in train when I was convener of the then Justice and Home Affairs Committee. Research into public attitudes to sentencing was needed to find out what people think, as opposed to what some of our tabloid newspapers report that they thought. Not much research had been conducted on public attitudes, so the exercise was useful and informative. Some of what was reported was fairly predictable, but I will describe the most interesting findings from the report that relate to the debate. The report showed that most people were unaware of non-custodial disposals other than fines and community service orders and that even though people thought that the courts were too lenient, when they were asked to examine scenarios, they chose sentences that were similar to those that had been imposed by the courts. The report showed that there was widespread support for treatment rather than jailing of drug offenders, and that people doubt the effectiveness of prison at preventing reoffending, especially for drug offenders. That is good news for the SNP's approach to the system. The report also showed that although the principle of community service orders was supported, the orders needed to be implemented more visibly. Overall, the Justice 1 Committee's report emphasised the need to restore public confidence in the system, but said that an opportunity existed to engage the public in a constructive debate about alternatives to custody. We have not had that debate with the public. That is a big part of what we should do. All of us should regard the Justice 1 Committee's report as good news and as a challenge to us. I talked about some of the current problems and I will talk briefly about some SNP ideas that have been put into practice or might yet—I hope—be put into practice.

I think that I will manage. The SNP is committed to the provision of creative sentencing alternatives; we are in the process of examining a number of them. The SNP has talked about parental responsibility. For the past two years, we have urged the Executive to look more closely at increasing parents' direct responsibility for the behaviour of their children. Before the Tories start to jump up and down about the European convention on human rights, I will tell them that similar systems to the one that the SNP proposes exist in other western European countries. It is clear that some elements in the Executive have begun to address the issue and I hope that we will see movement before the end of next year. I read Johann Lamont's letter in The Herald this morning and found much in it with which I agree. Problems of youth disorder are not confined to the inner cities or to peripheral housing schemes. They are surfacing in small towns, urban and rural, throughout Scotland. Although it might not be immediately obvious that some of the ideas that are being widely debated fall into the category of alternatives to custody, it is hoped that they will head off some of the problems that eventually result in custody. The SNP first proposed the idea of drugs courts in the run-up to the 1999 elections. Those courts now operate in Scotland and, thus far, we agree that drugs courts are a success. They will go on being a success as long as sufficient back-up resources are made available. Keith Raffan rightly said that there is a need for infrastructure. Perhaps the minister might indicate more clearly how long it will be before the appropriate infrastructure will be made available to extend drugs court more widely in Scotland. A number of members have highlighted the serious drugs problem that exists in the north-east of Scotland. Indeed, the members' debate today is on that subject. There is a need for more drugs rehabilitation places to be made available, particularly in the north-east. The case that I mentioned further highlights that need. It is unimportant whether the assistance comes out of the justice budget or the health budget; what is important is that the money that is spent now results in far greater savings down the line. The SNP has suggested ways in which to help the problem of fine defaulting. We propose a unit fine system that takes full account of ability to pay. First, the sentencing judge would impose a fine, which would be expressed as a number of units. Secondly, the convicted person's means would be assessed and the value of the units related to his or her means. Such a system would impose fines more equitably and cost savings would result  because the determination of the unit value is an administrative matter, which in turn would lead to the acceleration of court procedures. The cost of pursuing defaulters would be reduced, which would lead to further cost savings. The result would be that fewer people would end up in prison. Such a system is already in place in Finland, Sweden, Austria, Germany and France. That option is achievable for Scotland and I urge it on the minister. I also urge the minister to examine closely the expansion of bail supervision, because that alternative is available only in a few areas of Scotland. Bail supervision needs to be available throughout the country, which would enable us to reduce the huge number of people who are placed on remand because they do not have a fixed address or a way in which the authorities feel that they can properly monitor them. Ultimately, it is important that a variety of alternatives are put in place and that they are available throughout Scotland. Unless we do that, the available alternatives become more apparent than real and we will be kidding ourselves if we expect them to make a difference. The key point of the debate is that we need to find effective and sustainable initiatives that will make a difference. I move amendment 3149.2, to leave out from "commends" to end and insert: "regrets the failure of the Scottish Executive adequately to develop a range of high quality alternatives to custody which fit the changing pattern of offending behaviour across Scotland; recognises the importance of programmes which are well-resourced and available across every jurisdiction in Scotland, and believes that a greater element of restorative justice should be introduced into the Scottish criminal justice system whether dealing with adults or young offenders."

The paper covers a great deal of ground. Its subject  headings, if not the detail that it contains, are comprehensive. Before I move into the meat of my speech, I must say that a considerable amount of the paper does the English language a great disservice. To be frank, parts of it are almost incomprehensible. When ministers prepare such documents, I urge them to think about the concept of plain English. I am sure that all members will endorse the sentiments of the Deputy Minister for Justice on all Scotland's firefighters, whether they are full time, retained or voluntary. Those people provide society with an invaluable service, frequently at great risk to themselves. They have to be at the forefront of a wide variety of emergencies and would be on the front line of the worst emergencies that we could imagine. They do their work and we thank them for it. Society owes a huge debt to our firefighters for the danger that we ask them to face on our behalf. In return, that poses an obligation on us. We must ensure that the service within which our firefighters work is as modern and well resourced as it can be. We owe our firefighters the best and, in spite of the minister's comments, the best does not come if the cream is skimmed off in profit. We are three years into the Parliament's existence and this is the first time that we have debated the future of the fire service. That makes the debate important. It is always instructive to look at the motivation behind any set of proposals. Section 1 of the document, which bears the same title as the debate, outlines what are described as "The drivers for change": "Community Fire Safety ... the legislative basis ... a shared sense of direction ... partnership ... a modernising agenda and the requirement to deliver a value-for-money service" and "Changes in the built and natural environment". Six drivers are identified. In truth, the first and the fifth drivers form the meat of the debate. Having reflected on the drivers for change, I am surprised that the figures for the number of people who are killed in fires in Scotland each year do not make it into that list. I suppose that those figures could be thought to fall under the community safety heading, but nowhere are they specifically addressed. I would have thought that having one of the worst fire safety records in Europe would count as a key driver for change within the fire service. The United Nations has published a fire statistics study showing that in Scotland in 1996—the last year in which it was able to publish detailed figures—there were 2.09 fire deaths per 100,000 of population. That rate was significantly higher than the rates in other European countries.  For example, the same study showed a rate of 0.74 in Austria, 1.47 in Belgium and 1.17 in Germany. The Netherlands, Spain and Switzerland all had rates of less than 1. Although the figures for one year can be skewed by one or two very bad incidents and figures vary from year to year, it is possible to identify a trend. During the past 13 years, the fire death rate in Scotland has ranged between 2.69 and 1.52 fire deaths per 100,000, which is significantly higher than the rate in most comparable European countries. Sources within the fire service readily admit that the UK has one of the worst fire safety records in western Europe and that Scotland has the worst record in the UK. A Home Office report entitled "Fire Statistics United Kingdom 1999" stated that Scotland has had a "consistently higher death rate than the United Kingdom overall". Therefore, I certainly support the recommendation that all fire brigades participate in their local community safety partnerships to advance the multi-agency approach to community safety. We must face the stark fact that more than 70 per cent of all fire brigade responses in 2000-01 were a result of deliberately started fires and that fire raising in 2000-01 in Scotland alone is estimated to have cost £187.7 million. That figure is only the financial cost; it masks the human cost. Working together to tackle the problem is extremely important. Given the high percentage of fire brigade call-outs to fires that are deliberately started, it is perhaps surprising that the police have recorded a steady decline in arson over the past decade, as Phil Gallie suggested in an intervention. With closer working, it might be possible to resolve that puzzle, but it is perhaps more important that we reinforce a joint approach to crime and fire prevention. Any approach to community safety that does not involve the fire service will only be partially successful. It is incredible that initially Scotland's fire brigades were not formal players in community safety partnerships, although many brigades currently play a role in local CSPs. "Fire: Raising the Standard", the joint report by HM inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland and HM fire service inspectorate for Scotland, goes further and recommends that brigades should "ensure that they are represented on appropriate community safety fora at all levels. This will enable them to develop strategies with key partners and effect change through key practitioners. Brigades should also consider the merits of a local liaison officer." I think that that would be a more appropriate approach. Although the consultation document recognises that a number of fire brigades have  become involved with CSPs, it leaves unsaid the implicit corollary—that others have not. I hope that the minister will, in closing, tell us which brigades have not become involved and—more to the point—why not. Is it simply because, initially, CSPs were targeted towards crime prevention, or are there other more specific reasons for non-involvement that need to be addressed directly? On community safety, the issue of sprinklers looms large and my colleague Michael Matheson will focus on it. I urge the minister to back Mr Matheson's bill. That would be one practical outcome of this debate. I have one or two questions on section 4 of the document, which deals with intervention. Various figures are available for call-out times based on current risk categories and the Audit Commission reports give comparative figures. However, on a recent visit to the brigade in my area, I was surprised to discover that the figures do not necessarily mean the same across all the brigades. They measure slightly different things because each brigade has its own definition of what it is measuring. A similar problem applies to the application of guidelines. My local firemaster tells me that, potentially, there are three different sets of guidelines for brigades. I therefore have some difficulty with any current assessments of success. The consultation document does not make it clear whether it is intended to find a standard set of comparators that will mean the same for each brigade, or whether we are to continue with figures that give what may be called a slightly false picture that does not compare like with like. At present, we do not know whether the picture is true unless we go behind the figures and check exactly what is being measured. Paragraph 45 of the consultation document talks about pathfinder trials in Strathclyde and Lothian and Borders and the possibility of moving away from national standards of cover towards the risk management approach that the minister mentioned. There is an indication that it is intended to implement the risk management approach across all brigades—again, the minister referred to that. However, I understand that the current pathfinder trials have already been in existence for a couple of years and that any roll-out would—to use the euphemistic language of the document—"take longer". I know that the Executive does not like to be tied to time scales—we are still waiting for promised legislation on wildlife crime "soon"—but I wonder whether a clearer guide could be given as to what "take longer" will mean, given that the current trials have not yet finished and are already a couple of years old. It would be useful for us to know the time scales.  In the section on intervention, reference is made to "other services", comprising all call-outs that do not relate to fires. That is probably a fair definition. Those services make up a significant amount of the fire service's work. We all accept that that work—whether it is flood rescue, dealing with chemical spillages or even rescuing Jack Russell terriers from sewers—is work that would have to be done by someone.

That is a fair point and it takes us back to some earlier comments. We need a joint approach to dealing with such issues. In the situation that Mr Sheridan describes, not only the fire service but the police and the local council would be involved. As I say, those other services would have to be provided by somebody. If the fire service was not providing them, no doubt we would have to create some other arm of the emergency services in order to carry out the work. It is right that we should accept that aspect of the work and make the appropriate arrangements to put it on a proper footing. I would have no difficulty with that. The fifth key driver for change is the "modernising agenda and the requirement to deliver a value-for-money service". That title smacks a little of Blairism in its linguistic convolutions. Some expert in management speak has been very clever and decided that the fire service must ensure that all activities are subject to the 4Cs: challenge, compare, consult and compete. Two can play at that game. I would say, what about the 4Ps: people before profit and public need before private greed? What does the report say about private finance? In truth, it does not say much directly. If one did not know about the privatisation agenda of the Scottish Executive and the Minister for Justice, one might be lulled into a false sense of security. The Deputy Minister for Justice has said that he will accept the SNP's amendment. I am grateful for that. He went on to say that the comments on private finance relate to issues of capital, but he must know that that does not alleviate people's concerns. Not much reading between the lines is needed to work out where the Executive is heading. The Minister for Justice may sit and smile, but in the past month his department has put out press releases that were directed towards the use of private finance in the fire service. The Executive cannot run away from that issue.  It looks as though the Scottish Executive wants to cherry pick for privatisation all the bits out of which private companies might be able to squeeze a profit. That will deliver parts of a vital public service to the same brilliant service delivery standards that are currently on offer on our railways. To set that cherry picking in train, acceptance of the Executive's recommendations at the end of the document will spawn a plethora of consultants' reports—consultants to develop options for procurement and for control room facilities, consultants to examine the cost of information technology and so on. It looks as though PricewaterhouseCoopers is in for a lucrative time. Before one goes down a new route, it is advisable to take advice from those who have travelled before. Here comes the Irish example. The Irish Government has recently completed a review of its fire service—perhaps that is where the Executive got the idea. The Irish Government's consultants' report, which was published in January, dismissed public-private partnerships as having "limited potential". The Irish seem to have maintained significant levels of capital spending, enabling them to tackle their infrastructure problems. Why cannot we do that? The Executive will not have the firefighters on its side as it tries to push the service down the private finance route. Roddy Robertson of the Fire Brigades Union is on record as saying that the union is unhappy about the way in which it is being pushed. That is why the SNP's amendment seeks to make it clear that the provision of Scotland's fire service must remain firmly within the public sector. I have said that I am glad that the amendment will be accepted, but the Executive must do more than pay it lip service. Private profit and public service do not sit easily together and the thought of any aspect of the fire service being privatised should set alarm bells ringing. In the section entitled "Working with the private sector", the report refers back to an earlier paragraph that it claims points out that "distinctions between services delivered by the public and private sectors are being eradicated". They are certainly being eradicated by the Scottish Executive, but those distinctions remain important and I want to see them retained. The earlier paragraph referred to is paragraph 15, which is the booby trap in the heart of the document. It asserts boldly that the Executive recognises that "there is significant scope for more public/private sector partnerships" within the fire service—we just do not get any  detail. Remarkably, the paragraph goes on to claim: "Taking forward this sort of partnership in Scotland involves ensuring ... transparency in the process." That does not sound like any example of private involvement in the public sector that I know of—a handy catch-all of commercial confidentiality is being employed as a sort of blackout curtain against scrutiny. That has certainly been the case in the Scottish Prison Service and I doubt that things will be any different in the fire service. The Executive must do more than pay lip service to the SNP amendment. There is no doubt that the fire service in Scotland needs to develop, grow and modernise, but that must be achieved in the public sector. If the Lib Dems and the Labour party are no longer prepared to stand up for public services, the SNP will. I move amendment S1M-3098.2, to insert at end: "and believes that, as one of the key emergency services, the fire service should remain in the public sector."

What a dire performance the minister gave in his closing speech. At least the Tories have an argument—I do not agree with it, but at least their opposition to independence is grounded in strongly held belief. I detected a possible movement in both David McLetchie's opening remarks and Phil Gallie's closing speech. That is welcome. However, what has been most fascinating this morning is that—it is fair to say this—the Labour leadership has  bottled the debate. Frankly, the quality of the Labour and Liberal Democrat speeches tells us why they have bottled it; it is because they have nothing to say.

The Executive parties now appear to equate criticism with whingeing. What is fascinating is what that gives away about their attitude to politics, which is that there should be no criticism. They want a one-party state, in which nobody says that anything that the Executive does is wrong. That is the truth about their position. I am fascinated by the Liberal Democrat position in the debate. The Liberal Democrats appear to have ditched their policy on federalism, although Euan Robson tried desperately to fix his mistake by amending his position at a very late stage. As one of the few members of the Parliament who has experience of another national culture, I know that one of the things about Scotland that immediately strikes visitors is the sense of self-deprecation, which in Scotland often goes too far and becomes flat-out negativity. Some fine stock phrases give the game away. They include, "better the devil you know" and "it's aye been that way." Those are two phrases that sum up a whole frame of mind, which frankly has been encouraged by too many of our so-called leaders in the past. We have heard similar sentiments expressed today. It has been easier for Scots to list the ways in which a good idea might fail, and therefore should not even be tried, than for them to have a go. Scotland is not unique in that attitude. It has been the case in other countries, which have managed to turn the "can't do culture" around into a "can do" culture. They have thrived as a result. It is always instructive to listen to a debate such as this morning's and count the ways in which it is said that Scotland can't, instead of the ways in which she can. Today, however, we have not heard much in the way of reasons why Scotland can't. The most striking characteristic of the debate has been the poverty of argument from Labour and the Liberal Democrats. It has been characterised by feeble interventions and speeches that said very little, if anything at all. Some of them were profoundly silly. I am grateful to Robert Brown for the startling new theory that other countries are different. Until  he said that, it had never occurred to me. Bristow Muldoon's speech was incomprehensible. When members come to the chamber, we should at least make an effort to make speeches that say or mean something. The Tories said that the argument for independence is about emotionalism. If I have one criticism of what they have said in defence of themselves, it is that they proceeded to defend the union on the same emotional basis. The Tories cannot criticise the gander when the goose is using the same sauce—they should be honest about that. A lot of what has been going on this morning has been about attacking SNP policies. That is fair enough and we do not have a problem with that, but that is not attacking independence. The assumption that is being made is that all that someone has to do is to attack an SNP policy and somehow they have attacked independence. That is a basic misunderstanding of the entire situation and it betrays the intellectual vacuity of the arguments of the other parties. Rhona Brankin made a fascinating speech about Scotland's apparently debt-burdened economy. She has obviously not read Cathy Jamieson's so-called tough questions, from which it is clear that Labour is fast abandoning the black hole and the deficit. Like all members, I am often asked why I got involved in politics. I dare say that many members have wryly asked themselves that question from time to time. I asked it at least three times during Labour speeches this morning. It is a fair question. There is a great deal of dissatisfaction about politics and politicians in general. People assume that most politicians are in politics for themselves. The answer to that cynicism is, of course, "the vision thing" and "the bigger picture". The SNP certainly has that. Our vision is of independence and the power that it can give to the people of Scotland to take control of their own destiny. It is true that, in some areas, the devolution settlement allows us almost, if not quite, total control. My colleagues have already spoken about a number of those areas. I will touch on justice. We cannot be trusted to make decisions about the classification of drugs and firearms, which is a little bit odd, but, if we want to, we can pretty much do anything else that we choose in criminal and civil justice. That should afford us the opportunity to initiate, innovate and make up our own minds about the approach that we wish to take in Scotland to problems in Scotland, even though those problems are not unique to Scotland or even the United Kingdom. Indeed, in some areas, that is exactly what has happened, which makes Mike Rumbles's silly speech a complete waste of time.  The truth is that the SNP has acknowledged good ideas when they have been produced—particularly when the Executive has nicked those good ideas from the SNP in the first place. The truth is that the Executive has taken on board SNP initiatives and we thank it for acknowledging that many good ideas come from our party. However, this week, we have seen how that can be set at nothing by a diktat from the Prime Minister—not even a decision by the Westminster Parliament—that would effectively turn benefits offices into courts and roll judge and jury into one. The Scottish Parliament has responsibility for tackling crime in Scotland, but social security is unambiguously a reserved matter. That means that we in Scotland are powerless to stop the Prime Minister's plan to remove child benefit and housing benefit from low-income parents of young offenders. How on earth does that fit in with the strategy that the Executive might have on youth crime and youth disorder? The benefits system cannot and must not be allowed to replace the criminal justice system, but how can this Parliament stop the rollercoaster, assuming that the plan survives today's elections in England?

I promise Mike Rumbles that the SNP will address those issues in Westminster. Crime is a devolved matter. By his intervention, the Prime Minister is driving a coach and horses through Scotland's criminal justice system. Ultimately, the way to stop such intrusions into the devolved area is for the Parliament to have control over the reserved area—social security—as it would if it were an independent Parliament. Even within the existing framework, the SNP would do a better job than the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive. On the subject of justice alone, I can mention SNP policies that have been brought forward—policies on drug courts, measures to tackle sex offenders and compensation orders, which are one of the ways in which the SNP would begin to address parental responsibility in a more sensible and responsible fashion than Tony Blair currently proposes. The SNP would make the greatest improvement where it is needed—in the delivery of public services. That topic has been the default moan of Labour members in the debate. None has moaned more than Des McNulty. The SNP has talked consistently this morning about public services and the failure of the Parliament to deliver what the people of Scotland want in the way of public services.

If proposals have not gone through it is probably because the Executive parties have a built-in majority on committees and are rather loth ever to take on any ideas from the SNP, regardless of how good they are. Scotland's future must be based on strong public services. That is why we are making what I call our "local pact with the people". The five key principles of public service delivery are: that it be locally delivered; that it be public; that it be accountable; that it be consumer-oriented; and that it be transparent. When private profit is taken from public services, precious resources that should be directed towards front-line services are siphoned off. The Executive's record on public services has been appalling. It amounts to a massive extension of the privatisation programme that Labour vehemently opposed when the Tories began it. Our proposals, which involve a not-for-profit trust, would ensure that the work that needs to be done would be done—but with the big differences that the assets and the control would stay in public hands and that all the money would be invested in services, with no cream skimmed off the top. The SNP would, under the present system, do a better job of delivering the sort of Scotland that Scots want; but that would be only second best because, to make things work in Scotland, we need independence. In that framework, we could tackle the core problems rather than simply apply a soothing balm to the symptoms. We are giving the people of Scotland a positive, upbeat message that concentrates on their ability to take control of their future. Independence is about giving the people of Scotland the power that they need to tackle the real inequalities in our society and to make the changes that must be made. Policy autonomy is all very well in areas such as health, education and justice, but budgets are constrained by what Westminster deems appropriate. And even policy autonomy can go only so far. No one can seriously argue that it is possible to build a coherent transport infrastructure when we can build roads but not railways. Independence is not the threat that some of the timorous beasties on the Labour benches seem to think. It is truly about an end to dependency. It is Scotland's single greatest opportunity. Independence can be the key to Scotland's future as a go-ahead economy and a can-do society, where the root causes of inequality can be addressed and a true equality of opportunity attained. That is what the SNP wants. It is apparent that that is not what Labour wants.

It will save us some money.

Will the minister turn his attention to a specific type of bedblocking, which occurs when there is a lack of beds in mental health hospitals, which results in individuals being detained in the state hospital at Carstairs far beyond the length of time that is considered to be acceptable? In Perth, we are experiencing that situation with the Murray royal hospital. I am sure that that is not the only hospital for which that is the case. Does the minister have any solutions specifically for that problem?

Whatever the minister has to do to ensure efficiency in the prosecution service, will he rule out categorically any departure from strict time limits to ensure that Scotland never goes down the road of open-ended remand, which in some European countries extends to years rather than months?

I did not describe the figure as small change.

I have to say that the Minister for Justice is really struggling this morning. He is basically admitting that he has sold the pass on any possible reduction in prison numbers, and he is currently in the process of selling the prison system too. It has taken us two and a half years to get to this point, but the Executive is prepared to renege on previous leadership commitments on prison privatisation. No wonder the prison officers are feeling let down.

Frankly, if the privatisation option figures are demolished, the public sector option comes back into play, but that has been ruled out right from the start. Two years ago, the minister and the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service came to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and asserted that the prisoner population would decrease. Two years later, they are saying that it will increase. The fact is that the minister does not have a flipping clue what is going on, and that is a result of his complete inability to get a grip of the system. In 1996, Jack Straw stated that it was "morally unacceptable for the private sector to undertake the incarceration of those whom the state has decided need to be imprisoned". If it was morally unacceptable in 1996, I wonder whether the Minister for Justice or his deputy will be able to explain why it has miraculously become morally acceptable in 2002. Again, in 1997, Henry McLeish quite categorically stated: "There will be no more private prisons in Scotland." In his own party's manifesto for the Scottish Parliament in 1999, the Minister for Justice committed himself to a clear pledge to reduce prison numbers and make greater use of alternatives to custody. It is disappointing to hear his reaction to the average prison population in Scotland reaching an all-time high of 6,200 and his admission and acceptance that prisoner numbers are just going to increase. He tried to defend the figures by saying: "I will never apologise for a criminal justice system that locks up serious and violent offenders for a long time."— [ Official Report , 21 March 2002; c 10503.]  Nor should he. However, he should apologise for all the big talk about alternatives to custody while presiding over a system that is bursting at the  seams. As a lawyer and as a politician, I know that the prison estate is in need of an overhaul. The state of some of our prisons is indeed shocking, but the programme of closures and privatisation that the Executive proposes in the estates review is simply wrong. I shall start by talking about Peterhead. With the proposal to close Peterhead, the Executive is following through with the prisons policy that it embarked on when it closed Dungavel, a policy that rewards success with closure. There should be no doubt about it. Peterhead has been successful. It is world-renowned for the work that is done in its sex offenders unit. I know that the Executive and the SPS cannot wait to see the back of Clive Fairweather, but many of us have a great deal of respect for what he has to say. He has made it clear that he believes that closure of Peterhead will set back the progress of the sex offenders treatment programme for three years. The Minister for Justice should not dismiss too readily the fact that the community in Peterhead wants that facility to stay. Peterhead prison is an important employer in a town that has suffered a number of employment knocks in recent years. The people of Peterhead do not want the prison closed and they want it to keep doing the excellent work that it has been doing with sex offenders. It is instructive to look at the Official Report from the day of the ministerial statement on Peterhead prison and to contrast the contributions from those MSPs who represent constituencies that are accustomed to and at ease with a prison on their doorstep with the contributions made by members such as Janis Hughes, Bristow Muldoon and Robert Brown, who were clearly representing the concerns of their constituents about the prospect of one of the new prisons ending up in their constituency. I suspect that the resistance that they reflect will be magnified if there is a suggestion that that prison will contain significant numbers of sex offenders. To avoid indicating where any of those new prisons might be is convenient for the minister. Turning now to Low Moss, there is no doubt that the existing situation cannot be sustained.

I will take interventions only from the minister. If a prison is to be closed and a new prison built, it makes sense that the site that is currently home to a prison should be in line for any new development. [Interruption.]

The Presiding Officer will note—

I am aware of the long list of members who wish to speak in the debate and that members will speak after me.

Plenty of Labour and Liberal Democrat back benchers and front benchers take no interventions at all. If a prison is to be closed and a new prison built, it makes sense that the site that is currently home to a prison should be in line for any new development. The Minister for Justice said that that will be so in respect of Low Moss, but it is a pity that the same logic is not applied in respect of Peterhead, where there is overwhelming support for the continued presence of a prison. The Minister for Justice made it clear that the financial aspect sold him on privatisation. Incredibly, we have been told that £700 million would be saved by going down that road. I suppose that £700 million is not too bad as the price for principles. I would be the first to acknowledge that spending money on the prison system is not the most populist step, but I am afraid that the minister bought a pig in a poke when he sold his principles. It is not only SNP members who simply cannot accept that figure. It is clear that the recent academic study caused the minister some uncomfortable moments. It was so scathing that I briefly thought of just reading the summary into the Official Report in lieu of a speech. The report begs many questions. Why were hypothetical rather than actual prisons used to make comparisons? What happens if prisoner  numbers fall? Why was so little weight given to the many problems that were experienced at Kilmarnock prison, in particular the inability to retain staff in the face of low pay and poor conditions? Why did the public sector option include higher quality and greater risk burdens than the private option? Like was not compared with like. It is not just the academic report that is a problem for the minister. Comparisons made in the recently published intermediate report on HMP Kilmarnock by the chief inspector of prisons make it clear that no great savings are to be made from privatisation in terms of cost per prisoner. From the HMI report and PricewaterhouseCoopers' academic critique, we can see that Kilmarnock prison is far from being the glowing endorsement of private prisons that the Executive must have hoped as it tried to push its privatisation agenda. During First Minister's question time on 21 March 2002, the First Minister went so far as to boast that he had "been inside Kilmarnock prison" and had "seen the closed-circuit television cameras".— [ Official Report , 21 March 2002; c 10549.]  Those would be the same closed-circuit cameras that the HMI report mentions. Under the heading "Staff Safety", that report says: "an example was also given where it was impossible to arrange relief cover for toilet breaks and prisoners were therefore left unsupervised except by CCTV during these periods". The record of problems and incidents at Kilmarnock prison is long. The prison has the highest turnover of staff and the highest staff sick rate and has more than a third of all prison fires and almost a quarter of prison deaths. Other members will wish to go into details.

There is absolutely nothing untrue about what I said. Taken together, the HMI report and the independent academic report blow huge holes in the Executive's incredible claim that pursuing prison privatisation will save £700 million. In fact, the reports clearly show that private prisons are not cheaper to build or run and are not better run than prisons in the public sector.  At First Minister's question time on 28 March 2002, my colleague John Swinney said that it is stated specifically and categorically by PricewaterhouseCoopers on page 11 of its report that it had not "undertaken work in the nature of an audit".— [ Official Report , 28 March 2002; c 10786.]  I recall that the First Minister then seemed as uncomfortable as many of his back benchers are today. The Minister for Justice described the report by PricewaterhouseCoopers as "a robust piece of work".— [ Official Report , 21 March 2002; c 10507.]  He told us that he had wanted "an independent audit" and that this was it. It was certainly a piece of work but, in truth, there had been no independent audit. The PricewaterhouseCoopers report claimed a saving of 50 per cent, but a similar report in England and Wales by Mouchel Consulting Ltd claimed a saving of just 14 per cent. I say to the minister that that report specifically left out the two most expensive private prisons from its considerations. The two reports had extremely different results and they cannot both be right. It is interesting that United States studies also appear ultimately to show small cost differentials between the public sector and the private sector. Neither the Minister for Justice nor the First Minister can be surprised at the scepticism in the chamber. They tried to make us believe that they were so surprised that the disparity between the costs in the public and private sectors was so great that, in the words of the First Minister, they "had them checked and checked again".— [ Official Report , 21 March 2002; c 10549.]  The truth is that PricewaterhouseCoopers got its figures from the SPS; it did not independently arrive at its own figures. If the minister was so keen to have the figures carefully checked, does he understand why we find it a little strange that the company chosen to do the checking has 132 private finance initiative contracts that are worth £18 billion in the United Kingdom? It was not an impartial observer by any means. If the private costings are demolished on cost grounds, the public sector comes back into play as the future for the prison service. But the issue is not just about cost. There is massive opposition to the further privatisation of Scotland's prison system. The Minister for Justice need only look over his shoulder to find some of that opposition. The leadership of both Executive parties needs to listen to what its supporters are saying. The comments that were made on the ministerial announcement by Pauline McNeill, Henry  McLeish, Karen Whitefield and Scott Barrie are just a few that spring to mind—and that was before the Scottish Trades Union Congress got in on the act. If the proposals go ahead, a third of prisoners in Scotland would end up in private prisons and the country would have the most privatised prison system in the world. Prisons are a public service that should be provided by the state. The profit motive should have no role to play in the prison service. In principle, it is wrong for private companies to run prisons. If the state requires that a person should be deprived of their liberty, it is the state's duty to take on that responsibility. We should not fool ourselves. No private company will get involved in the provision of prison services as a contribution to the public good. They will do so because they think that they can make a buck. Where will savings come from that will help them to do so? We all know the answer: from staff pay and conditions, from cutting back on rehabilitation programmes and from concentrating on inmate containment. That is the record of privatisation where challenging offending behaviour and successful rehabilitation are not priorities. Cost cutting is the priority. Last year, the STUC passed a resolution that said: "Congress condemns any further proliferation of private prisons in Scotland."

I noticed that rehabilitation hardly got a mention in the PricewaterhouseCoopers report or in the review. The fact is that Kilmarnock is not succeeding in terms of rehabilitation. I will continue to quote the STUC resolution: "Congress condemns any further proliferation of private prisons in Scotland. In doing so, Congress recognises that it is morally repugnant to lock up someone and remove their freedom for the sake of profit. Congress further recognises that such a practice in the 21 st century is the equivalent of modern day slavery, where a person is sold to someone else for profit." If anyone thinks that that goes over the top—I suspect that some might—listen to this blurb from an invitation to a conference of the prison industry: "While arrests and convictions are steadily on the rise, profits are to be made—profits from crime. Get in on the  ground floor of this booming industry now. Leading industry analysts will give expert forecasts on future growth potential for the private prison industry and how to make the most of investments today ... as they share their insights on how to capitalize on a new era of opportunities." There is a vested interest in high crime rates and high prisoner populations.

That was an invitation to a conference in Dallas in 1996, but that is the ethos of the people who would be directly responsible for a third of Scotland's prisoners. That ethos is not a surprise to anyone who knows anything about Wackenhut's history. Ultimately, it is the US company Wackenhut that will benefit from privatisation. That is what the Minister for Justice wants us to sign up to. I find those sentiments utterly repugnant and I do not believe that I am alone. That is not the future that I want for the Scottish prison system. I do not believe that it is the future that the people of Scotland want to see either. I call on the natural majority in the chamber today to send a clear message to the Minister for Justice that he is not on. I move amendment S1M-2993.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the publication of the consultation paper Proposals for the Future of the Scottish Prison Service Estate ; believes that to help achieve a safer Scotland the prison estate should facilitate the secure holding of prisoners and the delivery of effective rehabilitation programmes, and that prisons should provide a reasonable standard of accommodation; recognises that these objectives can only be achieved by substantial modernisation of the present prison estate; further notes that private prisons have serious deficiencies in their management of both inmates and staff, and asserts that, in the interest of public safety, such a key component of the criminal justice system should remain in the public sector."

Compared with his figures!

Nonsense.

The minister will be aware that when the bill finally becomes law it will be up to landowners to make decisions about providing access to commercial companies. The real concern arises out of possible changes under section 9(2)(a). Given that most of the concerns of landowners seem to be about the possibility of people staging rock concerts or similar day-long events, what consideration has the minister given to redrafting section 9(2)(a) so as to include only ventures that involve the erection of a tangible structure—even if it is temporary—and to exclude others, such as mountain guides, who are exercising ordinary access rights?

It must be something to do with spring that brings these debates around; I seem to recall our having a debate on tourism on almost exactly the same date last year, albeit in very different circumstances. Last year, the impact of the tourism crisis on Perthshire was immediate. At the time, Perth and Kinross Council estimated that around £1 million was being lost in the area each week. That is obviously a lot of money and a lot of jobs were affected. The knock-on effects are still being felt this year—I suspect that that is true throughout Scotland. Tourism businesses in my constituency and across Perthshire are trying hard to be optimistic and, with most of them having just survived last year, they are working very hard to make this year's season as good as they can. Others have spoken about the problems that the industry has suffered and about the difficulties that it still faces; I would like to concentrate on something a little different. I confess that I have not read "Tourism Framework for Action 2002:2005" in detail because it is a different document that I want to raise with the minister today. Members may recall a very welcome recent document called "A Soundtrack for Scottish Tourism"—I am sure that the minister is well aware of it. It was published by VisitScotland together with the Scottish Arts Council. Members may even have signed my motion on it. For those who missed the document, I will say that those two  bodies conducted a joint initiative—the traditional music and tourism initiative—from 1999 to 2002. As someone who is passionate about music, particularly music that flows from the indigenous tradition in Scotland, the initiative was—I am sorry about the pun—music to my ears. The name of the game nowadays is diversification. Whether we are talking about Perthshire or about Scotland as a whole, we are in a very competitive international market. My one concern when I read through the soundtrack document, with its catalogue of successful projects across the country, was that none of them was based on my patch. Cue immediate letters locally and an early meeting with the local area tourist board and its new chief executive. I had an extremely useful, constructive and entertaining meeting with the new chief executive, but I am sure that he would not contradict me when I say that he was lukewarm, to say the least, about the soundtrack initiative. As he was new in his post, it would hardly be fair to blame him for the lack of any Perthshire musical voice in the initiative, but the meeting highlighted for me one of the structural problems with the tourism set-up in Scotland, namely the extent to which—again, members will have to pardon the pun—we are able to get everyone singing from the same hymn sheet. Perthshire is the home of some of Scotland's best traditional music. Niel Gow, the fiddler, came from there, as did the whole tradition of the Travellers and the world-famous Stewart dynasty, and as do Dougie MacLean, Jim Malcolm and Hamish Moore. There is a long list of music and musicians, past and present, on which to build a regional tourism initiative on the back of the national one but, so far, that has not happened. Much good work is done nationally and internationally to promote Scotland in a particular way, to sell the country to niche markets or to all markets, to market what is wholly indigenous to us, and to showcase what simply cannot be found anywhere else—obviously, traditional Scottish music will not come from anywhere else—but I am concerned that all that work can be defeated on the ground. I had a very useful meeting this morning with VisitScotland and the Scottish Arts Council about the soundtrack initiative and they tell me that a review of the relationship between the area tourist boards and VisitScotland is going on and that the minister is visiting area tourist boards, partly with that relationship in mind. I make a plea that the minister's closing speech should contain some remarks on how that review is going and on how that relationship can be changed so that, across Scotland, we are genuinely trying to do the same thing at the same time.

I feel as though I have been on permanent duty in the chamber yesterday and today. I endorse—as, I suspect, does everybody in the chamber—the minister's comments on what happened on 11 September and what that means for emergency planning. The Parliament met on the Wednesday immediately following that appalling event to express our condolences to the people of America and to all those who were bereaved. The following month, my party used some of its debating time to allow the Parliament to focus on the developing international situation and Scotland's role in it. As I pointed out then, the attack on the World Trade Center affected not only the USA; citizens of many nations and people of many religions were killed. The events of that day also brought home with terrifying clarity how susceptible our day-to-day lives are to being completely and totally overturned by the actions of a few determined individuals. The shock waves of the events of 11 September are still being felt and I have no doubt that it will take a long time for the aviation industry, in particular, to recover. The prevention of such atrocities must always be our priority, but we need to be pragmatic and to realise the importance of civil contingency planning and the ability to react in the most practical and efficient way possible in the event of any major incident. It is about thinking the unthinkable. The importance of the role that is played by those who must think the unthinkable should not be overlooked. It must be a strange and difficult job to constantly refine plans and preparations that such people hope fervently will never have to be put into practice. However, those plans do get put into practice. We are talking not only about wilful acts of terrorism, but about the destructive acts of God that strike communities throughout the country from time to time, and situations such as that which occurred in my constituency on Sunday night. I know that my constituents are grateful for the way in which that situation was dealt with. I  know that they are also grateful for the way in which local council officials, alongside the emergency services and the armed forces, reacted to deal with the aftermath of the dreadful flooding that struck Perth in 1993. I have no doubt that other members will have stories from their constituencies that demonstrate the importance of an efficient plan's being put into operation as soon as disaster strikes. Although I acknowledge the importance of that work and am glad to take the opportunity to applaud those often unsung heroes who are involved in it, I am a little puzzled about why the motion has been brought before us as Executive business. No specific document or strategy is promoted in the motion, nor does the motion focus on any one aspect of contingency planning, which is a wide-ranging subject. If the motion had proposed that more resources, for example, were to be provided, I would see why we are having the debate. I know that the money for the fire service that has been boasted about recently is just one of the Executive's famous reannouncements. The Executive's budget for civil defence and emergency planning actually remains static over the four years from 2000-01 to 2003-04. The Executive might at least commit to index-linked increases. I could understand why we are having the debate if the priorities for contingency planning were being re-evaluated or if the command structure in the event of an emergency was to be reorganised. Even if the motion did something other than merely acknowledge the importance of civil contingency planning and approve of the extremely important work that is done by the diverse agencies that are involved in civil contingency planning in Scotland, I would have understood the purpose of the debate. The debate should have a point. I therefore take the opportunity to voice concerns that have been expressed about the potential for an incident for which no amount of planning could possibly prepare us. As contingency planning must be as much about prevention as it is about reaction, I urge the minister to read the fact sheet on nuclear time bombs that Greenpeace has circulated, and to bear it in mind at any future Cabinet discussions on nuclear power. Given Kevin Dunion's new role as an adviser to the Executive, I dare say that the minister would find it easy enough to get hold of a copy of that fact sheet. I will be happy to send him one if he wants to see it. That paper puts it thus: "Since September 11 th , the world is facing a new dimension of threat; aviation risks multiplied by nuclear risks; a plane crash on a nuclear installation, in the past seen as 'improbable' is now a 'credible' scenario. From now on nuclear plants have to be seen as nuclear timebombs waiting to be detonated, by themselves—or by terrorists."  Lothar Hahn, the chairman of Germany's reactor security commission, which advises the country's Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety, has warned "against the illusion of believing that it is possible to effectively protect reactors against events like those in New York or Washington". He further explains that preparations can at best be realistic against minor occurrences. He says that strengthening the reinforced concrete cupolas or containment over existing reactors makes little sense. The report continues to inform us that, in most countries, an aircraft crash on a nuclear reactor has not been taken into consideration. Indeed, such events have been dismissed as improbable. In most countries, risk assessments of plane crashes have been limited to the investigation of the impact of a small aeroplane, such as a Cessna 210, crashing into a nuclear reactor. Members will not need to be reminded that the aircraft that ploughed into the twin towers of the World Trade Center on September 11 were two Boeing 767s. The kinetic energy of a Boeing 767 is more than 650 times greater than that of a Cessna 210 with a full fuel tank, and the amount of fuel on board each Boeing aircraft was almost 250 times greater than the maximum amount of fuel that can be carried by a Cessna 210. That means that the current design and construction requirements and regulations in countries that operate nuclear reactors are at a level of protection that is far below that which is required to withstand an attack such as that which was carried out on 11 September. I think the answer to the question that Lloyd Quinan asked about the number of decontamination units in Scotland is that there is none. We should, by all means, recognise the importance of contingency planning, and we should of course applaud the often unseen work that the various authorities do but, please, let us have no more vague motions such as the one that is before us; rather let us have more practical debate in the Parliament.

Is the minister aware that there is an active campaign in East Carse, which is called "Eyes off East Carse" and is led by an SNP councillor? Is she further aware that Perth and Kinross Council, in whose area the Carse of Gowrie lies, sees no cause for concern in the Angus and Dundee structure plan? Does she agree that, if such serious concerns exist, the Tory councillors in the Perth and Kinross Council administration might have made those views known? Will she resist any attempt to make planning a party political issue?

So much for the Liberal Democrat manifesto before the 1999 Scottish Parliament election and new Labour's promises before the 1997 general election. It is an amazing coincidence that nearly everything that the minister said in his statement appears to have been in the public domain since last Friday, when every journalist in Scotland who is interested in the matter tried to contact members through their pagers and mobiles. One can assume only that there was a great deal of unofficial briefing. The minister has had the review since December 2000. Will he explain why—although the review took 13 months from when it landed on his desk to come before Parliament—he is prepared to allow only a 12-week consultation period? That is utterly ludicrous. Will the minister undertake to ensure that the veil of commercial confidentiality is removed from Kilmarnock prison so that we can all compare the public and the private sector provision of prisons? At present, we are not permitted to know, for example, the number of prison officers at Kilmarnock, the conditions in the medical centre,  the extent of staff bullying and the extent of staff turnover. Such information is necessary to establish a real comparison between the private and the public sectors. Does not the minister realise that Kilmarnock—in terms of cost and of the prison regime—is nothing like an ideal model for the future of the prison service in Scotland? How on earth does the minister justify the closure of Peterhead prison? The prison system appears to be one in which the reward for success is closure. Dungavel prison, which was as close to being drug-free as a prison can be, was closed. Now, Peterhead, which has an internationally renowned sex offenders unit, will be closed. According to Clive Fairweather, that closure will set back the progress of the sex offenders treatment programme by three years. Where will the offenders in that unit go? I presume that the new recipient community will not be too happy about it. Conditions in Scotland's prisons need radical improvement. Does the minister realise that most people in Scotland believe that the proposals are not the way in which to deliver that improvement?

I congratulate Robert Brown on securing the debate, which is on a fairly important matter. It has generated a great deal of interest and among the visitors in the gallery is Andy Watson from Craigie in Perth. Recent years have not been easy for sub-postmasters. I have been increasingly perturbed—as I dare say other members have—at the number of letters that I receive from the Post Office telling me that a sub-post office in my constituency is closing because no one can be found to take over from the current sub-postmaster who is either retiring or getting out of the business altogether because it is not financially feasible to continue. In rural communities, and indeed in many urban communities, including those in Perth, the post office is a vital part of life. People meet up and share their news. Old folk have a reason to get out  of the house. If the post office goes, the heart often goes out of the community. Gil Paterson's anecdote shows how important they can be in a wider sense. Westminster is playing fast and loose with the future of those institutions and our communities. If no living can be made out of running a sub-post office, it will close. There is no doubt about it. It is as simple as that. With one recent decision, Westminster slashed a huge percentage off the income of the average sub-post office. The decision to pay benefits by bank transfer removed the major revenue stream for sub-post offices. The Government owes it to sub-postmasters and the communities that we represent to seek ways of replacing that lost income or many more sub-post offices will surely close. Not only was the cashing of benefits an important source of revenue, it also got people into the post office and encouraged the use of the other services that the post office provided. An interesting development that promises to act as a draw is the "Your Guide" initiative, which has been piloted successfully. The National Federation of SubPostmasters is very enthusiastic. The problem for our sub-postmasters has been caused at Westminster. However, there are things that the Scottish Executive can do to alleviate the situation for communities. Robert Brown's motion calls on the Executive to pilot a "Your Guide" scheme in Scotland with a view to rolling it out across the country. My concern is the same as that which has been expressed by others. We are running out of time to run more pilot schemes. The pilot has been successful. Our sub-postmasters need our help now, so please let us get on with it.

I will not be putting that on my election leaflets.

We support her.

I was sorry to see that the usually relatively sensible Bill Aitken was in print this morning with some hysterical nonsense about "the new Highland clearances" and "a landgrab of which Robert Mugabe would be proud." The Tory position is ridiculous, because it supports local landowning monopolies. Criticisms can be made of the bill, but the SNP will vote for the bill and it will go through. There is a scandal about land ownership in Scotland, which goes back to when land was first enclosed and treated as though it belonged to an individual, rather than to communities. The ownership of great tracts of land by individuals is a concept that ordinary Scots have never accepted. Scotland has the greatest concentration of land ownership in Europe. According to Andy Wightman, two thirds of Scotland's land is owned by just 1,252 people—that is 0.025 per cent of the population. That is the scandal of land ownership in Scotland. Finding out who owns land is a hugely difficult business because the owners hide behind companies. Absentee ownership has been a major irritation. Although there are many enlightened landowners, it is a lottery whether someone gets such a landlord in the decision-making process. If someone is unlucky enough to live in a community where the landowner resists selling land for housing or puts obstacles in the way of development, as Vestey did when he owned Assynt, it is too bad for them, too bad for their family and too bad for the whole area. However, the communities of Scotland have started to prove the truth of an old Gaelic saying,  which I will try to pronounce: "Na daoine—nas trèine na tighearna." That means "The people—mightier than a lord." It is time for the Parliament to come in on the side of the people and give legislative support to their might. To be in the position of debating the principles of a land reform bill affords enormous satisfaction. All the many committees that were involved should be congratulated on their work. The final report is commendable. The part of the bill that attracted most comment was part 1, on access rights. Originally, the draft sections were couched in terms that caused a bit of a stushie in the various access lobbies. The Executive should be congratulated on its response to the consultation, which has meant, in turn, that that is the part of the bill that is most changed from the original. However, it is fair to say that many concerns remain. Those concerns have been expressed by a large number of diverse interest groups. On a philosophical point, the minister appears to have got himself into a bit of a mess on the law of trespass. The fact is that there has long been a widely understood and accepted de facto right of access in Scotland. We are making that de facto right statutory because it was being challenged increasingly, often to the detriment of ordinary people. Those challenges continue right up to today. There are reports in The Scotsman today. Last week, I was written to by a constituent who was ordered off a vehicle track on an estate in Perthshire. I appreciate that there has been a debate about the law of trespass for many a long year. Someone could probably write a PhD on the subject and still not come to a final conclusion. Possibly that has been done, but it is not necessarily the minister's place to be making declarators of law in the way he seems to have chosen to do. The fact that the minister has done that has given rise to the concern that what is before us is a concession, when that is not how people view it. I commend to the minister the approach of the Justice 2 Committee, which I paraphrase by saying that it is a cautious repudiation of the ministerial assertion, albeit one that accepts that the case law is confusing. I reinforce the committee's point that, in Scots law, what is not expressly forbidden is permitted. There are many exclusions that could be debated, but I will confine myself to the one that has caused most controversy. That is the problem connected with section 9(2)(a), which seeks to exclude commercial ventures from the right of access. That provision is not sustainable in its  present form. There has been a deluge of evidence highlighting the dangers of section 9(2)(a) and its possible detrimental effect on the vital economic sector of leisure and tourism. Outdoor recreation generates somewhere between £600 million and £800 million of Scottish tourism income—about six times the income from hunting and fishing—involves 23,000 jobs and is of vital importance to Scotland. There is no doubt that massive alarm has been felt by the exclusion of commercial activity. I note the minister's comments, which suggest that he might be minded to make some concessions. However, I believe that section 9(2)(a) has to be removed from the bill completely or moved to the access code to allow for guidance that seeks to remove landowners' concerns about those commercial ventures that would involve, for example, erecting structures on the ground. That is really the basis of the problem with section 9(2)(a). Leaving section 9(2)(a) in the bill could lead directly to charging for access. I do not think that it is alarmist to say that. Dartmoor National Park Authority charges £500 to commercial photographers, including, I understand, media photographers. Everyone rushes to say that they have never heard of such a thing happening in Scotland and that they do not think that it would happen. I have no such confidence. The truth is that, once a class is created of people who have to seek formal consent for access—as section 9(2)(a) is presently constituted that would include those who are walking or mountain guides—it does not take a genius to spot that charging for that consent will be seen as a nice little earner. Frankly, section 9(2)(a) would in no way prevent that from happening in Scotland, and we should resist that at all costs. There is another aspect of the bill that needs to be addressed. Many of us in this chamber will have been approached by farmers who farm close to urban areas. In one case in my constituency, the planned building of 900 houses in one area—Oudenarde at the Bridge of Earn—will result in the houses being bounded on three sides by a motorway, a river and a railway, and on the fourth side by a farm. An adequate core path network will be vital if the farmer's understandable concerns about frequent casual access are to be alleviated. However, section 17 allows only for local authorities to draw up core path plans, when what is needed is a clear statement in the bill that local authorities will be responsible for the establishment and maintenance of those plans. Core paths should not be seen as an alternative to responsible access, but the actual—not just theoretical—provision of such paths will be vital for the success of the totality of the access proposals.  Another issue that arises from access in areas of higher population density is liability. I am not sure who is advising farmers, but the farmer who is concerned about the situation at Oudenarde says: "If people are present by right I am led to believe that they have to be taken into consideration in our risk assessment." He does not say who is leading him to believe that, but he goes on: "due to our situation, we would probably have a duty of care towards children using our land in order to protect them from harming themselves. They can't read the dangers and I am informed that we could be liable. Modern society is much more litigious and this is a real concern." Clearly, there is a serious need for reassurance on liability. Section 5(2) was added to the bill in an attempt to provide just such reassurance, but the Executive has not been helped by the evidence of the Law Society of Scotland, which reinforces the concerns of the Scottish Landowners Federation and the National Farmers Union of Scotland. The Justice 2 Committee has made a fair assessment of the concerns in its report and, at paragraph 44, it makes a recommendation to the Executive. That recommendation, if implemented, would further emphasise the reassurance that I know the Executive means to give. I hope that the minister will take that recommendation to heart. Perhaps my constituent's comment about our more litigious society is a fair point that we have to take on board. The bill's provisions on access are undoubtedly important, but, for me, it is the right-to-buy provisions that will begin to change the pattern of land ownership in Scotland. There should be no doubt that a change of ownership is precisely what is intended. Equally, there should be no doubt that it is that change of land ownership that has been demanded by rural communities throughout Scotland for many years. I have made no secret of my view that the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill simply does not go far enough to make the changes that are needed. The bill says nothing about empowering communities short of outright purchase, but it is important to recognise that not all communities will wish to buy. The right to register an interest to buy, which is what the bill is all about, will have minimal impact. Only about 1.5 per cent of the Highland land that was transferred last year would have been affected by the provisions in the bill. Andy Wightman described the measures as "modest but important." That is a fair assessment, but the minister, more tellingly, conceded that he did not see the bill as being about the significant redistribution of land. What a pity that the opportunity has not been taken to make it about exactly that.  Perhaps we have a failure of nerve to thank for the proposals' apparent lack of ambition. I have said that we support them, and I have said that we welcome them, but I say today that we should go much further. We should give tenant farmers a right to buy and, more to the point, we should introduce a right-to-buy trigger on transfers of land, rather than just on the sale of land. That would mean examining the law on succession and trusts, but unlike the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, I want to see a significant redistribution of land in Scotland. Taking the bill further would be the way to achieve that.

The law of trusts and the law of inheritance must be examined. Those laws are complex, and issues on the European convention on human rights will be raised, but they must be addressed if we are to make the change that we need to make in Scotland. Whatever the Conservatives say, the majority of rural Scotland wants those changes. I will challenge the minister directly on the definition of community in the right-to-buy sections. The minister will be well aware of what I am about to say, as many other people have said the same thing about the operation of the right-to-buy provisions. I challenge the minister on the definition of community that is based on polling districts, which flies in the face of experience. The polling district that includes Eigg also includes Muck, Rum and Canna. Are we saying that three separate island communities should have been able to decide for the fourth island community? That is madness. I hope that the minister will say that he concedes that point and that we should move towards postcode rather than ballot areas for such communities. If he does not say that, I will lodge an amendment to that effect at stage 2. The crofting provisions are about not the individual right to buy, which crofters have had for a long time, but the potential for crofting communities to buy croft land at any time and not just when owners put land up for sale. Those provisions were a late addition to the bill and are unexceptionable. There is something of a debate between the Scottish Crofting Foundation and the Crofters Commission about the mechanics of the right to buy and the threshold that will be required after a ballot of community body members. I am  not sure whether there is an obvious or easy answer to the problem, other than to point out that a deeply divided community, albeit one that has voted narrowly in favour, might find other hurdles difficult to overcome in proceeding towards purchase. Easily the most heated part of the debate about the crofting provisions has centred on the intention to include fishing rights in the community right to buy. Other members will say more about that. I do not think that there will be much interest in buying such rights, except when they are not being developed adequately. If that is the case, far from being a disincentive to investment, the right may become a spur to development by an existing owner. We have been a long time reaching the present point, but at last we have a bill on land reform. There is no doubt that, before devolution, a key demand of rural Scotland was the demand for land reform. There should be no mistake about it and we should not be persuaded that it is not a priority. I hear mutterings from the Conservatives—people who probably never went out and asked anyone about land reform. Several years ago, the SNP spent two years going the length and breadth of Scotland to take evidence from communities on land reform.

People flocked to our meetings. If the member wishes to have it, he can be sent the detailed evidence from that two-year study. Throughout those years, land reform was a key issue. It was felt strongly that a Scottish parliament would make a difference to a matter on which Westminster had failed to deliver. Here we are. Let us start making the difference today.

Will the minister take an intervention?

What an odd and entertaining performance that was from Bill Butler. When my constituents come to my surgeries to complain about the national health service, I will be sure to let them know that Bill Butler thinks that they live in a fantasy world. I am sure that they will be pleased with that response from the Labour party. The truth is that the NHS is not only shrinking in terms of numbers—some of the numbers have been mentioned already—but it is contracting in terms of its physical presence. I know about that from Tayside. Following the interminable Tayside acute services review, I am convinced that the managers of the health services in Tayside are thirled to a centralising agenda. Across a wide spectrum of health care provision—from Perth royal infirmary's children's ward, kidney dialysis and maternity provision through to the helicopter ambulance service—that fear has been real and of great concern to my constituents and to many others throughout the health board area. As the minister knows, the most active campaign has been to preserve maternity services at Perth royal infirmary. Last December, I expressed my concern about the lack of progress on the midwife-consultant partnership as a national demonstration project. The impression then was that the partnership was being set up to fail so that the centralisation option could be pushed ahead. There are now rumours of an Executive ultimatum to Tayside NHS Board, which would result in the imposition of a midwife-led unit, but nobody involved in the maternity services in Perth—from the professionals through to the patients—wants that or believes that that is appropriate. Even more important, the people of Perthshire showed that they did not want that  during the review. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will take the opportunity today to disavow any such behind-the-scenes manoeuvring and to put people's minds at rest. The deputy minister could also advise of progress on the demonstration project in her closing speech, since neither she nor the Minister for Health and Community Care are leaping to their feet now. If the midwife-consultant partnership is not to be, the only feasible option for maternity services at PRI is the existing consultant-led unit, unless of course the Minister for Health and Community Care is intent on completely destroying public confidence in Perthshire. This is not only about maternity services. Clinical nurse specialists who work in the field of psychotherapy have recently contacted me. The service that they have been providing has been curtailed and it is now clear that not all areas of Perthshire will be covered by the service. That is the shrinking NHS in Tayside. That is the answer to the Minister for Health and Community Care's comments at the beginning about how those services are being rolled out to offer greater provision. The reality is the opposite. I have no doubt that, in summing up, the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will try to assert that the NHS is doing well under the Executive and that it is safe in their hands. Facts tell a different story. What matters to my constituents is the experience that they have and they are not satisfied. I will copy the correspondence on a recent case to the Minister for Health and Community Care, but I think that outlining it will help the debate. One of my constituents attended his GP and was told that he would have to be referred to a specialist at PRI. He received a letter dated 22 February 2002 informing him that the out-patient appointment was on 4 March 2003. That is absolutely ludicrous. That is a waiting time of more than a year and that is the reality being experienced by my constituents. The NHS is shrinking. The 1999 to 2001 activity statistics from Tayside University Hospitals NHS Trust show that: elective in-patients are down; day cases are down; the percentage admitted within three months is down; total out-patients are down; bed numbers are down throughout Tayside generally and in particular at PRI; and the median waiting time for in-patients is up. That is the answer to Bill Butler. Those are the realities that my constituents and those right across Tayside have to face. Fewer beds are available, fewer patients are treated and there are fewer nurses to care for them, and there is rampaging centralisation. The Executive has utterly failed the NHS, throughout Scotland and in Tayside in  particular.

I, too, congratulate Lord James on securing today's debate. When the e-mail request came round to ascertain whether members wanted to speak in the debate, I pressed the positive reply button almost without thinking. Why was that? I was raised in one of the furthest flung parts of the Commonwealth—Australia. When asked, I describe myself as 100 per cent Scots and 50 per cent Australian—I feel that that is an accurate assessment in relation to my upbringing. It is something of a standing joke in the Scottish National Party that on any set-piece occasion I am permitted only one mention of Australia. Mike Russell could regale members with tales of the attempts that have been made to get me to shut up about Australia.

In such a debate I should be allowed more than one mention of Australia. Being raised in another Commonwealth country lends me some perspective. I do not imagine that Australia differs greatly from other parts of the  Commonwealth in that membership of the Commonwealth has always been important to it. Australia is part of a network of historical relationships—that is what the Commonwealth is about—that people have valued over the years and that they wish to maintain. I suspect that it is the relationship that they wish to maintain, rather than the title. We cannot say for certain whether that will always be the case. Whatever the original basis of the relationship there is no doubt that it is changing. Indeed, it has changed already, with the old imperial mindset gone and the emergence of a new relationship of equality. That nations stay in the Commonwealth tells us that it has value. However, that value is challenged by occasional periods of stress, one of which we are undergoing and which other members have mentioned. Although today's debate is and should be congratulatory, we should not pretend that the situation in Zimbabwe is in any way in keeping with Commonwealth ideals. Election counts in Scotland, which are attended by one or two policemen, remind us of how hard-won our democracy is. It is hard for any of us, involved in our process here, to imagine being involved in an election in the circumstances that we have seen in Zimbabwe, a country that is led by someone who I believe is certainly a fascist and probably a racist. The Commonwealth can play a vital role in bringing about change—I very much hope that it will do so. Keith Raffan is right to say that thus far it has not lived up to expectations. Change will happen only if we continue talking to one another, which is why the CPA is so important. I welcome the debate and the work of the CPA and look forward to a great deal more debate and work. I look forward especially to a day when Scotland can be involved in the Commonwealth as an independent country.

The report is fairly comprehensive and the minister detailed a long list of things that he is taking on as a result of it. It is almost impossible to cover everything in the short time available. I welcome the report, not least because I was the convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee when it decided to hold an inquiry into legal aid. It is nice to see the end product of something that was set in motion at that time. The committee undertook  the inquiry when my colleague Alasdair Morgan was convener and I know that he is very sorry that he is unable to participate in the debate. The desire to carry out an in-depth investigation of legal aid in Scotland arose out of evidence that the committee was beginning to get in what appeared to be unrelated investigations and reports. My recollection of the committee's initial interest focuses on the evidence that we took on what became the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. I see that Maureen Macmillan is at the back of the chamber and that my colleague Gil Paterson is also here—I am sure that he will comment on legal aid in connection with domestic violence. Legal aid is one of the unsung areas of the justice system, which many people appear to love to hate. Legal aid receives media attention only in the context of soaring legal aid costs or the legal aid earnings of solicitors and advocates. I am looking at Gordon Jackson in particular—I have no doubt that he has an interest in that side of things. Consideration of legal aid focuses only on the sea of money being spent on it, rather than on the real issues and problems that arise when people find it impossible to get legal aid, for whatever reason. Invariably, both the legal aid costs, and the legal aid earnings of solicitors and advocates are held to be too high and therefore a total outrage. That makes it too easy to ignore the real problems within a system that puts justice beyond the reach of many people. The report contains a great many specific recommendations. Michael Matheson will make some points about criminal legal aid, but I will concentrate on the civil side. At present, the stark truth is that if someone is involved in civil proceedings in Scotland today, they had better be very poor or very rich, because those are the only people who are guaranteed access to justice. Even then, if someone is poor, they have to rely on the Scottish Legal Aid Board granting their application in the first place. However, it is when someone on a relatively low or middle income applies for legal aid that the real problem emerges. The number of people in that group has grown steadily over the years, because the increases needed to bring thresholds in line with the various inflation indices have not taken place. I have a constituent who earns slightly less than £18,000 a year who cannot for all practical purposes be granted legal aid, despite its being warranted on the merits of the case, because her income level has been judged to be too high. On an income of £18,000, she is expected to be able to cover legal fees in the region of £4,000 for just one week. I have another constituent, who has a total aggregate income of £10,977, with a disposable income assessed at £5,998, who has  been asked to contribute £1,124 to legal aid. It does not take somebody of high intellect to realise that, in those circumstances, people's prospects of going to court are completely removed because of their low income. It cannot be right that that happens, as it does far too often. Clearly, the inquiry was bedevilled by the same paucity of information as the consultation on "Access to Justice" in 1998. I refer particularly to paragraph 21 of the committee's report, which refers to Scottish Legal Aid Board research about eligibility and take-up. It is an advance that the research is now being done, but it is a pity that years of parliamentary questions, not to mention the identification of the problem in submissions in 1998, did not motivate action a bit sooner. The inquiry comments specifically on inconsistencies in the treatment of benefits. Again, that is not a new problem—it was raised in the 1998 consultation. I raised it with the then justice minister because of problems that constituents were experiencing. I hope therefore that the Executive responds to the committee's request for proposals on that matter. I also hope that real consideration will be given to the recommendation that the whole of the legal aid set-up—both civil and criminal—be simplified. That is long overdue. I see that even the Minister for Justice thinks so, at least in so far as his quoted evidence in the report suggests. However, in one sense, none of this is new. In fact, so not new is it that, when I looked back at the SNP's submission to the 1998 "Access to Justice" consultation paper, I found the same general concern and indeed many of the same specific issues that were addressed by this inquiry. There were a great many submissions to that consultation and I suspect that the majority of them were opposed to the general thrust of the consultation and just as concerned as I was about what was happening to civil legal aid. What was the outcome of that whole consultation procedure? After the consultation period closed, little more was heard of it. The same could be asked about the consultation prior to that, in 1993, where an entire procedure was undertaken and then nothing happened. I very much hope that the response to this inquiry, when it is finalised, is different. What the minister has said today is very much welcome, as are the increased limits and the upratings that have been announced. That is a significant shift, and it is evidence of the strength of the committee system in the Parliament that we have achieved it. However, I have one concern about the minister's comments on the availability of solicitors who are prepared to do civil legal aid. I have had a conversation with a prominent small firm in Glasgow that does a great deal of civil legal aid work. I was told in no uncertain terms that, without  an increase in the fees in the next 12 months, the firm would simply bail out of civil legal aid altogether. I suspect that that will be mirrored throughout Scotland. On the previous consultations—here we are again—it is all very well to identify the problems every four or five years; the real achievement will be when something is done about them.

It is relevant that we are debating the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill on international women's day. Another debate will follow, but this is the kind of debate that before the Parliament was established we hoped that we  would have. I would like to think that such a debate would have taken place even if the Parliament did not have a relatively high number of women, but I am not 100 per cent certain that it would have. Matters relating to criminal justice are always controversial. A fine balancing act must be performed between the right of the accused to a fair trial and the right of the victim to be treated with dignity. Our discussions this afternoon show how fine that balancing act can be. That is never more true than in respect of sexual offence cases. Frequently, the victim is made to feel that they are on trial. The problem is compounded in the—admittedly few—cases in which the accused chooses for one reason or another to carry out their own defence, which can often include extended cross-examination of the alleged victim. I have no doubt that the scales of justice have been out of kilter and have needed readjustment in sexual offence cases. It does not take a genius to work out that there is something far wrong with how rape and sexual assault cases are prosecuted. Only a tiny percentage of crimes that are committed result in convictions. That undermines the confidence that women—the victims of such crimes are overwhelmingly women—have in the judicial system. The result is that fewer women will even report a crime, let alone put themselves through the undoubtedly traumatic process of a trial. If we are to build women's confidence in the system's ability to prosecute rape and sexual assault, we need to make changes. My profound hope is that the bill will go some way to doing that. The trial that brought the issue firmly into the spotlight took place in my constituency. People will remember the trial of John Anderson. That gentleman was finally acquitted and it subsequently emerged that he had previously been on trial for rape and had used the same tactic in his defence. The bill tackles only one aspect of the problem of lack of confidence in how the system deals with sexual offences. A great deal more needs to be done. I make no apologies for again stressing that we need specialist fiscals who are trained in dealing with rape and sexual assault cases so that we emulate the successes in the Californian system. I think that we were first promised a review more than three years ago, following the high-profile Jacqueline Radin case. The debate on leading evidence in court on the complainer's sexual history and character has continued for much longer. The bill has been a long time coming and is only a small step along the road. We cannot be complacent. The bill deals with  two specific aspects of court procedure in sexual offences trial, one of which—self-representation by the accused—occurs in only a handful of cases, albeit high-profile cases. Addressing the two problems is important, but should not blind us to the fact that much more needs to be done in respect of the crime of rape.

I have tried to follow what the Minister for Justice has just said about amendment 16. If I was struggling a little through his speech, I suspect that everyone else was as well. As a result, I think that I will go ahead and move amendment 16. Amendment 16, which is supported by Bill Aitken, provides for a further pre-trial diet to ascertain whether the accused has representation in circumstances where the solicitor has been dismissed or has withdrawn prior to the trial in terms of new section 71A(7) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, as proposed in paragraph 6 of the schedule of the bill. This is not an unusual procedure; it is recognised and well known. Basically, the schedule makes detailed provision on the procedural steps that will be invoked to implement the proposals set out in the bill. Paragraph 6 creates a further pre-trial diet in solemn cases to enable the court to ascertain whether the accused will be represented for trial. The amendment has the effect that, on being informed that the solicitor is being dismissed or has withdrawn in terms of new section 71A(7), the court shall order a further diet to ensure that procedures are put in place in advance of the trial to instruct a court-appointed solicitor. It is really an intermediate diet to ensure that everything is working and that we will get to where we intend to go in respect of any trial. The amendment also reflects the procedure that is to be adopted under new section 72A(9) of the 1995 act, as proposed in paragraph 7 of the schedule, and under new section 148A(9) of the 1995 act, as proposed in paragraph 11 of the schedule, and at least has the argument of consistency behind it.

I wonder how many people who are present understand what "doing a Moorov" means. I know that a few members do, but I suspect that many do not. We are entering discussions that are quite complicated for those who do not have legal backgrounds. I would be interested to hear the Executive's  view on amendment 14. It seems that a serious debate has taken place in the Justice 2 Committee on the disclosure of previous convictions. There is a real debate about the way in which evidence of PCs will be used. Will it be used as corroboration, which most people understand, or will its use go further, to provide a sufficiency of evidence? Although that is a slightly different matter, it is related. Will such evidence be used primarily, or even solely, in relation to the credibility of the accused? A fine balance is involved, which Bill Aitken talked about. Pauline McNeill's amendment 14 is useful, because it makes it explicit that we are talking about credibility and that it is not expected that evidence of PCs should be used in a corroborative manner. I would be surprised if the Minister for Justice argued that PCs ought to be used in a corroborative manner, and I look forward to hearing what he says. I am bound to echo concerns that once PCs are in evidence, the point becomes moot. The famous phrase concerning an elephant in the jury room describes the situation. Matters can become difficult to disentangle, but courts must deal with the impact on a jury all the time. I was interested in the brief discussion of jury studies in the Justice 2 Committee's meeting last week. We ought to return to how juries handle such evidence. That is a more difficult matter to handle and the bill cannot do that. At present, I am much disposed towards supporting Pauline McNeill's amendment. I am interested in hearing what the minister says.

I sympathise with some of Pauline McNeill's comments. I do not want to go too far down the procedures road, but we know that sometimes members do not lodge amendments at stage 2 because they feel that, if those amendments are debated but not accepted, they will not be able to lodge similar amendments at stage 3. Perhaps we should consider that issue, because it means that amendments that deal with serious issues, such as amendment 10, are lodged at stage 3 with little forewarning, with no evidence to back them up and with little time in which to be debated—only 10 or 15 minutes in a stage 3 debate such as this. SNP members will not vote for amendment 10, but not because Phil Gallie has no good, supporting arguments. We should debate restricting the reporting of an accused's identity in a rape case. It is important to recognise that issue; we should not pretend that we can simply run away from it. I gently suggest to Phil Gallie, however, that the way in which he presented his argument did his cause no favours and probably made members shut their minds to what is a serious issue. Another concern is that the amendment was introduced so late in the bill's passage. That is one of the main reasons why we will not vote for it. Amendment 10 represents a valid argument, but it could open the door to granting anonymity for accused across the board. It is difficult to justify anonymity for the accused in one case but not another. Members should consider that issue. However, the amendment could also lend anonymity to a victim. There must be many cases in which openly identifying the accused also reveals the victim's identity, particularly in smaller communities.

Members are shaking their heads. For people who live in cities such as Glasgow, anonymity might be protected, but for those who live in much smaller communities, it is extremely difficult to maintain anonymity, even when the court has imposed anonymity. We must accept that as a fact of life. There should be a debate on the issue, but it is too late in the passage of the bill to have one now. Phil Gallie did himself no favours by the way in which he presented his arguments. The SNP will not support amendment 10.

We have had enough to-ing and fro-ing to hear the substantial differences between us. I press amendment 9.

I am aware that this matter was canvassed in committee at stage 2, but it received only a brief airing at that point and I thought that it was worth having a slightly longer discussion. There are real concerns among practising solicitors about the position that they will be in when the legislation comes into force. The concern is that there is no specific provision for the regulation of the relationship between the court-appointed solicitor and the client in so far as their professional—and, indeed, statutory—duties to their clients are concerned. There is great concern that the amendment is necessary to define the altered nature of that solicitor-client relationship. There is a new role for solicitors, albeit one that will not occur very often. Solicitors' terms and conditions are, in a sense, already dealt with by  statute—solicitors have statutory obligations in respect of their work. If there is to be a new court-appointed role for solicitors, we should consider regulation of that as well. The real concern is that solicitors could end up finding themselves breaching their professional responsibilities and that a knock-on effect might be internal disciplinary proceedings against them in the Law Society of Scotland. We must consider solicitors' concerns in that regard carefully. It is fair to say that amendment 9 mirrors similar sections in other pieces of legislation that deal with court-appointed solicitors. It mirrors the Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999, which invoked similar provisions in sexual offences cases in England and Wales. In that act, there is a clear indication that a court-appointed solicitor in sexual offences proceedings is not responsible in any way to the accused. The act appears to recognise the altered nature of the solicitor-client relationship in cases such are those that are suggested in the bill. We must think carefully about where we are going. In other pieces of legislation—and not only in the one that I mentioned—the issue has been addressed more explicitly. The Terrorism Act 2000 has a similar specific provision in respect of solicitors appointed in connection with immigration appeals, which explicitly states that such a solicitor will not be responsible to the client, because the conduct of solicitors is defined by statute. The amendment tries to bring the bill into line with the practice that appears in other legislation. Such a provision is necessary if we are to go down the court-appointed solicitor road in Scotland. I move amendment 9.

Given that the bill's scope is wider than that of the acts that have been mentioned, is not there even more—rather than less—reason to ensure that the situation is clarified?

Will the minister give way?

Solicitors will not act irresponsibly because doing so would be a breach  of the legislation under which they operate. The difficulty is that the minister is perhaps imagining a set of circumstances in which a solicitor is acting capriciously. However, if he acts capriciously, he will be subject to discipline in any case. The difficulty is that what solicitors understand, are well aware of, comfortable with and bound by professionally and statutorily will be taken away. They will be put into a more ambiguous position.

That raises another point. The minister's initial comments on amendment 9 related to a situation in which solicitor after solicitor withdrew and the trial did not go ahead. Let us turn that on its head. A solicitor could go to the court and say, "For these reasons, I absolutely cannot continue to represent someone." The court could say, "Okay, we understand." The next solicitor may have exactly the same problem and may come back to court. At what point will the trial not go ahead? If that is the basis of the objection to the amendment, is it not already implicit in the bill?

Will the member give way?

Notwithstanding what the First Minister has just said, I am sure that he is aware that warrants are being issued in Scotland at twice the rate that they are issued south of the border. Given that we have a not-very-liberal minister south of the border and a so-called Liberal minister north of the border, how is the different rate explained? Does the First Minister not believe that Scots deserve a better explanation of such disproportionate surveillance in this country than that which he has given, which amounts to a shrug of his shoulders?

A Labour-Tory alliance.

No, I am not.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Although members did not like what I had to say about Sewel motions, at least my comments related to the substance of the motion. I have listened to Mr Martin's speech and  do not have the faintest idea how it relates to the motion.

It is always very interesting to discuss Sewel motions relating to the justice brief, as there have been more Sewel motions in justice policy than in any other policy area. That is an extraordinary irony. Regardless of what the Executive claims, it seems that it is intent on delivering a dumbed-down Parliament by playing constitutional ping-pong from week to week. If it does not matter where we legislate, why did we create the Scottish Parliament in the first place? However, I recall that vast numbers of Labour and Conservative members did not want the Scottish Parliament in the first place, hence their derisive attitude. I do not know whether we are at the 30 th , the 31 st or the 32 nd Sewel motion.

I have comments to make on the substance of the motion, but first I want to make my point. Justice policy is almost entirely devolved, so it seems extraordinary that most Sewel motions have been applied to it.

I have no idea. I wonder what happens when Westminster runs out of time. Which Parliament will Westminster MPs get to legislate for them when they run out of time? If the establishment of the Scottish Parliament meant devolution of responsibility from Westminster, the widespread use of Sewel motions represents an abrogation of that responsibility but, of course, abrogation of responsibility is what the Executive is about.

rose—

Perhaps we could start to behave like a Parliament and meet a little more frequently when we have more work to do, instead of passing work on to someone else. The passage of the Police Reform Bill is a failure of democracy and is not in the interests of the Scottish people. For a start, it is a House of Lords bill. Perhaps the new Liberal Democrats or Labour lite—or whatever they call themselves—want to describe the House of Lords as a democratic institution, but it is certainly not democratic in my book. Although there is a Scottish Executive memorandum about the apparent effects on Scotland of the bill, the official explanatory notes on the bill are not yet available from the Home Office. It is extraordinary that we are discussing a bill for which we cannot obtain the explanatory notes from the bill's originating body. It does not seem as if we will send the bill to be dealt with by a particularly efficient body. In the meantime, in tandem with the Police Reform Bill, Westminster plans to make more changes to policing, which will affect the pay and conditions of our police officers. For some reason, the power to make such changes is not devolved. The white paper "Policing a New Century" was published in December 2001, but with a closing date for responses of 21 January, public involvement and the democratic process lose out again. I will address the proposals in the bill one by one. Secondment of Scottish officers to the independent police complaints commission for England and Wales, the nationality requirements for police officers and the provisions on liabilities of law enforcement officers from elsewhere in Europe are unexceptionable provisions, but why must Westminster make those changes for us? The inspection of Ministry of Defence police in Scotland has been handed over in the past to HMIC for England and Wales, although an inspection has not been carried out since before devolution. The bill requires that HM inspectorate of constabulary in Scotland be consulted during such inspections but, given that those officers operate in Scotland and in England and Wales, should not they be subject to inspections by joint teams? MOD inspection reports are published only after they are edited for national security purposes, but there is no requirement to inform the Scottish ministers about unpublished matters of concern. Why are Scottish ministers not to be trusted? Perhaps the MOD is concerned that there might be among the Scottish ministers a chiel  taking notes who will rush to publish his memoirs as soon as he leaves the job. The bill will grant wide powers to the Home Secretary to modify the functions and structure of the Police Information Technology Organisation. The appropriate order is to be made after consultation with Scottish ministers, but it will not be laid in draft before the Scottish Parliament. How will the Scottish Parliament scrutinise the work of Scottish ministers? I see that the Minister for Justice is smirking—it is clear that he has joined the Labour party in his desire to avoid as much scrutiny as possible. Many of us fought long and hard to win the limited control that we have. I want to move on. The only thing that I whinge about is the failure of the Parliament to deliver for Scotland—the ministers in the chamber are culpable in that failure.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of Perth and Kinross Council. (S1O-4476)

I will take that answer to mean, "Not recently." When the minister, or his colleague, next meets administration members of Perth and Kinross Council, will he remind them that the Parliament is committed to open government and freedom of information? In particular, will he tell the Labour-Tory-Lib Dem coalition that it is unacceptable that it refuses to publish the report of an investigation into the training and care assistants fiasco, which recently resulted in the withdrawal from school of many vulnerable children in Perth and Kinross, some of whom will never re-enter mainstream education?

I am interested in what Mr Fraser has to say. Of course people do not turn up to an MSP's surgery calling for a freedom of information act, but they turn up to my surgeries wanting information and asking how they can find out about things. That is what the debate is all about. People may not couch their concerns in the nice, legalistic terms that Mr Fraser obviously prefers, but that does not mean that they are not interested in how they can find information. That is what we are debating today.

As most people know, the SNP supports the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill and the intention behind it. We welcome today's debate and the widespread, if not quite unanimous, support for the bill in the Parliament. There are points where we would like changes to be made, but the Parliament should feel considerable satisfaction that it is debating a bill that underlines the difference between this Parliament and Westminster. Our freedom of information regime will be much more robust than the regime that was set up under the Freedom of Information Act 2000. I have no doubt that campaigners in England and Wales will continue  to press for changes to be made down south to emulate what we will have in Scotland. However, as I have hinted, that does not mean that the bill is perfect. I am sure that the Minister for Justice would be bitterly disappointed if I said that it was. He might also be very surprised. The fact that, in many ways, the Scottish bill is better than the UK act does not mean that it does not contain flaws, or that the UK act does not have the edge over it in a couple of areas. Where that is the case, I am not averse to a bit of cross-border raiding; at times there is nothing wrong with legislative plagiarism. There are one or two areas in which I would like to propose such plagiarism. The first area of concern is class exemptions. I am sure that the minister is not surprised to hear me say that. Everyone accepts that a bill on freedom of information has to contain some exemptions. However, those exemptions should depend entirely on the content of the information that is being sought, rather than its broad type, as is the case under a class exemption. There is justification for the view that the harm test and the public interest test are sufficiently robust to deal with those occasions when information ought to be withheld. If the minister were confident about the robustness of those tests, he would not need to insist that class exemptions be retained in the bill. In written evidence to the Justice 1 Committee, the National Union of Journalists pointed out: "If harm cannot be demonstrated to the Scottish Information Commissioner, then either the harm test is wrong, the Commissioner is wrong, or there is no harm." It is difficult to argue with that. Insisting on class exemptions for police, judicial and statutory investigations, including health and safety investigations, could protect any stage of any investigation by any public body. In practice, that means that, even if the bill had been in place, no additional information would have been available on the BSE crisis, food safety, rail safety or any number of recent major public scandals. Although I do not share Conservative members' view that the bill is pointless, I believe that the minister should guard against giving substance to their criticisms. I am afraid that the bill's provisions on class exemptions create precisely that possibility. However, I know perfectly well that, if the minister had introduced a bill that did not contain class exemptions, that would have given Conservative members even more cause to complain. The second area of concern is the bill's provision for a decision on the disclosure of information or an enforcement notice to be made void by a certificate issued to the commissioner by the First Minister. In effect, that would give the  First Minister a veto on freedom of information. Many witnesses who gave evidence to the Justice 1 Committee during stage 1 consideration of the bill spoke out against that power. The NUJ, in a paraphrase of its concerns about class exemptions, argued: "If harm cannot be demonstrated to the commissioner or to the court, what harm can exist—other than perhaps political discomfort?"—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee , 21 November 2001; c 2838.] The NUJ described the provision as "not a belt-and-braces approach—it is a belt, braces and straitjacket approach."—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee , 21 November 2001; c 2841.] Executive officials told the committee that ministerial certificates would be used only in "limited circumstances". My problem with that assurance is that similar reassurances have been given before. The Law Society of Scotland's comment on the predicted infrequency of the use of ministerial veto was succinct. It said: "it is frequently said that the procedure ... will never be relied on. In that case, why is it there?"—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee , 21 November 2001; col 2812.] Why, indeed? It is not necessary to go abroad to discover occasions on which ministerial vetoes have been abused. I note the example of New Zealand, which was given in evidence by the Campaign for Freedom of Information, but the experience of Sewel motions in the Scottish Parliament ought to give all members pause for thought. As with Sewel motions, a trickle can soon become a stream or, indeed, a flood. As the Campaign for Freedom of Information put it: "Our concern is that when the veto has been used once or twice and ministers discover that it is relatively easy to get away with it, it will become a frequent occurrence."—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee , 27 November 2001; col 2898.] That raises a real concern, which must be taken on board. The minister has been a long-standing campaigner for freedom of information and I am sure that he understands that concern. The third area of genuine concern is the proposed cost for accessing the right to access information. Friends of the Earth Scotland and the Law Society are but two of the organisations that have serious concerns about the implications of a charging structure that would effectively render that right meaningless. That is one area in which it would appear that the Westminster legislation has the advantage. I cannot say whether the minister is standing by the figures that were outlined in the commentary that accompanied the draft bill, but they are a matter of some controversy. An inquirer would have to pay up to £50 for a piece of  information that it would cost a UK body £500 to provide. However, the inquirer could be asked for up to £400 to obtain similar information from a Scottish body—to those that have will the information be given. The Law Society described the issue of costing as "the kernel of the whole system's integrity". It went on to say: "If people cannot translate the rights under the bill into an effective remedy, the bill is meaningless".—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee , 21 November 2001; col 2812.] The minister referred to costs in his speech, but I hope that more detail will be provided before stage 2.

I am pleased to hear that, as I am concerned about persisting with two very different charging structures for the separate regimes. Once the structures are in place, the difference will become stark. It will not matter whether the Scottish regime is better in other areas, because the fact that it is not better in relation to charging would create unnecessary rancour, which would be unfortunate. I have outlined my three main areas of concern: cost, unnecessary exemptions and too much power in the hands of ministers. However, those concerns are not the only hurdles to access to information in the bill as introduced. There are one or two smaller matters that I hope the deputy minister, Richard Simpson, will address in his closing speech. The first such matter might seem to be relatively minor to others: the requirement for the request for information to be made in writing. That has been a matter of concern for some organisations, a number of which have provided good arguments against it. I make a particular plea for a rethink of that provision. In passing, I remind members that I am looking for sponsorship to raise money for the Royal National Institute for the Blind—donations to my office, please. The RNIB is one of the organisations that made a clear point about the difficulty that blind people would have in making an application in writing. I appreciate that there might be administrative issues to resolve, but that  is a relatively minor point on which to stick and I hope that there may be some movement on it. On the matter of vexatious and repeated requests for information, although there might be an argument for a freedom of information equivalent of the vexatious litigant, I recall that vexatious litigants are so designated in our courts fairly reluctantly and only after a great deal of consideration has taken place. Will the minister clarify whether the code of practice will contain guidelines on when and how such requests will be designated? If it will, what are the guidelines likely to contain? The minister will also need to reassure members that all public authorities will observe the same standards, or we will end up with vastly different experiences in different parts of the country. Many of those who made representations on the bill stressed that organisations that provide public services are not always public bodies, as defined in the bill. I think of, for example, social inclusion partnerships, housing associations and the range of companies that would otherwise be regarded as private but that provide public services. Unison Scotland said that the omission of such organisations from the remit of the bill could "give rise to a two-tier freedom of information system, in which some providers of public services would be liable to provide information to the recipients of their services ... whereas others would not.—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee , 13 November 2001; col 2787.] A number of my colleagues wish to make serious points about the effect of what would eventually become a form of commercial confidentiality rule. Given the Executive's avowed intention to increase the use of private finance initiative contracts through a variety of mechanisms, we face the distinct possibility that much of the information that would once have been accessible through the exercise of the rights that are conferred by the bill will not in fact be accessible. When the regime comes into operation, the amount of accessible information will be diminishing rapidly. The issue of commercial confidentiality already gives rise to serious misgivings and a thoroughly confusing understanding of the true picture of what happens in public services—I need only mention the continued debate about the cost of keeping a prisoner in HMP Kilmarnock in comparison with other prisons. The situation will not be helped if that practice continues. Unison made the point in its written evidence that the consultation document indicated that the freedom of information regime should apply to "public service providers". Perhaps the minister could find his way back to that position in preference to the position that is taken up in the bill. I turn now to the timetable. Today's debate is  barely relevant if we have to wait forever for any form of freedom of information regime to get up and running. As I understand the situation, the UK Freedom of Information Act 2000 will not come into force until January 2005, which is more than four years after the Westminster Parliament approved the legislation. We have known that since 14 November. When I read about the delay in the implementation of the UK legislation, I immediately wrote to the Minister for Justice to seek a firm assurance that the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill, once passed, would be implemented speedily. I knew that the minister's party colleagues in Westminster strongly opposed the delay in the implementation of the UK legislation. I wanted some consistency and a guarantee about time scales from the minister, but no such guarantee was forthcoming. In his reply, he gave me an assurance that the legislation would come into force "without undue delay", followed by much hedging about how the timetable was dependent on public authorities having adequate time to prepare and on sufficient time being available to establish the office of the independent Scottish information commissioner. In the space of a few sentences in that letter, the minister managed to water down his commitment to speedy implementation. Although he began by saying that he was "committed to bringing the legislation into force without undue delay" he finished by saying that he "would not wish to take any final decisions" on the timetable until the commissioner had been appointed. Reports have appeared about the possibility of the implementation of the bill being delayed until 2005, 2006 or even 2007. The real problem is that, if public authorities are given two years to prepare for implementation, they will take two years, which would be a reasonable timetable. To be frank, public authorities can hardly be taken by surprise by the bill and I am moved to ask what they have been doing over the past two years. However, if they are given three, four or five years, it is in the nature of things that they will take three, four or five years. We all know that that is human nature. I have always held the view such a delay cannot be what the Minister for Justice wishes, given his long-standing support for legislation on freedom of information. Therefore, I was interested in his comments today, but what he said does not really help the situation. The minister should propose a specific timetable to force the pace; otherwise, I fear that his five-year backstop will end up as a five-year reality. One final matter requires some comment. I mentioned the UK legislation and the fact that it will usher in a less-favourable regime, with the  possible exception of costs. The Scottish bill has been drawn up so that it deals specifically with Scottish public authorities. Clearly, UK authorities are dealt with in the UK bill.

My concern is that if we allow an elastic timetable, the elastic will get stretched. I do not know about anyone else in the chamber, but when I am given a deadline to do something, I do not do it two weeks beforehand. I work to the deadline. Perhaps everyone else in the chamber operates differently, but I rather suspect not.

The Presiding Officer has reminded me that I must wind up. The truth of the matter is that two years is not a big-bang approach, but represents a reasonable time scale. The final matter that I want to highlight is the difference between the way in which the UK and Scottish bills deal with the various authorities to which they apply. There is an anomaly, in that the cross-border public bodies, as defined in the Scotland Act 1998, will not be subject to the Scottish regime even for information that relates to devolved matters. The Scottish Consumer Council flagged up the confusion that is likely to arise if we are not careful. The NUJ had wider concerns about the fact that, in truth, substantial areas of Scotland's governance will fall outside the Scottish regime and under the much-criticised Westminster regime. That is a matter of concern, but I know how the minister will reply—indeed, he need not rehearse it to the chamber. However, let me say this: when requests for information are made to such bodies  on matters that are certainly devolved, I very much hope that those bodies will comply with the spirit of the Scottish bill. They should not refuse to provide information simply because they can. After all, although it may be said that bodies such as the Forestry Commission are cross-border public bodies, such bodies will owe a duty to people in Scotland after the bill ushers in what we hope will be a major culture change. Notwithstanding those specific concerns, I support the bill. The SNP will whole-heartedly vote for the bill at 5 o'clock today.

I am tempted to spend my seven minutes talking about independence, as so many members on the Labour benches apparently want to hear more on the subject. Perhaps a number of them privately agree with the SNP. I say to them: late conversions are always welcome. However, we are talking about the Executive's priorities. There should be no disagreement that the Executive's priorities must be, to quote its motion, "to deliver first class public services that help create a Scotland full of opportunity, where children can reach their full potential". That is where we have to part company, however, because, since day one, the Executive has failed to deliver those first-class services and has signally failed Scotland's children. It has also failed today to convince anyone of anything other than its failure. What was needed from the Executive was not some trite restatement of its priorities but a recognition of that failure in respect of public services. Its motion should have contained a genuine commitment to change. Instead of the new broom sweeping clean, however, it looks as though it will not sweep at all. We have today the Executive's new year's resolution, which will no doubt go the way of all new year's resolutions. The Executive might try to hide this from the rest of us and it might even try to convince itself otherwise, but in reality all that it offers is more of the same empty pledges that we have heard throughout the Parliament's short life.  I would like to quote what the First Minister said in his speech; I apologise if I have to paraphrase slightly. He said that it was not good enough for the Opposition to tell the Executive what cannot be done rather than what can be done. As well as being asked to talk about independence, we keep being asked what we would do. I understand that Labour members are anxious to know the detail of our policies because, to judge by past performance, that is one of the few ways in which they get their own policies. If the First Minister does not believe me, I shall read a little list of the policies that Labour has stolen already. It includes drugs courts, a minister for external affairs, abolition of air passenger duty, abolition of quangos, changes to judicial appointments, the introduction of a seller's survey, a local government power of general competence, the creation of poverty indicators, the promotion of measures to deal with anti-social behaviour, the introduction of a secure tenancy, the assumption by local authorities of more strategic responsibilities and, as I hear one of my colleagues saying, free personal care—although perhaps we should wait a while to convince ourselves that that is happening. That is why Labour members want to hear what the SNP's policies are. They need to know because they need those polices for their manifestos. It sometimes feels as though the only things that the Executive has delivered on are the SNP policies that it first derided and has now adopted. Obviously, I have a particular interest in justice issues. The Executive is promising to reduce crime and the fear of crime. Of course we all want that to happen, but what is the Executive's track record? What has actually been achieved? Has the Executive kept the promises that it has made? Let us look at some of the pledges from the programme for government. It pledged a Scotland "where people are safer and feel safer." Is Scotland safer? Despite the First Minister's claims, between 1997, when Labour came to power, and 2000, the number of crimes recorded by the police increased by 2,500 according to the Government's official statistics. Non-sexual crimes of violence recorded by the police were up by more than 4,000—an increase of 22 per cent. Homicides in Scotland were up by 18 per cent. We know that the Procurator Fiscal Service is under strain. We know that the number of cases in which it took no action on reports that it received from the police and other bodies rose by 20 per cent between 1997-98 and 2000-01. We also know that a youth crime strategy was promised by March 2001. I may have missed that, but perhaps we are still waiting for it.  The programme for government pledged to "develop more effective community penalties for offenders, taking particular account of the needs of women offenders". The reality is that the prison population in 2001 reached record levels. The numbers in Cornton Vale peaked at 265 on 30 November 2001. That is the highest figure ever. Use of community disposals remains highly variable. Community service orders were used by courts in Dundee twice as often as by courts in Glasgow. There seems to be no progress on that at all. That is the reality: broken promise upon empty pledge upon hollow words. The Executive's only real success appears to be in the number of consultations or reviews that have been set up or are in progress. A number of Labour and Liberal Democrat members seem to be rather startled that the job of an Opposition is to oppose. If that is their attitude, it is no wonder that it took the Labour party 18 years to get back into government. I make no apology for repeating the key failures of the Executive. I quote a few people who are not members of the Parliament. On health, Gavin Tait, consultant orthopaedic surgeon, said: "Short termism, penny pinching, parochialism and micro-management by government are all preventing rational and rapid development of the service". On children, Henry Maitles of Strathclyde University said: "As the Scottish parliament enters its third year, virtually no impact has been made on child poverty". On transport, David Begg, one of Labour's people, said: "We had one of the lowest levels of investment (as % of GDP) in transport". The truth is that nothing that has been said by members on the coalition parties' benches today changes the verdict that the Scottish people have already passed: guilty of failure. If Labour members ask voters about their views of health service delivery, they will hear hollow laughter if they are lucky. There are longer waiting times and longer waiting lists. If they ask university students for their verdict on higher education policy, perhaps when those students are on their way to visit the bank manager, trying to cope with spiralling and crippling debt burdens, the answer will be that it is a failure. Dismal reports on the economy give the lie to any claims of success. I could go on. We have heard how much money the Government claims to have ploughed into Scotland's public services, but our constituents—the people of Scotland—are not seeing any benefit. Services are getting worse. Part of the problem is the Executive's  incompetence. Another part of the problem is that the Parliament simply does not have the power that is needed truly to transform Scottish society. We will be able to create a Scotland that is full of opportunity only with independence—that is what SNP members want and strive for.

Whether they like it or not.

Will the minister give way?

In return, will the minister have the good grace to say that drugs courts, one of the principal alternatives to custody that he has proposed, are an idea that he got from the SNP?

There is some justification for describing the Scottish Prison Service as the cinderella service in the criminal justice system. Inmates and employees are out of sight and it is a little too easy also to keep them out of mind. There are three main purposes of imprisonment: humane punishment, rehabilitation of the offender and the protection of the public. Each of those is absolutely vital to society in the short, medium and long terms. All aspects of our Prison Service should be measured against the achievement of those fundamental aims. Conditions for staff and inmates should be assessed so that we may know whether they contribute to or hinder those three aims. Let us consider some aspects of Scotland's prisons. First, there is overcrowding, which, in my view, weakens the system's ability to deliver on all three aims. The basic decency of conditions in prisons is a mark of a civilised society. The overcrowding of prisoners is inhumane and impedes work on the rehabilitation of offenders. In 1998, the Scottish Office minister with responsibility for justice, Henry McLeish, said: "Overcrowding ... means that we cannot spend enough time with individual prisoners. That is why there will be further reforms in the Prison Service to overcome the problem."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 21 July 1998; Vol 316, c 895.] That was just one of many hollow assurances about the prison system. Despite promises from both Labour and the Liberal Democrats, the prison population has continued to rise. This year, we locked up more people than ever before. The peak figure for this year so far is 6,388, which was recorded on 29 June. That is the highest number of prisoners in Scotland ever recorded. Despite previous assurances, the situation is getting worse, not better.

The debate should be about the Minister for Justice taking some responsibility for what has, clearly, gone badly wrong. I remember the constant and consistent assurances from the Minister for Justice and from the chief executive of the SPS that things were going to get better. It was always said that they would get better, but they have simply got worse. Only recently, the Minister for Justice, replying to me at question time, rather sarcastically washed his hands of responsibility. He said: "the number of people in prisons is not entirely within the Executive's remit, given that the sheriffs who sentence them are not ministers."— [ Official Report , 29 November 2001; c 4382.]  If that is the case, presumably the minister knew that it was nonsense for the Liberal Democrat party to promise in its 1999 manifesto that: "We will cut prison numbers by encouraging greater use of non-custodial sentences, where offenders pose no risk to the public." How has the minister fulfilled that promise? Fine defaulters continue to represent more than 40 per cent of new prisoner receptions in Scotland. The Scottish Government now seems to regard its commitment to cut the number of prisoners as a distant aspiration. That is fed, no doubt, by a cynicism that assumes that there will be no public outcry at the Government's failure. Nowhere is that failure more evident than in Cornton Vale.

I speak to sheriffs on a number of occasions. Many of them tell me that, although there may be plenty of alternatives on paper, those alternatives are not as available to them in practice as might be assumed. They say that they often feel that their hands are tied, despite what appears to be more of an option. The minister ought to address that, instead of asking me about it. The report of Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons for Scotland on Cornton Vale calls for a reduction in the number of prisoners. Clive Fairweather, the chief inspector, has repeatedly gone on record with his concerns about the number of women being jailed in Scotland. His report of 1998, "Women Offenders—A Safer Way", showed that most women sent to prison should not be there. The Government accepted the report's recommendations that the number of women in prison should be cut sharply. Since 1998, the number of women in prison has risen to  a record level. It is becoming the case that assurances from the Government ought to be treated as promises that exactly the opposite is going to happen. The only prison solely for women, Cornton Vale, has been seriously overcrowded this year, and the figures for females under 21 are climbing particularly steeply.

I am well aware of the positive points that Clive Fairweather has made, but I am pointing out his consistent call for a cut in the number of prisoners, his consistent concern about the number of women being jailed and the consistent failure to address that issue. I recognise that the member has a strong local interest in this matter and has done a great deal for Cornton Vale. However, that should not distract us from the fact that over the years there has been a consistent failure on the issue of women in prison. We already know that 82 per cent of women in prison are the victims of some kind of abuse. However, the figures for the number of women in prison are rising at a time when the chief inspector of prisons is warning: "what has not changed is the condition of the women arriving at the prison gates. If anything their condition is even worse and they are getting younger and younger." According to the chief inspector, Cornton Vale, Scotland's only women's prison, is acting as "a casualty clearing station, psychiatric ward and ... an addictions clinic". I do not think that it is the proper purpose of a prison to act as any of those things. Mr Fairweather has called for the number of women jailed to be cut by half. For several years it has been the Government's stated policy to reduce the number of prisoners in Cornton Vale. The Minister for Justice has failed miserably to deliver on that policy. Women who are being jailed are probably women who are most at risk of suicide. Indeed, in recent weeks there have been two more suicides. Warning bells are ringing loud and clear and even the minister should hear them. However, there is precious little evidence that that is the case. Neither were warning bells heard in connection with the degrading practice of slopping out, which hinders the achievement of progress and what should be the aims of the Prison Service. As long as slopping out exists, Scotland's prisons will not provide a basic standard of decency. In 1999, we were told that there was a plan to end slopping out by 2005. Then £13 million was taken from the prison budget, and bang went  the plan. However, ending slopping out would save staff time, expense and, possibly, legal costs. Improved conditions for both prisoners and staff would provide a better environment for the rehabilitation of offenders. The conditions in prisons have a big effect on staff morale, which is at an all-time low despite the complacency of the Executive amendment. The past few years have seen a collapse in staff confidence in SPS management. That has been caused by management intransigence in negotiations on terms and conditions, management cost-cutting through driving down pay and the constant review of the service with a mind to privatisation. Prison staff should be properly valued for the tough job that they do. If the Scottish Prison Service does not treat its staff properly and pay them decently, they will leave. Prisons are now big business, dominated by global corporations. Those corporations have a track record of forcing down staff pay and conditions and of treating prisoners poorly. They make their money through paying low wages and employing fewer staff, or through financial manipulation at the taxpayer's expense. Privatisation is being used by SPS management to threaten its staff in a way that should be unacceptable. It would have been unacceptable when new Labour was promising no more private prisons, but that was back in the days before the party was elected. Now that Labour is the Government, that has become just one more broken promise. Privatisation is happening in other ways as well. The privatisation of the general practitioners service in prisons was pushed through without proper consultation. The SPS uses the excuse of commercial confidentiality to avoid revealing the cost of staffing the new service. If privatisation has led to savings for the SPS—because of the secrecy surrounding it, there is no way of knowing whether it has—it has also led to poorer conditions for medical staff and has placed prisoners at risk. The kind of privatisation to which I refer is being kept more secret than the SPS agreement with Her Majesty's Prison Kilmarnock. In its efforts to contract out social work, the SPS management has shown itself to be a bullying and, ultimately, incompetent negotiator. It appears to have been driven by ideology and the desire to push costs on to local authorities. The policy initiative appears to have come from within the SPS and ministers appear to have been left in the dark until too late. The results of that initiative in Edinburgh have been the loss of an experienced social work unit, harm to vital links with social work in the community, higher costs for the SPS and damage to relations with a long-standing service provider.  I know that the Minister for Justice will spend some time talking about the prison estates review. That has been something of a saga, allowing the minister to spend a considerable amount of his time answering questions about the prison system by not answering questions. The review was announced in autumn 1999 and started in December 1999. It was completed in December 2000 and submitted to the minister. In January this year the minister promised to publish the review, but we are still waiting for it. What is the minister trying to hide? Why have we not seen the review before now? It is extraordinary that so much time has been allowed to pass and that an important review should have been left sitting on the shelf despite the fact that questions are continually being asked about it. Continued uncertainty about the estates review has been another factor in bringing about a collapse in staff morale. However, I suppose that this has been a useful exercise in allowing the minister to avoid what little appears to be left of his responsibilities to the public for the prison system. That lack of accountability is one of the true scandals of what has been allowed to happen. The minister continually tells us that he is responsible for policy and that the SPS is responsible for operational decisions. The extent to which subjects can be designated operational is interesting. No doubt that is convenient for the minister. Of the 185 written parliamentary questions about prisons that were lodged between November 2000 and November 2001, only 27 were answered directly by the minister. Tony Cameron was allowed to decide that staff bullying at Kilmarnock was a matter solely for the prison operating company. What is more, many of his answers seem designed deliberately to mislead. That makes it difficult for the Parliament to hold anyone to account for what is happening in Scotland's prisons. Cameron is answerable to the minister, who is answerable to us, but the minister will not answer. My views about the chief executive of the SPS remain the same as they were when, earlier this year, I lodged a motion of no confidence in him. Unfortunately, by extension I must say that I have no confidence in the minister's stewardship of the Scottish Prison Service, as he appears to have washed his hands of all problems in the service. I move, That the Parliament notes the Executive's failure to bring forward a strategy to address the increasing overcrowding within Scottish prisons and further notes that morale amongst Scottish Prison Service staff is at rock bottom as the result of (a) the deterioration of industrial relations, (b) the continued threat of further privatisation within the Scottish Prison Service, (c) the culture of secrecy within the service and (d) the continued and unacceptable delay in the publication of the Estates Review.

I will deal with two issues: first, the reality of the NHS as experienced by my constituents; and secondly, the outcome of the acute services review in Tayside. My constituents frequently contact me in desperation about the length of time that it is taking for them or members of their families to get an appointment, or to express their extreme dismay at cuts in essential services. I emphasise  that the cuts happen in essential services, not in services that might be regarded as inessential. I simply cannot believe that the experience of other members in their own surgeries is any different. However, if that is the case, I will cite a few of my own examples to alert them to the reality of NHS health service delivery, at least in Tayside. For a constituent's son who has been diagnosed as having elective mutism, which is a serious psychological disorder, the waiting time to see a child psychologist at Murray royal hospital in Perth is 10 months. That child will receive no professional help throughout his first year of school. To ignore such a serious problem at such a crucial stage of a child's development is unconscionable, and I do not believe that it is acceptable in our society. The father of another constituent was referred to a neurologist by his general practitioner after he was diagnosed last May as having Parkinson's disease. However, treatment cannot start until a specialist confirms that diagnosis, but his appointment to see that specialist is in May 2002. That is an extraordinary way in which to treat such a disease. Furthermore, when we debated mental health issues four weeks ago, David Davidson made what the minister rightly described as "a most moving speech about eating disorders" and the difficulties that he faces within his own family. I see that David Davidson is in the chamber this afternoon. However, the minister went on to boast of a "further extension to the mental health framework which deals specifically with eating disorders."— [ Official Report , 14 November 2001; c 3823.]  The reality is quite the opposite. One would think that, with the number of people who suffer from eating disorders continuing to rise, the provision of services would be expanding accordingly—as the minister's comments would lead us to believe. However, the already small and underfunded eating disorder service in Perth has been withdrawn. Astonishingly, the trust, in informing the Scottish eating disorder interest group that services in Perth were being brought into line with those in Angus and Dundee, admitted that there was "an undesirable rounding-down" of the service. Where does such an admission leave the minister's assurances to the chamber? Does not he realise that all his other assurances are greeted just as sceptically as was the one to which I referred? Over the past few years, the most consistent and overwhelming concern about medical services in my constituency has related to maternity services—I know that the minister is familiar with  that debate. We seem to have been forever fighting the threat of closure that hangs over the maternity unit at Perth Royal Infirmary. Until the last minute, the options that have been advanced by the acute services review sat at two extremes: the status quo, which was the public's choice; and complete centralisation of services. The 11 th hour introduction of a middle way—an experimental midwife-consultant partnership national demonstration project—became the final successful option. However, that project is—supposedly—to be implemented in April, but we are still waiting for the Executive's confirmation that funding for consultants will be in place. If the minister promises nothing else today, will he at least put minds in Perthshire at rest on that issue, which is extremely important for staff morale? Things seem to be taking so long that it is hard to avoid the inevitable question: is the project being set up to fail in order to ensure that the centralisation option is imposed by default? Perhaps I am being unduly cynical, but experience suggests that I am not. [Interruption.]  I could go on, but I have been reminded that I have little time. Those are people's real-life experiences of the health service in Tayside. It is clear that resources are not sufficient, that waiting times are too long and are growing, and that the situation is getting worse instead of better. That is the reality of the NHS in Tayside.

Is the Minister for Justice aware that the number of prisoners in Scotland has increased sharply in 2001? That applies particularly to women prisoners in Cornton Vale prison, which is still overcrowded, despite the reopening of Skye hall. On Friday 23 November, 250 women were in that prison. Is he also aware of the concerns about the situation, particularly the recent suicides, in Cornton Vale? Will he say when Labour will fulfil its 1998 commitment to "limit the female population at Cornton Vale ... to 100 or less on a daily basis by the end of the year 2000"

On the basis of their ability to contribute to the Labour party.

Will the minister also remember that many of the decisions about choosing to self-represent occur part way through a trial? Although I appreciate that it might be difficult to monitor that matter, he should remember that such decisions are not made only at the start of a trial.

The Scottish National Party supports and welcomes the general intent of the bill, which is—of course—aimed at protecting the complainer and other witnesses from humiliating and distressing questioning, principally in rape trials. The case that brought the issue firmly into the spotlight took place in my constituency, when the now infamous John Anderson refused legal counsel and cross-examined the complainer, a 13-year-old girl, for three hours. He was acquitted and it emerged subsequently that he had previously been on trial for rape and that on that occasion he had employed the same tactic in his defence. I understand that statistics are not gathered on the number of accused who choose to represent  themselves from the outset of their trials, but that is generally thought to be a fairly rare occurrence. Perhaps it would have been useful to monitor the incidence and examine the outcomes. However, there is no doubt that high-profile cases such as that of John Anderson are likely to deter some women from reporting a rape and from going through the whole process. We know that in Scotland the majority of rapes go unreported and that of those that are reported, the majority go untried. Of the rape cases that are tried, we know that the majority result in acquittals. In truth, most women are unconvinced that if they put themselves through the trauma of a trial, the system will give them justice. If we were honest, even the women in the chamber would feel ambivalent about that. However, the last thing we need is fewer victims coming forward. If we look back at the statistics of the past six years, we see that in any one year the percentage of rapes that were reported to the police and that ended in a conviction has never reached double figures. Those figures were revealed in a parliamentary answer to a question that was lodged by my colleague, Gil Paterson. Let us be honest about the figures—they are a disgrace. What is more, they suggest that the problem is bigger than the provisions that are encompassed in the bill. In dealing with that wider problem, I believe sincerely that the Crown Office needs more resources. We also need specialised procurators fiscal who are trained in dealing with rape and sexual assault cases. In California, a similar move has been very successful. Conviction rates there have increased substantially, not by making it easier to convict, but by the prosecution being beefed up in the first place. We need to send out the message to the women of Scotland that they will be taken seriously if they make an accusation of rape. We also need to send out the message that a man who rapes a woman will be charged, prosecuted and—where possible—convicted. It is unfortunate that rape can be a difficult crime to prove. There are rarely any witnesses. Many women cannot face going through the whole process of a prosecution in which they must relive their ordeal. In many cases, women feel that they have also been put on trial. I ask people—in particular the men in the chamber—to put themselves in the position of a woman who has been raped. Imagine how that woman feels when she must tell the world about what she went through—reliving the emotions and remembering the pain. Imagine also how the woman feels as she sits alone in the witness box; the man who attacked her gets to do it all over  again in open court, questioning her and undermining her recollections. It might be that a tone in his voice or a turn of phrase reminds her of the power that he had over her and which is echoed in the power that he again holds over her in court. We need to remember that rape is not about sex; it is about power. Rape is an abuse of power. When the accused is allowed to cross-examine the complainant in court, the balance of power swings back to him. The victim, who already feels more like an accused person, has that feeling dished up to her in spades while the accused is put in a position of authority. In effect, he becomes a seeker after truth. I remember a conversation that I had with a number of advocate deputes—advocate deputes are responsible for prosecuting in the High Court. One of them, who is now a prominent Queen's counsel, admitted that if his teenage daughter was raped, the last thing that he would allow her to do would be to go anywhere near a courtroom. If even the practitioners feel like that, something is badly wrong. I do not deny that the balance between the right of the accused to a fair trial and the right of witnesses to be treated humanely is a difficult one to strike. However, if we are to protect the vulnerable without falling foul of the European convention on human rights—indeed, of centuries of precedent in the practice of Scots law—we will need to locate specifically that point of equilibrium. There are difficulties with the bill, which we need to consider. Perhaps the minister will, in his closing remarks, elaborate on something that he mentioned in his opening remarks: the potential for making previous convictions admissible in trials such as those we are discussing. I would like to hear more about that. Is it intended to include such provision through amendment to the bill? If that were the case, I would be concerned about the effect of lack of scrutiny of the longer-term impact of introducing that notion into our criminal courts. We need to think carefully about that. We must ensure that we close every loophole. The last thing I would want is for a rapist to walk out of court a free man because we in the chamber had been careless and had produced legislation that did not meet the stringent human rights criteria that we set ourselves. Article 6.3(c) of the ECHR provides a minimum right to an accused "to defend himself in person or through legal assistance of his own choosing". We already know that that is not an absolute right. There are areas, however, in which the legislation might—or more likely will—face challenges. First, if we do what we intend to do with the bill, accused persons will be completely barred from conducting  their defence in person. Because we have not restricted the measure to cross-examination of complainers, I am slightly concerned that it might end up being construed as a greater than necessary interference with the right that is set out in article 6.3(c) of the ECHR. I wonder whether the minister will address that. Secondly, I am curious about why we are in the process of preventing the accused from conducting his own defence in homosexuality cases in which there is no complainer. I am not sure about the purpose of that. Thirdly—this goes back to the first question—can there be adequate instruction of a defence solicitor who is appointed by the court? Where the defence solicitor is appointed for trial by the court, the accused has no right to dismiss the solicitor. That is a real issue. In evidence to the Justice 1 Committee during stage 1, the Faculty of Advocates and the Law Society of Scotland—which represent the practitioners—expressed their concern that it is unclear what will happen when an accused flatly refuses to instruct them. I am not clear about where that will leave the defence agent and his or her important responsibility in respect of the client and, indeed, the court. Anybody acting in court in Scotland has a duty to the court as a whole. There is an issue there, and I am not sure whether we have quite got to the nub of it; in evidence to the committee, the Law Society of Scotland and the Faculty of Advocates expressed their concerns about that. The Law Society suggested another approach, which was its idea about an amicus curiae. That idea was given brief consideration during stage 1, but it might have been useful to have more detail about the proposal so that we could compare and contrast. I dare say that the idea might resurrect itself during the later stages of the bill. I understand that it has been brought in in Ireland, although it has not existed for long enough to test what happens in practice. However, it would be interesting to know Ireland's rationale for choosing that option. I welcome the fact that we now have a bill in front of us. However, if we look back over the history of the issue, it is clear that there has been a certain amount of foot dragging, or at least shoulder shrugging, down the years—I note that we are finally introducing this legislation only now that we have a Parliament with a high proportion of women. The shoulder shrugging relates to both the issues that are addressed by the bill. It might be helpful to remind members of some of the key milestones over the years in respect of this issue. In September 1992, the European Court of Human Rights held that there was no  absolute right for an accused to defend himself. That is why we can discuss the matter today. In August 1996, a woman in an English case was cross-examined for six days by the man who raped her. Her view was clearly that that was like being raped all over again. In November 1997 Jack Straw, the then Home Secretary, said that he was determined that rape victims should not have to go through that sort of experience.

It is difficult for me to answer that question. I understand what Lord James Douglas-Hamilton is trying to say, but such cross-examination does occur in Scottish courts, albeit not for that length of time. It is true that eyebrows were raised about why the judge did not step in considerably earlier in that case. However, it happened in a court; not a court in some far-off country about which we know little, but in an English court. Clearly, that caused a great deal of distress at the time. In Scotland, in February 1999, Jacqueline Radin was cross-examined in court by her assailant. The then Scottish Office minister with responsibility for home affairs, Henry McLeish, ordered a review. In March 1999, John Anderson made his first appearance in court. He was accused of raping three women, but he was allowed out of prison to interview the mother of one of his alleged victims. Anderson then cross-examined the other two women in court. He walked free when the case against him collapsed because of the lack of corroborating evidence. Henry McLeish again called for a report, saying that the situation was unacceptable. In July 1999, a bill in England and Wales to end cross-examination of rape victims by the accused received royal assent but, in January 2000, the Scottish Executive warned that a Holyrood bill to prevent cross-examination of alleged rape victims could contravene the ECHR. The then Deputy Minister for Justice, Angus MacKay, told the Parliament that he would report within 90 days on the issue of rape victims, but made no commitment to change the law. In June 2000, a written answer by Angus MacKay indicated that he had instructed civil servants to find ways in which to ensure that women are not cross-examined. On 20 June, a report by civil servants conceded that the ECHR was not an insurmountable obstacle. Eventually, we have reached the position in which we are today, but there has been an incredibly long catalogue of such milestones over many years. I say again that it is instructive that it is only now that we have a Parliament with so many women that we are confronting a problem  that has faced society for a very long time. We have come this far, but I cannot help but notice that the time scale for change in Scotland seems to have been uncommonly slow. On leading evidence in court of the sexual history and sexual character of the complainer, international examples of change have been available for much longer. Canada, New Zealand and many American and Australian states introduced safeguards in the 1970s. In 1976, safeguards were introduced for England and Wales. In 1979, Sheriff McPhail produced a report, but there was no action until 1982. In 1985, nine years after the English bill to protect complainers in rape trials, the Scottish Law Commission's draft bill was passed by Westminster, with a few minor amendments. That legislation requires an application by the defence to introduce questioning or evidence about sexual history or the character of the complainer in certain circumstances. It also included instruction that the court must be satisfied "that it would be contrary to the interests of justice to exclude the questioning or evidence". Again, it took an extremely long time to bring even that limited protection into Scotland, and that last exception provided wide discretion to the judge. There have been difficulties and failings in the application of the law. In 1992, a Scottish Office central research unit study, "Sexual History and Sexual Character Evidence in Scottish Sexual Offence Trials", was published. That study detailed serious problems. It struck me in particular that 70 per cent of all applications to question on sexual character or history were made just before cross-examination began and 22 per cent were made during cross-examination. Thus the complainer had no formal notice of the questioning in at least 92 per cent of the cases. That seems to me to be like a kind of legal sandbagging in court. No action was taken by the Government, either as the Scottish Office or as the Scottish Executive, to update the law after the publication of that study in 1992. It has taken until now to reach this stage. Down the years, Scotland's justice system has failed victims of rape, and Governments in various guises have been exceedingly slow to respond. We must start to put that right—the bill is that start. However, I want to sound a note of caution.

I am sorry, but I am in the final minute of my speech. The proposed changes will affect not just rape cases; they will cover a wide variety of offences,  which might include those committed by the common or garden flasher. There is no adequate explanation or justification for the bill's being drawn so widely. It would be interesting to hear the minister's comments on that. The bill deals with two specific aspects of court procedure in sexual offences trials, one of which—self-representation by the accused—occurs in only a handful of cases, albeit high-profile cases. Addressing the two problems is important, but it should not blind us to the fact that much more needs to be done in respect of the crime of rape. The passage of the bill should not result in our becoming complacent. The central problem of how to increase the reporting and conviction rate has not been addressed, nor has another unfortunate aspect of rape cases, which is that ultimately—whether we like it or not—juries acquit and juries are made up of ordinary people. There is an issue in society that needs to be confronted before we stand any chance of making a significant difference to how rape is dealt with by the criminal justice system.

I have put so many big lines through my speech I might need fewer than three minutes. To begin with, I want to make one or two comments about access issues, which I know are not within the minister's remit. Earlier this year, foot-and-mouth disease caused huge problems in rural areas. When the notices went up in the countryside, the tourists—whether they were day trippers, weekenders or visitors who were staying longer—stopped coming. Access is absolutely crucial to Scottish tourism. I have already expressed concerns about delays in introducing access proposals as part of the land reform bill and about how they will be handled in the bill. If we do not see those proposals soon, I will renew my call to split the issue off into separate legislation. However, since the Parliament should be about joined-up thinking, I ask the minister to put pressure on her justice colleagues to introduce the land reform bill as quickly as possible, as it is partly key to some of the issues that we are discussing. The Executive's policy statement in March contained a lot of fine words and a higher than usual standard of art work, but wildlife professionals and the public clearly want much more than that. We want some action. As people have said—and as I say again—until this month, the Executive had given no indication about when it intended to proceed with the wildlife crime legislation. In one of his last appearances at First Minister's question time, the ex-First Minister said that a draft bill will be published "as soon as possible". I note that the same phrase has been repeated again today. It is not good enough; the phrase "as soon as possible" does not tell us anything. Green tourism is a fast-expanding sector of Scotland's most important industry. Despite the foot-and-mouth outbreak, which had a catastrophic effect on my constituency, the great outdoors is still by far Scotland's biggest visitor attraction. A recent report discovered that it supports 180,000 tourism-related jobs and contributes £2.6 billion to the Scottish economy. I have already stated why people come to the countryside: they come because they care about Scotland and what it looks like, and to see things that they might not otherwise see. For example, the image of the golden eagle is used around the world to attract visitors to our country, but last year alone three golden eagles were illegally poisoned and there are now only 420 breeding pairs in the whole country. It is not just the golden eagle. Eleven of our country's species of breeding raptor are an official conservation concern of the RSPB. That organisation has provided me with a list of  the poisonings so far this year; it is distressing to tell the chamber that three of them have happened in my constituency. I also note that one of the bad news case studies in "The Nature of Scotland" relates to a poisoning in west Perthshire. It is a tragedy. Indeed, those figures might be under-representative because under-reporting undoubtedly happens. Furthermore, the comparison between Scotland and New Zealand makes very sad reading. Someone in New Zealand was jailed for nine months for being caught with 32 eggs; in Scotland, people do not receive such sentences. We need to follow New Zealand's example, to get moving on the issue and to get it into practice now.

May I ask the First Minister—the First Minister! That is perhaps too soon, although on the basis of last week it may not be. May I ask the minister whether his remarks also apply to the aspects of the Sewel memorandum that will extend to all criminal investigations, not just to those that are connected with the current international situation and international terrorism?

Bill Aitken appears not to have been in the chamber on the numerous occasions when SNP members have made many of the same points about previous Sewel motions as we are now making about this Sewel motion. Indeed, I managed to refrain from doing a simple cut-and-paste job on previous speeches; I have changed the words this time for the sake of my sanity. We have made this argument consistently and we will go on doing so. It is about the fundamental constitutional settlement for this Parliament. Every Sewel motion, by its existence, goes to the heart of that. I go back to Donald Dewar's comment—which I notice no Labour member has mentioned—that it was not expected that we would deal with Sewel motions very often. In fact, we are dealing with them practically every week. Something that Donald Dewar did not expect to happen has, indeed, happened. In my opening remarks, I should have said that we applaud and support the Scottish Executive opt-outs. We look forward to Executive proposals  on religious hatred. I concede that that will be a difficult issue, but we must consider it in a Scottish context. However, the same argument can be extended to the remainder of the proposals in the Sewel memorandum. James Douglas-Hamilton reminds us that detention without trial—or, more properly, internment—will apply only to foreign nationals. I appreciate that the Government has tried to draw the terms narrowly. However, I am not sure that that narrowness helps in the current situation. The pool of potential detainees remains pretty large. They will all, I presume, be Muslims. On past performance, the majority of people who are picked up will be innocent of the charges—or the not-charges of the current proposal. That means that, in one part of the bill, we may do something that we are trying to avoid in another part, with regard to racial aggravation and hatred. The bill will focus on just one religious group in this country. Iain Gray's astonishing intervention, when he said that detention could be ended by the individual's leaving the country, was unworthy of him. If he had thought a little more carefully, he might not have got to his feet. What he said implied that, if a person was wrongly suspected, that is too bad. That is a bit like witch-finding: bind them with stones and throw them in the water—if they sink they are innocent but if they float they are guilty. Heads the accuser wins; tails the accused loses. The proposals will put people in that ludicrous position. To Gordon Jackson, I say that much of the memorandum does not necessarily relate directly to current international circumstances. We know that because at least two of the items under discussion were proposed nine months ago and were dealt with in previous Sewel motions. Please do not let anyone argue that everything in the memorandum is an emergency response to the current situation. It is not.

As my colleague says, that does not really matter. I have already spoken about one part of the memorandum as an example; Mr Jackson chose to forget that and pretended that I had taken it in isolation. Robert Brown said that the SNP continually uses Sewel motions to raise constitutional issues. He rather misses the point. Does he not understand that the very introduction of a Sewel motion is a constitutional issue? Having a Sewel motion means that we are arguing for a departure from  the agreed constitutional set-up. That is the point. Mr Brown also spoke about onus. He is saying that the onus is now on us to say why we should not depart from the constitutional set-up of this Parliament, instead of its being on the Executive to say why we should depart from it. I am not arguing that certain measures in the bill are not necessary. However, there is no practical reason why we should not legislate on them in this Parliament. I note that some of the proposals extend to all criminal investigations, not just to terrorism. That is an aspect that Gordon Jackson may have wished to consider. Some issues in the memorandum could be commented on. For example, secondary legislation will now be used to implement European Union decisions. The Parliament may have wanted to consider that in a bit more detail—perhaps the Tories would have had something to say. As for hoaxes and special statutory offences, there is a continual debate in this Parliament about whether the existing common law is sufficient or whether we need more specified offences. I would have thought that Gordon Jackson—a leading Queen's counsel, as we are continually told—might have had something to say about that. We could reasonably have debated a number of the issues in the memorandum. However, we have had only 24 hours to consider them. Perhaps Gordon Jackson's brilliance allows him to master, in 24 hours, every item in the memorandum, but I suspect not. The point is that we cannot even have a proper debate about the issues, simply because of the way in which the memorandum has been presented. That is why I am asking for support for the SNP amendment.

Yes I could.

At the outset, I should thank the Executive for arranging yesterday's briefing by officials on the Sewel motion, which helped to clarify some issues. However, although I am very grateful for those 40 minutes, they led me to question the extent to which the officials themselves had been consulted by Westminster. It was clear that the consultation has lasted only a matter of weeks, not months. People will argue that this is an emergency. However, that argument would have considerably more force if we were not being presented with Sewel motions almost weekly. Everything cannot be an emergency and, given the number of Sewel motions that come before us, it will soon be difficult to ascertain when we are dealing with a genuine emergency. All the Sewel motions that we deal with are not emergencies—in fact, they are anything but. The minister referred to the fact that two issues that are included in the memorandum that accompanies the motion have already been the subject of Sewel motions. On those occasions, the Scottish Parliament was asked to allow Westminster to legislate on our behalf on devolved matters, yet Westminster did nothing of the sort. One could argue that if we had gone ahead with appropriate Scottish Parliament legislation earlier this year, instead of having Sewel motions, we would have been ahead of Westminster in the game. However, we are considering the two issues again and it could be argued that parliamentary time was wasted earlier this year to no great purpose. For the record, the SNP abstained on one of the motions and voted against the other—we are therefore consistent in our arguments. We will vote against today's Sewel motion for two main reasons, both of which are points of  principle. First, there is the question of the continued use of Sewel motions. As I said, the Parliament is repeating itself. It seems that we are beginning to import some of Westminster's redundancies and inefficiencies. The procedure has become a matter of course. A startling development is that, when it comes to amending a Sewel motion, the onus is beginning to be put on those who do not think that such motions should be used, when it should be the other way around. Let us be clear. The Scotland Act 1998 sets out the constitutional framework within which the Scottish Parliament operates. There is a clear distinction between devolved and reserved matters. For obvious reasons that do not need to be repeated, criminal justice is one of the most clearly defined matters. Westminster's handling of Scottish justice matters over many decades was beginning to cause major concern. Issues were not addressed speedily and simply finding out what the law was could be difficult. It was scattered around in bits of legislation that had Scottish clauses tacked on, or was contained in the now infamous law reform (miscellaneous provisions) (Scotland) acts that became too many to mention and were distinguishable only by the year in which they were passed. That was meant to stop. I regret that we are fast heading back to such a situation. According to the Labour party, Donald Dewar could say or do nothing wrong. He said of devolved areas: "there is a possibility ... of the United Kingdom Parliament legislating across those areas, but it is not one which we anticipate or expect."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 28 January 1998; Vol 305 c 402-3.] What was unanticipated and unexpected has turned into the 25 th Sewel motion and the fifth that deals with law and order—the quintessential devolved area. When the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill goes into standing committee at Westminster, we will be lucky if one Scottish MP is on the committee and lucky if that MP knows about Scots law. So much for scrutiny. There will be precious little of that, although it has always been a professed virtue of the Scottish Parliament's procedures. The motion deals with fundamental matters of criminal procedure, which should themselves undergo the utmost scrutiny. For example, the Scottish Parliament should decide whether specific offences are required in respect of hoaxes or whether existing common-law offences in Scotland are sufficient. I have focused on the general concept of Sewel motions. A number of measures may require to be introduced in the light of the current international situation; I do not argue with that. However, the Scottish Parliament is perfectly competent to deal  with all the matters in the memorandum and to debate them in the detail that might be necessary and with the scrutiny that is absolutely necessary. Another aspect of the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill is the rather vexed question of the extension of detention without trial. There is some irony in the Sewel motion being in the name of the Minister for Justice, who is not in the chamber. I suppose that he might be rather embarrassed to have had to attach his name to the motion. On Monday, when the bill was introduced, Simon Hughes MP said in a Liberal Democrat press release: "Everybody must have the right to have their detention reviewed by the courts. Government plans to deviate from the European Human Rights Convention and to detain people for as many as five years goes far too far." I agree. That a coach and horses is being driven through Scottish procedures is bad enough, but the procedures seem to be being torn up wholesale. That it is proposed to do so without reference to this Parliament is even worse. That it is expected that that can be done without so much as a cheep from this Parliament is the crowning insult. The Blunkett proposals have, not unreasonably, been described as a return to internment. Leaving aside the dubious historical experience of internment, I will just say that the detention will, in effect, be enforced by certification by the Home Secretary. Another politician said: "The Prevention of Terrorism Act ... allows an extension of detention not by the judiciary but by the Executive. It must be accepted, as it was accepted when the power was introduced, that prima facie the power is offensive to the basic principle of the rule of law, which is that deprivation of liberty should be through the courts and not through politicians."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 10 March 1993; Vol 220, col 972.] I could not have put it better myself, which is strange, given that I do not normally agree with Tony Blair, who said that when he was in Opposition. I do not argue that certain measures may not be necessary in the current circumstances. However, there is no practical reason why we should not legislate where that is necessary. Some proposals in the bill extend to all criminal investigations, not just to terrorist-related offences. We have procedures in this Parliament that would expedite matters. It is right that this Parliament has the opportunity to make its position clear on the single most controversial aspect of the bill. For those reasons, I ask members to support the SNP amendment.  I move amendment S1M-2445.1, to leave out from "and agrees" to end and insert: "calls on the Scottish Executive to bring forward legislation dealing with the relevant devolved matters, if necessary under the Parliament's emergency bill procedures, in order that there can be proper consultation with the relevant authorities, companies, agencies and organisations in Scotland, and furthermore notes with concern the new proposals in regard to detention without trial in clauses 21 to 32 of the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill which are a suspension of the normal Scottish criminal justice procedures and which would breach the European Convention on Human Rights."

On Sunday, the Chhokar family were trying to commemorate their son's life when they were abused by a racist oaf who appears to have had some connection with those alleged to have been the murderers of their son, Surjit. It is worth all of us remembering that the family's pain has not ended but continues. Throughout their campaign, all that they have tried to do is get an answer to a straightforward question: why did there seem to be no justice for either their son or for themselves? Three men were charged and two trials were held, but because the accused in the trials blamed one another, no convictions were achieved. It is only because of the family's determination to find out the truth that we are here today. We must remember that this debate is about one family's pain and loss. Their campaign has forced us to re- examine our whole system of justice. Although the family will not yet be satisfied by the results of their labours, I believe that we have reached a significant turning point in our nation's justice system. When the reports were published, I described them as "a signpost to the future".— [ Official Report , 24 October 2001; c 3238.]  If we follow correctly the route that is marked out, there will be a fitting memorial to the Chhokar family's love for their son. I appreciate that the Lord Advocate acknowledged that debt when he presented the reports to Parliament some time ago. However, the unfortunate leaking of the reports some four days prior to the date of his statement gave the press the opportunity to spend several days focusing on a series of unfair and, I believe, untrue statements about individuals—both family members and advisers—who were connected to the campaign. How much progress has been made in identifying the source of and motivation for those leaks? I hope that the Minister for Justice—I take it that he will reply to the debate—will not treat that question as rhetorical. It is not a rhetorical question; I want a response to it. The statements that Dr Jandoo made were hurtful and damaging. I do not know why Dr Jandoo chose to adopt such a tone in his report. In my opinion, the fact that he did so justifies the family's concerns about the inquiry in the first place. It also reinforces in their minds their decision not to participate in anything short of a full public inquiry. There is an even more serious aspect to the inclusion of those comments. After all, on one view, they can be seen as a not very subtle message to anyone else who challenges the vested interests of the criminal justice system. They say, "If you come after us, we will come after you." That is a bad message for our system to send out. Members will know that the Scottish Trades Union Congress has launched a campaign to raise £40,000 to set up the full public inquiry that the Scottish Executive has refused the Chhokar family. I understand that the Commission for Racial Equality has demanded such an inquiry from the outset. I urge the Minister for Justice to declare that campaign unnecessary by announcing that a properly constituted, Executive-sponsored, open inquiry will be held. The two reports that we have had were quite specifically not such an inquiry. Noticeably, Dr Jandoo did not look for guidance from other public inquiries when he set about his work.  I emphasise the need for just one inquiry. There was always a danger of contradictions in having two reports—and that is precisely what has happened in respect of institutional racism. When I asked the Lord Advocate on 24 October about the contradictions, it was noticeable that he studiously ignored that part of my question. However, whether he likes it or not, there is a discrepancy between the two reports in respect of institutional racism. That discrepancy is very unsatisfactory indeed. The Campbell report did not find evidence of institutional racism in the Crown Office, but the Jandoo report implies quite strongly that it does exist and questions previously accepted definitions of the phenomenon. It is absolutely imperative that we are sure of what we are talking about when we discuss institutional racism. We must be absolutely clear about what it means and what it does not mean. Most members are aware that the system has been and continues to be insensitive towards victims and their families. There is still an attitude that victims who want to be kept aware of how their cases are being handled are little more than a nuisance to busy professionals. As a case in point, at a surgery in my constituency in the week when the two reports were published, I was informed by a constituent who had been the victim of an assault in February that his telephone call to the fiscal's office in that same week—I repeat, the week in which the Chhokar reports were published—was met by the question, "What do you want to know for?" He had been the victim of an assault. It is astonishing that anyone should still wonder why victims would want to be kept informed. It is against that background that we have to assess whether the Chhokar family's problems were compounded by their experience of living as a black family in Scotland, by an ignorance of cultural differences and by a failure to appreciate the extent of linguistic barriers. There is no doubt that that was the case. I am concerned that we should learn the right lessons from the experiences of the Chhokar family and from the failings of the system in dealing both with them and with the prosecution of those charged with their son's murder. It is therefore important that we acknowledge where things went well and who got things right. Strathclyde police should be singled out for particular mention. The experience of the Lawrence family continues to loom large when such questions come to the fore. Although some deficiencies were identified in the Jandoo report, the family's experience of their dealings with the police was clearly good throughout. It has been generally agreed that problems began only when the case was no longer in police hands. Indeed, since the publication of the Jandoo report, representatives of the Chhokar family justice  campaign have sprung to the defence of the police. The police are undoubtedly an easier scapegoat than the more entrenched establishment attitudes that exist in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. A bias towards fellow professionals could be read into Dr Jandoo's report: the language that is used to explain their failings is very different indeed from the language used to talk about the failings of the police, even though the failings of the latter were much more minor. The root of the problem lies within the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. The Campbell report was a damning indictment of the system's failure, despite changing pressures, to change over the years. The recommendations of the Campbell report have been accepted, but the report also made it quite clear that the Crown Office does not have sufficient resources. That is at the heart of the problem. This is the point at which we look for more than warm words from the Executive—and, not surprisingly, it is the point at which the Executive is found wanting. The Executive continues to insist that the Crown Office has sufficient resources. Let us be clear. The two reports may have been about the murder of Surjit Chhokar but, with the exception of the issue of institutional racism, they could have been about any number of other families and other cases. The Cawley family, who have been mentioned already and about whom many members will have received letters, are a case in point. However, it is all too easy for criticisms of the system to become criticisms of the people within it. There is an important distinction to be drawn between, on the one hand, the overworked individuals who are labouring under a great deal of stress and, on the other, a process that is under-resourced. That distinction needs to be recognised and the problem needs to be addressed. The people who work in the system know that it is creaking and they are starting to speak out. I could find any number of examples—I have at least a page and a half with me. I will take two examples from The Scotsman of 30 October 2001. They highlight the stresses on the system and underline the pressure being put on those on whom the system depends. Jim Keegan, who is described as "a respected lawyer with more than 20 years' experience", has this to say: "It's an absolute shambles. Fiscals are responsible for three or four courts at a time. They are placed under unbearable pressure, taking work home with them and working late into the night. After three years at the Crown Office, they are completely burnt out." No doubt he was picking up on the comments  made in chapter 15 of the Campbell report that principal deputes in the High Court are regarded as having a shelf life of three years because of the pace at which they were having to work to have any chance of keeping their heads above water. Will the Minister for Justice or the Lord Advocate advise members whether they think that that assessment is accurate? If it is accurate, what do they think that it says about how our prosecution system is being run? Mr Keegan goes on to say: "we are getting justice on the cheap in Scotland and it results in miscarriages of justice." Also in The Scotsman was an article about David Hingston, who resigned from his post as a prominent procurator fiscal in the Highlands as a result of stress. He warns that there will be more prosecution blunders because of pressure on the legal service. He makes it quite clear that he believes that fiscals have come under increasing pressure because of a lack of investment by successive Governments at a time of rising crime. He says: "What is the point of throwing money at the police so that more criminals can be caught, if there is not an adequately funded and staffed service to bring them to court?" What indeed? That is not the first time that that question has been asked, and in almost the same fashion. The article cites the stresses faced by Mr Hingston before he resigned. "Mr Hingston was in an office on his own, on call 24 hours a day, seven days a week, covering an area stretching from Dingwall in the east to the Summer Isles in the north-west and down as far as the Skye bridge. Dingwall, Tain and Dornoch was once handled by four fiscals, but now there are just two. As well as dealing with cases in court, his day would be filled with discussions on forthcoming cases, as well as dealing with arrest warrants and sudden deaths. Typically, he left his office at 6 pm, but worked for a further three hours when he got home and, even on leave, he had to carry a mobile phone or check in with police at regular intervals. He says pleas for help were made directly to the Lord Advocate, but nothing was done." Let us be very clear about what the two reports together disclose about what was going on in the handling of this particular case. The Chhokar case was allocated for precognition—assembling of Crown evidence—to a relatively junior fiscal depute who had never even sat through a High Court case before. To get the precognoscing done, he had to get up at 5 am to work on it before attending court all day. Because of time constraints, his line manager did not have time to read through everything to check the recommendation made. The advocate depute who prosecuted the case against Ronnie Coulter had nine other cases allocated to her for prosecution  during the two weeks of the trial, six of which would be time-barred if they were not started. If that is an example of a system that the Minister for Justice thinks is well resourced—and I have heard the Lord Advocate defend the resourcing—I shudder to think what they imagine under-resourcing would lead to. One view might be that we ought not to be surprised that things go wrong; rather we should be surprised that they do not go wrong more often. How on earth has the situation been allowed to develop? Unless the resourcing crisis in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service is addressed—it is not even mentioned in the Executive motion—the dire warnings of people such as Mr Keegan and Mr Hingston will come to pass. I noticed that the Lord Advocate was 15 minutes into his speech before he addressed the issue of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and it was 17 minutes before he uttered the word "resourcing". The Lord Advocate announces various reviews and steering groups. However, so far, all that we have to look forward to is the Solicitor General's view, which has been widely quoted, that the fault lies with our 110-day rule, which prevents an untried prisoner being held in custody without trial for more than 110 days. Frankly, that is one of the jewels in Scotland's criminal justice system, and any attempt to ditch it will be opposed vigorously by the SNP. It causes me some concern that an individual who will chair one of the steering groups appears to be already writing the conclusion. I worry about the conclusions that will be reached by other reviews. The failure is a failure of resourcing, which includes a failure to resource professional training programmes to deal effectively with the problem of institutional racism. The people of Scotland—all of them—deserve a first-class prosecution system. The experience of one Scottish family, the Chhokars, tells us that the people of Scotland are not getting that. That is an appalling indictment of the Scottish Executive and of the Scottish Office, which was its predecessor. I move amendment S1M-2406.2, to insert at end: "; but further notes the serious concerns raised by both reports about the lack of resourcing of both the Crown Office and the Procurator Fiscal Service and the effect that has had on their ability to operate effectively; is concerned at the apparent confusion regarding the definition and existence of institutional racism emerging from the different conclusions of the two reports; deplores the personal attacks on named individuals contained within the Jandoo Report which seriously detracted from the important issues being investigated, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to establish a full public inquiry into the handling of the case, in order to restore public confidence in our prosecution services."

I express my solidarity with the American people after the tragedy that took place on 11 September. I have not had the opportunity to do that in the chamber. We must remember that the attack on the World Trade Center affected not only the USA. Citizens of many nations and people of many religions were killed. Several thoughtful speeches have been made that expressed different views. It is sad that David McLetchie's speech cannot be counted among those thoughtful speeches. His tone was unfortunate and discordant. I am tempted to describe him as a wannabe colonel, but most real colonels would never adopt such a tone in their speeches. I do not want to be drawn into a historical debate, but I will paraphrase an old saying: those who do not learn from history are condemned to repeat it. Perhaps David McLetchie should ponder that. The events of 11 September and the action in Afghanistan have left their mark on Scotland in many ways. Perhaps the part of our nation that has been most directly affected is Scotland's Muslim community, which has been in a state of fear and alarm since then. In The Scotsman yesterday, Syed Jaffri, a businessman with premises in Glasgow and Edinburgh, described the situation as "intolerable". We cannot ignore the real and perceived threats to the safety of a section of our community. I accept that the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister have given a commitment to reviewing the criminal law, but I am concerned that the problem exists now and cannot wait for some future solution. Every one of Scotland's politicians must take every opportunity to reassure our Muslim community of its safety and security and to condemn those who perpetrate racial and religious prejudice. The First Minister, and the Deputy First Minister in his role as Minister for Justice, must ensure that the existing legal protections are vigorously enforced consistently throughout the criminal justice system—by every part of it. At times, that does not seem to be the case.  It is hardly surprising that the Scottish economy has suffered, given our massive dependence on the tourism industry. Several members referred to that, including the First Minister. He talked about the short-term consequences, but we should also be concerned about potential long-term consequences. The debate was intended to ensure that here in our Parliament, Scotland's view of recent world events can be expressed, that the impact of those events on the people and the economy of Scotland can be recognised and that the ways in which Scotland can help can be addressed. Those matters are hugely important, and this is our national Parliament, so we should discuss such matters. I hope that the diversity of the views that we heard will continue to be countenanced throughout the chamber and in all parties. Mr McLetchie's comments in that regard were ridiculous. I respect the conscientious arguments of pacifism, although I had not appreciated that Tommy Sheridan was a pacifist. The SNP has supported the decision to take military action. I am not a pacifist. The views of most people lie somewhere between pacifist beliefs and the extremes of David McLetchie's views. The concerns that some express are also shared by most people. We have only to go around with our ears open to know that. It is not exactly hold-the-front-page news. There are concerns about whether the humanitarian campaign is compatible with the military action. George Reid made it clear how they can be made compatible. One need not oppose military action to believe that we can pursue a humanitarian agenda, too. I want to say, in passing, that it is a pity that George Reid's job as Deputy Presiding Officer precludes him from making more contributions in the chamber, as we have all benefited today from the speech that he made. I repeat the point that was made by John Swinney, which relates to what Jim Wallace had to say about the difference between "compatible with" and "accompanied by". As John Swinney pointed out, Tony Blair's statement had three parts, all of which are equally important to the operation in which we are engaged: military, diplomatic and humanitarian. The concern of the SNP, and it is my own concern, is that that balance is seriously out of kilter—objective analysis would not suggest anything different. In particular, the humanitarian side of the equation is losing out. Humanitarian aid is simply not getting through. The much-publicised airdrops from US planes are indeed a drop in the ocean of what is needed. That is especially true if comparisons are made between the amount of money that is being spent on armaments compared with the amount spent  on aid. If we are honest, the humanitarian exercise is more a part of the diplomatic campaign than of a humanitarian campaign. More must be done to head off a humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan. Because of lack of food, 7.5 million people are at risk. In Pakistan, there are about 2 million Afghani refugees. Goodness knows how many more Afghani refugees are in other surrounding states. I would be at the head of the queue of those making criticisms of the Taliban regime and have done so on previous occasions, including in the House of Commons. However, the issue is not only about the Taliban not allowing humanitarian aid to get through. That is a convenient excuse, but it cannot be allowed to put the balance so much out of kilter. Tony Blair said that the military, diplomatic and humanitarian aspects were equally important: in practice, that has not worked out. We should be clear that, unless we get the aid issue right, building the peace will become infinitely more difficult. Building the peace is absolutely vital if we are to minimise the likelihood of being in this position again. The SNP has been criticised for calling the debate. Some of the criticism has been explicit and some implicit. However, there can hardly be a living room or a pub in Scotland where the debate is not taking place in one form or another. Can we really say that the one forum where the debate should not be happening is in Scotland's Parliament? I cannot imagine that that could be thought to be appropriate. The First Minister recognises the direct challenges that we face in Scotland. He outlined a series of measures that, as a result of the crisis, are to be undertaken by the Executive and other agencies. Those are proper measures. I shall list four—although there might be more—which involve the police; the emergency co-ordinating committee; new guidance in regard to bio-terrorism; Executive discussions with Westminster; and the proposal from the Scottish Trades Union Congress for an economic summit. Those are proper measures and should be pursued. However, they ought also to be discussed in the chamber. I wish that the Executive had initiated a debate of this kind, as we should talk about actions that are very properly being undertaken. I reiterate that the aim in the long term must be peace. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton quoted Winston Churchill. I want to quote Franklin D Roosevelt. In the very different but perhaps similarly challenging circumstances of 1945, he said: "The structure of world peace cannot be the work of one man, or one party, or one Nation. It cannot be just an American peace, or a British peace ... It must be a peace which rests on the cooperative effort of the whole world."  However small our nation, let us resolve—at least here today—that Scotland, too, will play its part in that co-operative effort.

I thank the Lord Advocate and the Minister for Justice for their remarks about the leaks that have taken place. I am sure that all members will agree that those leaks were appalling and that they simply added insult to injury for the Chhokar family. I hope that the matter will be met with the utmost seriousness and that there will be an internal investigation to establish what happened. Given that the leaks took place and that extensive information ended up in the public domain, does the Lord Advocate think that consideration should have been given to allowing the Chhokars to see the reports earlier than this morning? I regard the Campbell report as an objective piece of work and I have great confidence in its findings. It highlights mistakes that were made in the decision-making process and the existence of serious problems in the system. It amounts to a damning indictment of the system's failure to change over decades, despite the changing pressures during those decades. I am glad that the recommendations are being accepted, but does the Lord Advocate agree that a serious question about resourcing of the Crown Office is raised? Whenever that question has been asked of the Executive it has been rebuffed as being irrelevant, because the Executive has believed that the Crown Office has had sufficient resources to do its job. The Campbell report makes it quite clear that the Crown Office does not have sufficient resources. There is a discrepancy between the two reports in respect of institutional racism. Campbell's report does not find evidence of institutional racism in the Crown Office, whereas the Jandoo report implies that it exists. How will the Lord Advocate and the Minister for Justice resolve that apparent discrepancy?  I will deal in slightly more detail with the Jandoo report. I find it far less satisfactory than the Campbell report. The Jandoo report is highly subjective and I am afraid that I cannot find great satisfaction in much of what is in it, given the brief chance that I have had to see it. Why—despite guarantees to the family—are personal details, including all family addresses, contained in the report? Can anything be done about that before the report is provided to the wider public, including the press? Why did the Jandoo report proceed on the basis of what is in effect character assassination of individuals—Surjit Chhokar, Darshan Chhokar and Aamer Anwar? Does that character assassination not effectively justify the concerns that the family had about the conduct of the inquiry in the first place? What—given Dr Jandoo's dismissal of Macpherson's definition of institutional racism and his substitution of it with something called institutional sensitivity—is our understanding now of institutional racism? Do the Lord Advocate and the Minister for Justice accept that redefinition? I am concerned that we could get into easy scapegoating of the police. Although some deficiencies in police actions have been identified in the Jandoo report, it is clear that the family had a good experience of the police and it is agreed in general that the real problems began when the case was no longer in police hands. If any institution comes out of the report well, it is the police, but certainly not the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. I ask the Lord Advocate and the Minister for Justice to comment on that. I am concerned that, in such circumstances, the police are an easier scapegoat to have in our sights than the more entrenched establishment attitudes that exist in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. I would be concerned if that were the lesson that was learnt from the reports. I have asked a number of specific questions. Members will have other questions. The reports are highly detailed and I hope that we will have a chance to return to the issue in much more detail, but I want the Lord Advocate and the Minister for Justice to give some specific answers to my questions about the nature of some of what has appeared in the Jandoo report.

I thank Lord James Douglas-Hamilton for his extreme courtesy. Would the minister confirm that the purport of the motion is in effect to extend the protection of privilege to the reports when they are published? That procedure is rare and is not applied to hundreds of Executive reports. I think that on only three occasions in the history of the Parliament has that procedure been used. As a result of that, can we be clear that neither Darshan Chhokar nor Aamer Anwar will have any recourse to legal action, given the allegations of a defamatory nature that are in the reports about them? Will he clarify whether that privilege applies only when the reports are published—at least from today onwards—and not to what has happened in the press since Saturday's The Daily Telegraph was published?

The debate has been one of contrasts: between the ambition of the SNP and the lack of ambition from the Executive; and between the SNP's desire to make Scotland a better place and the Executive's willingness to settle for second best. I want the very best for Scotland but, without independence, we know that that will not happen. That is because the Scottish Parliament does not have the powers necessary to make the changes that will bring about the best for Scotland. The Executive need not take my word for it; its ministers can see regularly that they do not have those powers. Ministers know that the Parliament does not have the necessary powers, but they are not prepared to seek them. In areas where we have power, there is a curious inaction or inertia, as Donald Dewar might have called it. I will illustrate that lack of ambition—that inertia—with some examples: Malcolm Chisholm knows that vouchers for asylum seekers are wrong, but he will not do anything about it; Susan Deacon knows that banning tobacco advertising would be of great help in the drive to improve the health of our nation, but she will not do anything about that; Jim Wallace knows that proportional representation is needed to improve democracy in local government, but he will not do anything about it. We have an Executive that lacks ambition. I am mindful of the maxim that the greatest evil that fortune can inflict upon men is to endow them with small talents and great ambition. Surely the Executive could at least try? As I am responsible for the SNP's justice remit, I note with a resigned sigh that some of the five pieces of proposed legislation are quite unexceptional, although I await with interest the replacement diligence for poindings and warrant sales. I ask the Deputy First Minister, in his winding-up speech, to comment on the absence of a title conditions bill, because I understand that without one the abolition of feudal tenure will, in practice, not happen although, in theory, it has been passed by the Parliament. There are other big issues that the Executive has simply not mentioned. Bruce Crawford rightly pointed out that a huge debate is raging about nuclear power. New Labour has long since  departed from its radical roots, but the Scottish Parliament can tell Westminster that we will not stand for any new nuclear power stations. The Executive's silence on the issue is deafening. I wonder about the number of members, particularly those on the Labour side of the chamber, who, once upon a time, I marched with against the building of new nuclear power stations. Where are their voices now? I hope that the Deputy First Minister will also comment on that. Mike Russell noted the Executive's ducking of the issue of education. In the Borders and in Perth and Kinross—places, particularly Perth and Kinross, where Labour is in administration—we see vulnerable schoolchildren being forced out of mainstream education because of an outrageous round of cuts. I listened with fascination to Mike Rumbles when he intervened on the subject of PR. I am sure that members were grateful to hear of his steadfastness, but was he laying the ground for a convenient Liberal Democrat walkout just before the elections in 2003? That is what it sounded like. The truth is that the Executive is not responding to the realities in our communities. Land reform is another issue that has long been dear to the SNP's heart. Once again, we have been promised legislation on land reform. The Labour members to my right are chattering, but the SNP did more about land reform at Westminster than did the combined efforts of Labour and the Liberal Democrats. Members, including Elaine Murray and Tavish Scott, are pleased to hear that land reform is in the programme, but we have been here before. What should have been the flagship piece of legislation for the Scottish Parliament has been delayed and botched and delayed again. It is probably the best example of the lack of purpose shown by the Executive. That legislation was promised to the people of Scotland by Labour and the Liberal Democrats in 1999. In the first programme for government we were told that it would be introduced in the spring of 2000. In the second programme for government we were told that it would be published in February 2001. When it finally appeared it managed to unite all sides in anger and disappointment. I am not surprised that David McLetchie is opposed to the land reform bill, but it is disingenuous in the extreme for him to suggest that his opposition has anything to do with foot-and-mouth disease—it has nothing to do with that. He knows that his opposition is ideological and that, regardless of what was happening in the countryside, the Conservatives would never have supported the bill. The truth is that the Executive has made a  complete boorach of it. I ask the Deputy First Minister whether, in the third Executive programme for government, we could have a time scale for introduction. If he cannot give us a reliable time scale for the second—as I understand it—redrafting of the bill, will not he simply exert some leadership, proceed now with the land reform and crofting reform aspects of the bill and treat the access provisions as separate legislation? It is not the first time that Donald Gorrie has agreed with the stance of the SNP. That way, we might just make it third year lucky for land reform and get a better access bill into the bargain. The Executive must start considering the bigger picture. We should be trying to end the stigmatising of asylum seekers. I listened to Johann Lamont, who displayed the singular lack of grace that is her hallmark. I say to her that as far back as the 1970s, Andrew Welsh was responsible for Kenyan Asians settling in Angus. Perhaps—just perhaps—she and others like her could attend to their own backyard. It is her Government that has put in place the conditions that have resulted in the current problems. We should be taking real steps to address the problems within our society that mean that nearly one third of Scottish children and about one quarter of our pensioners live in poverty. We should be addressing the fact that our economic growth rate is so slow that it is among the worst in Europe and a little more than a third of the UK level. We do not appear to be addressing any of that. On the basis of today's statement, the conclusion would have to be that the Executive is woefully lacking in ambition. It lacks the ambition to take real responsibility for the well-being of our nation—the grown-up responsibility of earning our own keep and paying our own way. Instead, it is content with shuffling the pocket money that has been handed to it. Where any sense of ambition is apparent in proposed legislation—such as, for example, the plans for the implementation of the Sutherland commission recommendations—it has been entirely forced on the Executive by the SNP and others in the Parliament. Somebody once said: "The roots of true achievement lie in the will to become the best that you can become." The Executive lacks that will for Scotland, but the SNP does not.

Apologise.

He is behind you.

I am curious about an omission. With our newspapers and airwaves full of concern about the treatment of asylum seekers in Scotland, and given the cross-party consensus, which I suspect exists, that we should be doing a good deal better than we are doing, I am surprised that there was nothing in the First Minister's comments or in the Executive programme that goes any way towards alleviating the problem. Surely the Executive, with all its highly paid advisers at its fingertips, should be scrutinising carefully the areas where the Parliament can make a difference. Could we please have an explanation for the silence?

Presiding Officer, I have written to you to explain my point of order. It concerns this morning's announcement about the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill, which I read with great interest on the front page of The Scotsman . I looked in vain for anything regarding the bill on the Scottish Executive or Scottish Parliament websites. I discovered that the document supply centre in the Scottish Parliament information centre had nothing and then endured a 45-minute radio programme, still with no information at all, during which I understand the Executive was having a press briefing about the bill. I am still none the wiser on the detail of the bill. I seek your guidance on such matters. I do not expect a ministerial statement on everything, but, when the press is being advised, it is at least courtesy to ensure that members of the Parliament have the same advice as the press.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I realise that this is a matter of convention, but does the fact that the Executive front benches are entirely empty represent an appropriate way for the Executive to behave, even given that we are mostly in agreement on this issue?

As the lack of an SNP amendment to the motion suggests, I have no hesitation in welcoming the publication of the white paper on serious violent and sexual offenders, which paves the way for implementation of the MacLean report's recommendations more or less in their entirety. In my speech I want to focus on those proposals. Since the report was published, I have been calling for the MacLean recommendations to be implemented, so I am not about to start opposing them now. I am happy to welcome the Executive on board—finally. As recently as February this year, the Labour party dismissed the SNP's proposals as "uncosted nonsense". A few short months later, much of that so-called "uncosted nonsense" is being presented to the Parliament by the minister. He may want to reflect on some of the silly, knee-jerk statements that are made on behalf of ministers, perhaps even with their authority. Some months later, those statements can look a little hollow. For many years, the SNP has argued that our criminal justice system should provide for a form of lifetime supervision for certain categories of offenders—particularly those for whom it is considered that there will never come a point when they can be regarded as no longer posing a danger to the public. It is now a year and a day since the MacLean report was published. At the time I was quoted in the newspapers as saying: "we must study its proposals in detail but, having waited some time for its publication, we will be looking to the Scottish government to move swiftly in order to act on its recommendations, so we achieve reform and better protection for the public as quickly as possible". I am not sure that, after waiting a year and day, the Executive is allowed to say that it has acted  swiftly. It will also be some time before these proposals are implemented in practice. Nevertheless, I am pleased that progress is being made. There is certainly a need for legislation to deal with violent offenders. Since new Labour came to power in 1997, the number of serious assaults has increased by 15 per cent and the level of violent crime has risen by 22 per cent. Meanwhile, the number of individuals granted parole is increasing. In 2000, 374 prisoners were granted parole, compared with 311 in 1999. The number of adult mandatory life prisoners released with the agreement of ministers has increased from 10 in 1999 to 17 in 2000. I have never been a fan of keeping people in prison unnecessarily. There are still proportionately more people in prison in Scotland than in almost any other European country. However, if serious violent and sexual offenders are to be returned to the community, we have a duty to protect society from the possibility of their reoffending. Equally, we should have a desire to support those offenders in their attempts to correct their behaviour, if that is at all possible. I accept that there is a great deal of professional evidence to suggest that for some individuals it is not. Since 1997, the SNP has pressed for the implementation of what is now the MacLean report's recommendation for an order for lifelong restriction to be available to the High Court for high-risk violent or sex offenders. At the time, we described it as lifetime supervision. That would ensure constant monitoring and a recall to custody if the order were breached. Although this is not covered by the debate, I add a plea for the Executive at least to consider making supervised release orders available to the courts, even in summary cases. In some Scottish courts, sheriffs are arguing that their hands are tied by the lack of availability of such release orders, but perhaps that issue is for a different debate. There is no doubt that lifetime restriction orders are needed. The name John Cronin will be well known in the chamber. His case underlines the importance of introducing lifetime supervision for serial sex offenders. To be frank, if an individual has a repeated pattern of sexual offending, it is unlikely that there will come a time when that pattern of offending will not require control. If serial sexual offenders are to be returned to our communities, a mechanism must be put in place to ensure that they are under supervision for as long as they are at liberty. It would be irresponsible for the SNP, as an Opposition party, simply to wave through any piece of legislation, no matter how worthy, without some scrutiny. Therefore, I will raise a couple of small concerns.  The Executive has agreed to the MacLean committee's recommendation to create the risk management authority. That is an interesting decision in the light of the ministerial statement given last week by Angus MacKay, who is at long last striking a small match as a precursor to the much-vaunted and long-awaited bonfire of the quangos. Is there no existing organisation that could have carried out the role envisaged for that new body, such as the Parole Board for Scotland or probation services? I would be interested to learn from the minister whether any thought was given to extending the remit of existing bodies rather than creating yet another quango. If that route was considered, why was it rejected? The creation of another quango will raise eyebrows in some quarters. I know that concern has been expressed that the proposals might be open to challenge under the European convention on human rights. The application of the convention continues to impact on the criminal justice system, as is demonstrated by yesterday's decision on slopping out. There is no doubt that there will be a challenge to the order for lifelong restriction. The offenders whom such measures are designed to deal with are often extremely resourceful and use the system to their own ends. I sincerely hope that every effort has been made to ensure that the proposals are completely robust in relation to ECHR compliance. While some commentators believe that there will be ECHR problems, I note that Professor Gane from the University of Aberdeen, who has expertise in the ECHR, served on the MacLean committee and believes that the proposals are compatible with the convention. The key will be watertight risk assessment, bearing in mind the fact that the orders are a continuation of criminal cases. We must consider risk assessment carefully if we are to stay well within the boundaries of the ECHR. The proposals will be challenged—probably sooner rather than later—but I do not believe that such challenges will be successful if the correct statutory powers and guidelines are put in place. Executive sources have been reported as saying that ministers hope to use satellite technology to track offenders. I may be wrong, but I presume that that refers to electronic tagging, about which the Executive has only just made an announcement. I would be interested to learn whether the Executive has envisaged a time scale for rolling out the electronic tagging proposals, as any reference to time scale was omitted from the Executive's press release. The debate gets to the heart of what we want our justice system to be about: appropriate punishment for crimes, protection of the public and rehabilitation of offenders. None of those targets  has been adequately addressed for the classification of offenders that we are discussing today. The implementation of the MacLean committee recommendations gives us the opportunity to meet those targets. That is why the SNP will support the Executive's motion.

Oh dear me—another day, another debate in the Parliament. In the past few weeks, there have been a number of debates and events in which the relationships between the Scottish Parliament and the world have been examined and in which, as today, the parochial and totally contradictory nature of the Scottish Executive's position has been exposed. That was evident in the debates on Europe day and the international criminal court. Rather more controversially, it was evident in the revelation that the First Minister had signed an international declaration on Scotland's behalf, but had forgotten to inform the Parliament or the people and is now trying to disown the principles to which he signed up. We marked Europe day with a debate on the impact of the European Union on Scotland, a form of words that, as I said at the time, was an eloquent reminder of how the Executive perceives Scotland's role in the big picture. We are a spectator rather than a participant. The EU has had a profound impact on Scotland but why should that work only one way? In the debate on the international criminal court, we had a rare opportunity to debate an international issue on which Scotland is in a position to join other small nations such as Finland, New Zealand, Belgium and Sweden—to pick and mix a few—in blazing a trail for international justice by opting for universal jurisdiction and being in the vanguard of developments in international co-operation rather than adhering to minimal standards. However, once again, the Executive failed to meet that challenge. In recent days, our Parliament has been  addressed by the leaders of South Africa and Ireland. I hope that the SNP is not alone in recognising that, for all our talk of similarities between Scotland and Ireland, the most fundamental difference is the starkest: when decisions are taken on a global or European level, the Scottish Parliament is not represented while the Dáil Éireann is. Today's debate, brought by the SNP, follows from the outward-looking approach that we insisted would be more appropriate for the Europe day debate. To paraphrase John F Kennedy, we should ask not what the world can do for us but what we can do for the world. It seems to me that that was what Thabo Mbeki, the President of South Africa, called on us to do when he addressed the Parliament last week. Through the debate, the SNP has sought to contrast the inadequacy of Scotland's current position, in which we are excluded from European and world affairs, with the role that we would be able to play as a modern, progressive, independent nation. In comparison, the Executive is in an absolute mess. Ministers clearly cannot make up their minds as to how Scotland should relate to the rest of the world. Logic tells them one thing but subservience to London Labour tells them to shut up, backtrack and do as nanny tells them. The First Minister's rare forays into world politics always follow those lines. Consider the plan for a trade embassy in the USA and the farce surrounding the signing of the Flanders declaration. As Duncan Hamilton said, when the First Minister signed the political declaration in Brussels on 28 May, there can have been only one of two reasons. Either he had no clue what the declaration was about and signed because everyone else was signing and it seemed like a good idea on the day or he knew exactly what he was doing and, on that one day, he found enough courage to do what he knew was right. It is worth reiterating what the First Minister signed up to. The declaration reads: "in order to ensure due compliance with the principle of subsidiarity and therefore guarantee full respect for the constitutional regions' own area of competence, the political role of those regions has to be strengthened within the European Union." It continues: "The constitutional regions demand that ... there should be a review of the division of political responsibilities between the European Union on one hand and the member states and the regions on the other". It also states: "The constitutional regions are not satisfied with the current institutional framework". That is what the First Minister signed.

I have heard enough drivel from the Labour benches for one day. As we have to assume that the First Minister is not stupid—although that is perhaps a dangerous assumption—we can assume only that, since 28 May, he has suffered a catastrophic failure of nerve, has had a kicking from his London bosses or has had a combination of the two. His absence from the debate points to a failure of nerve. It seems that, having signed up to the principles in the declaration, the First Minister is disinclined to vote for them or publicly support them. Goodness knows what the political leaders in other European countries think. This farce makes Scotland a laughing stock. I wish that the First Minister would not be coy about his support for such initiatives. The truth is that, if he had brought the proposals to Parliament, he would have found support from the Executive benches, the Scottish Socialist Party, the Scottish Green Party, the Scottish National Party and Dennis Canavan—although, like Dennis Canavan, most of us would prefer the word "nation" to the jargon of "constitutional region". The Executive has taken a whingeing and cringing approach in which having an international outlook is the equivalent of peeking over the back fence occasionally and running away when the big kids appear over the horizon or running back to the kailyard when the boss tells it to. The signing of the declaration gives official expression to the view that the current constitutional settlement must change. However, the Executive benches continue to display nothing but poverty of ambition while the SNP wants to rise to the challenge. It must be strange for Thabo Mbeki to ponder the fact that, in all the years during which he and others like him were told that they were not good enough to govern themselves and be players on the international scene, some of the people who were urging change for South Africa were—and remain—content with the same impotence for their country. That brings me to Jack McConnell's speech. How did he rise to today's debate? He is obviously touchy about his boss's absence. He talks about vision but displays no evidence of it. He started with a series of anti-independence clichés but, although my pen was poised to note any serious points he might make, he made none. We got 10 minutes of waffle, about which he is probably embarrassed, because the truth is that he is prepared to settle for so little. Ben Wallace gave us the typical Tory line. He talked about the Executive doing things that were beyond its competence. As my colleague Duncan Hamilton said, most things are beyond the Executive's competence. Otherwise, Ben Wallace's contribution was just a Tory version of  the Scottish cringe. As for the Liberal Democrats—I will lump them all together, including the deputy minister—I was interested to hear whether there would be real support for their colleague in the European Parliament. Instead, we got wibble, wibble, wibble. Otherwise, they were silent on their attitude to Henry McLeish's apparent backtracking. We can take it that the Lib Dems in the Executive have been whipped into line yet again because they have absolutely nothing to say about the subject of the debate. In typical Liberal Democrat style, when embarrassed about the detail of an argument, they retreat into generalised waffle. Frankly, I wish they would collectively get a spine. The SNP has pointed to the positive role models that exist. They are countries that are much like ours but which have the full powers of independence. Norway was able to act as a conduit for direct talks between Israel and the Palestinian Liberation Organisation in the search for peace in the middle east during the early 1990s. Finland's president Martti Ahtisaari, along with Russia's ex-foreign minister, brokered the deal that ended the war in Kosovo. Contrast that with the sort of post-imperial desperation that leaves the United Kingdom Government tied too often to the coat tails of the United States of America. I am more interested in my country playing a positive role in brokering peace for the future than swaggering on the world stage trying to recapture old glories. John Swinney referred to Mbeki's challenge to us on globalisation. Blair will obviously bury his head in the sand on that issue and it looks as if the Executive will follow suit. Any legislature, wherever it is in the world, has to face that challenge. Any legislature should seek ways to do exactly that. That is what Mbeki wants us to do. Let us take up the challenge that Thabo Mbeki laid down and take our place in the world. Let us have some real ambition for Scotland, instead of succumbing to such fearful parochial cringe.

It is worth reminding ourselves, at this early stage in the debate, of the overriding principle that has driven the whole idea of an international criminal court. Who better to quote than Kofi Annan, the UN Secretary General? He has stated: "In the prospect of an international criminal court lies the promise of universal justice. That is the simple and soaring hope of this vision. We are close to its realisation. We will do our part to see it through till the end. We ask you ... to do yours in our struggle to ensure that no ruler, no State, no junta and no army anywhere can abuse human rights with impunity. Only then will the innocents of distant wars and conflicts know that they, too, may sleep under the cover of justice; that they, too, have rights, and that those who violate those rights will be punished." It is worth emphasising the phrase that "no ruler, no State, no junta and no army anywhere can abuse human rights with impunity." That is, of course, a lofty ideal. Perhaps we will always fall short of reaching the ideal, but I hope that we agree that it is an ideal worth striving for. An international criminal court should be part of that process. As an effective and responsible Opposition in this Parliament, we will debate the issues and scrutinise the proposals. However, we will not forget the higher purpose as laid out so clearly in that quotation from Kofi Annan. His statement can be taken as an exhortation to the legislatures of the world to finish the job that could be described as having been started in 1948 when the UN General Assembly, in the wake of the Nuremberg and Tokyo trials after the second world war, first recognised the need for such a court. The pity is, I suppose, that it has taken so long to reach the point that we have now reached. A total of 139 countries have signed the Rome statute, which was adopted in 1998. The policy memorandum for the bill tells us that, as of 12 February 2001, 29 states had ratified—including South Africa, whose President Thabo Mbeki addressed this Parliament yesterday. I understand that, to date, some 33 of the 139 signatories have now ratified their original signature. The UN's website tells me that, as of 21 May, that number was up to 32. The 33 rd country on the list will be Ireland, whose Taoiseach will address us next week. Members could be forgiven for missing the Irish agreement, which took place last week. All the publicity about the referendum focused on the Irish electorate's reaction to the Nice treaty. There was little or no media interest in the constitutional amendments that were agreed relating to the international criminal court. Meanwhile, at the Westminster end of the legislation was one of those bills that were signed  off in the rush to beat the election deadline. I hope that that does not reflect a view in the UK Government that the bill was just something to be gotten over quickly. In this Parliament, we still have important issues to deal with and important questions to consider. One of those issues is the one that the minister dealt with at some length—universal jurisdiction. I am concerned that the Justice 2 Committee felt constrained by the lack of time available for scrutiny of the bill. A whole section of its report is entitled "Time constraints and quality of scrutiny". Although I recollect from my time on the Justice and Home Affairs Committee that that was a perennial issue, it is nonetheless a matter of concern that the issue is raised time and again. I understand that the reason why things moved so quickly was to ensure that the UK was among the first 60 countries to ratify—it was seen as important to be at the heart of the process of establishing the court. However, I wonder whether that could not have been achieved a bit more efficiently and in a slightly better fashion that would have allowed fuller scrutiny of the bill. After all, we are introducing our bill considerably later than the one that has gone through Westminster. I wonder whether another few weeks would really have made an enormous difference. The Justice 2 Committee's report specifically highlights the effect that the lack of time has had on consideration of the question of universal jurisdiction—a concept that is described in the report as the "most complex, and most frequently raised, issue before the Committee". Putting it as simply as I can, I would say that the bill provides for offences to be prosecuted in Scottish courts if they are committed in Scotland or outwith the United Kingdom by UK nationals or UK residents. Crimes committed outwith Scotland by a non-UK national or resident could not be tried in Scotland even if the accused was currently present in Scotland. That is my understanding. The minister is correct: the Rome statute does not require states to adopt universal jurisdiction. However, it does not prohibit it. As the committee's report makes clear, the bill is consistent with the minimum standard required for compliance. We should be aiming for better than the minimum standard. If we can see an opportunity for improvement, we should take it and be one of those countries that is taking a lead in the development of international law. It is telling that the only witness whom the committee heard from on the issue who opposed the adoption of universal jurisdiction was the minister. All the others who addressed the issue were of the view that universal jurisdiction should  be adopted. The Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture, the Scottish Human Rights Centre and, indeed, the Law Society of Scotland all identified loopholes that could be addressed by the introduction of universal jurisdiction. Dr Iain Scobbie of the University of Glasgow made it clear that universal jurisdiction was already an accepted principle in international law for torture, war crimes and crimes against humanity. In the written submission from the Scottish Human Rights Centre, Dr Scobbie concludes: "In sum, international law appears to be developing in favour of the assertion of universal jurisdiction over international crimes committed during armed conflicts, whether these are international or non-international. The intention of the authors of the ICC Statute aims at the suppression of these crimes using prosecution at both the domestic and international levels. It would be in accordance with this if the Scottish Parliament were to assert universal jurisdiction over ICC crimes in the legislation it enacts." We have to ask why Scotland should not follow the path that has been taken by the likes of Finland, New Zealand, Belgium, Spain and Sweden in opting for universal jurisdiction. Is the minister saying that those countries are wrong to do what they have done? Are we to pressure them into reversing the decisions that they have made in opting for universal jurisdiction? Surely, at this stage of the bill, the real issue is whether sufficient time has been made available to explore the issue in detail. This morning's debate suggests that that has not been the case. I suggest that that lack of scrutiny and detailed consideration is the real problem. The committee could have had a lot more time in order to go into the issue in the detail required. Another issue on which all the organisations that gave evidence expressed concern was the absence of any mention of a UN trust fund for victims. Given the importance that this Parliament has attached in recent months to the rights of victims, it would be useful to have confirmation that the UN fund will indeed be created and that no separate legislation will be needed in Scotland. When the Parliament approves the bill, as I am sure that it will, it will not be the First Minister's name that will go on the treaty. Although this Parliament is responsible for the administration of justice in Scotland, the UK speaks for us on the world stage. I urge the Minister for Justice to ensure that the distinctive nature of the Scottish legal system and the role of this Parliament are recognised by Westminster when the UK ratifies the treaty on the international criminal court. That should include giving Scottish judges due consideration in the nomination process for the court's judiciary. With independence, Scots law would be individually recognised in the international criminal court's procedures. In the meantime, we can only  hope that, when Westminster speaks on our behalf, Scots law is given equal weight with English law in the UK's negotiations on procedure and the appointment of judges. I am pleased to note that the Justice 2 Committee report recognises the importance of that point and that, because of the difference between English and Scots law, the terms "UK courts" or "UK law" are meaningless concepts. Many of the countries that have ratified the treaty have issued declarations in which they make clear the basis on which the international criminal court should dovetail with their own legal systems. Norway stated that its Ministry of Justice and the Police is the designated channel for the transmission of requests from the international criminal court. Spain declared "that, without prejudice to the fields of competence of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Justice shall be the competent authority to transmit requests for cooperation made by the Court". Finland declared "that requests for cooperation shall be transmitted either through the diplomatic channel or directly to the Ministry of Justice, which is the authority competent to receive such requests." I see no reason why the declaration from the UK Government should not make it clear that the Scottish Parliament or the Scottish Executive justice department is designated as the competent authority to deal with requests from the international criminal court in matters relating to Scotland. I hope that the minister will comment on that in his closing remarks. In an earlier debate, I expressed concern about the extent to which we were allowing Westminster to legislate for us on this matter. Today, I have expressed my concern about the amount of time that is available for scrutiny of the bill. That concern is shared by the Justice 2 Committee. However, I understand and appreciate the desire to be one of the first 60 countries to ratify—a desire that does not appear to be shared by one of the countries that we all agree should be on board. Unfortunately, the USA—the country that wants to establish itself as the world's policeman—looks as though it will turn its back on the need for a world court, just as it seems to want to turn its back on so many of its previously agreed international commitments. As Bush junior visits Europe, it is apparent that his language anent the Kyoto treaty is softening. Perhaps that is just cosmetic; perhaps he does not realise that people in Europe are perfectly capable of reading and hearing the speeches that he makes to a domestic American audience. However, if the softer language is indicative of a shift in his outright opposition to Kyoto, I sincerely hope that he is facing pressure as strong—if less  public—over his backtracking from the international criminal court. The irony is that only through an international criminal court will there ever be a chance of bringing people such as Saddam Hussein and his deputy Tariq Aziz to justice for their actions during the Gulf war. Of course, bookshops are currently selling a powerful polemic against Henry Kissinger, which makes a case for his indictment as a war criminal because of decisions such as the bombing of Cambodia. Perhaps US nervousness about an international criminal court is based on the fear that the court could just as easily be used against former allies such as General Pinochet, never mind Henry Kissinger. That belief—if I may refer to Phil Gallie's comments—might lie behind the reluctance to agree in practice something that countries have agreed in the past in principle. We know that agreeing with things in principle can be easy. Facing up to the reality of what that might mean in practice is when the chickens come home to roost. I suggest what lies behind America's reluctance is the fact that it would not necessarily be immune to interest from the international criminal court. Nonetheless, it is undeniable that the international criminal court would be immeasurably strengthened by US ratification. I hope that the UK Government will keep up the diplomatic pressure to get the US on board. Either way, the truth is that the international criminal court will be a huge step forward in international justice. Jose Ayala-Lasso, the former United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, said that "a person stands a better chance of being tried and judged for killing one human being than for killing 100,000." That has always been the case, but we should be doing all in our power to change that balance. The international criminal court will do that.

It was not in the Conservative manifesto.

Members may remember that, on 1 May, we had a debate on crime. At that point, I made a number of criticisms of the Executive's continual attempts to debate feel-good motions in the face of mounting public concern about the state of Scotland's criminal justice system. I complained about the feeling of déjà vu on that day, given that we had debated the subject only a few weeks prior to that. It was clear that the minister was desperate to somehow get a good-news story out of something that people were resolutely refusing to believe was such good news. I make no apology for returning to the subject today. Members will note that, despite recent well-publicised problems in the criminal justice system, the Executive has shown some reticence on the subject. I wonder why. Last week, the decision was taken to make this one of the subjects for today's business because the Scottish National Party had obtained figures about the current situation in Scotland's courts. Early last year, there were some much-publicised problems in the courts because of the ruling on temporary sheriffs resulting from the application of the principles of the European convention on human rights. Information that we had at that time indicated that seriously long periods of time were elapsing before criminal and civil cases could be brought to court. Waiting periods in some courts were high: for instance, in January 2000, in Perth the waiting time was 22 weeks; in Stirling, 26 weeks; in Dundee, 19 weeks. That was the result of a particular decision and arose out of a particular problem, which was to be addressed by the appointment of part-time sheriffs, whose creation was the principal reason for the Bail, Judicial Appointments etc (Scotland) Act 2000. As would be expected, the situation has become a little better, but recent figures suggest that there continues to be a major problem. The Scottish Court Service target for summary criminal trial  waiting times for 2000-01 is 12 weeks. We should remember that summary criminal trials comprise the largest number of criminal trials that take place in our courts. Of the 49 sheriff courts in Scotland, 16 are failing to meet that target. Failures include Perth, with 21 weeks and Hamilton, with 16 weeks. That figure of 16 out of 49 courts means that, effectively, one third of Scotland's courts are failing to meet the targets that have been set. The number of failures has increased from four in 1997-98 to five in 1998-99 to nine in 1999-2000. The fact that the number of failures has hit 16 this year shows us that the trend is steadily upwards, even allowing for the problems of last year. The Executive's programme for government for 1999-2000 promised to "speed up the operation of the courts system" but, the programme for government for 2000-01 says merely that that aim is "on-going". In The Scotsman of 11 September 2000, the minister said of the criminal justice system: "The Executive will continue to identify areas where improvements are needed, to make changes where necessary and to deliver a fair, open system for the people of Scotland." Does the minister seriously think that those recent figures on court waiting times can give either this chamber or the people of Scotland any confidence in the Executive's ability to identify problems? Why, when the Executive is presiding over such a situation, do ministers not want to come to this chamber to discuss the issues and present us with their solutions? This debate seems to have been quickly overtaken by subsequent events. Having last week made a decision to have this debate based on the information that was then available, we were confronted on Monday with a story of a highly sensitive case being dropped because of a lack of time. That might have been treated as a one-off—although the number of such one-offs appears to be rising—had it not been immediately followed by the resignation of a senior procurator fiscal, David Hingston. He wrote an article for a daily newspaper, in which he said: "The Procurator Fiscal service is not working anymore. There are too few people trying to do too much work and the victims are justice and the Scottish public ... The entire service is totally depressed and extremely stressed ... There are not enough fiscals to do the work and as a result mistakes are made. And with every mistake made by a fiscal, justice suffers." I know that the Justice 2 Committee is undertaking a review of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. It is clear from the Executive's amendment that it would like to wash its hands of all responsibility until the committee reports. However, that is not good enough. I also  know that, when representations were made to that committee by the Procurators Fiscal Society, the Solicitor General described them as "posturing". Is it to be claimed that David Hingston is posturing? Surely the fiscals who contacted me privately—in fear of reprisals should it be discovered that they have approached an MSP—are not all posturing. The figures suggest that something is going seriously wrong in our courts. Lest the problems are put down as being something for the courts alone to deal with rather that the Procurator Fiscal Service, I draw the minister's attention to the more than 1,000 cases that were dropped in 2000-01 because of a lack of time. The set target for that was zero. How does the Scottish Executive intend to deal with the problem? Is it true that fiscals have effectively been gagged, as I have heard, and told that, as civil servants, any comments would have to be cleared through the Crown Office first? Will the minister give a categorical assurance that no fiscal will suffer as a result of speaking out? If he does not give that assurance, we can assume only that the fears of individuals are well founded, which does not reflect well on the Executive. In anticipation of the minister's reply, I am well aware of the intention to recruit another 30 procurators fiscal, but I point out that what cannot be replaced and is sorely missed is the experience that is being lost. The minister cannot afford to brush off coverage such as that which appeared on the front page of Glasgow's Evening Times : "Cops are ordered to stop court's arrests". That is the kind of thing that destroys public confidence in our justice system. It is not enough to allow this issue to be parked in the Justice 2 Committee until some indeterminate date in the future. The Executive is in charge right now, it is responsible right now, the problems are being experienced right now and the Executive has a duty to deal with them right now. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern the developing crisis in the administration of Scotland's justice system; recognises that public confidence in the criminal justice system is being eroded by the system's inability to deal with the current level of prosecutions, and asserts that urgent action must now be taken to ensure that resourcing levels are assessed and addressed if this crisis is not to deepen.

The minister is well aware of the continuing public outrage at moves to downgrade maternity services at Perth royal infirmary. Will she join me in welcoming the late addition to the acute services review of another option that would retain a consultant-led maternity provision at PRI? Will she also go further and give a commitment to Scotland that she will continue to push for locally accessible services within the framework that she mentioned and confirm that there will be no orthodoxy of centralisation in Scotland's health service?

The Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs seems a little narky this afternoon. It may be that he was reading out a speech with which he was not entirely comfortable—I detected a singular lack of his normal commitment and verve. I am happy to start on a consensual note by wishing him, you, Presiding Officer, and the rest of the chamber a happy Europe day. That might not have been unknown to our ancestors. I was interested to read in The Scotsman this morning that the rulers of ancient Scotland dined on Mediterranean cuisine and drank French wine—no change there, then. I have no difficulty in supporting most of the Executive's motion. On such a day, it is appropriate that we at least desist from moaning about having to order our bananas in kilos and our flour in grams and instead try to consider the bigger picture. The European Union is all about the bigger picture—it was born out of a determination that the continent should never again tear itself apart in war, and it was built by an equally strongly held belief that the countries of Europe should work together for their mutual benefit. There are times when the Conservatives at least give a good impression of having forgotten  those origins. The Tories can wave their pound signs and union flags all they like, but the hysterical little Englander anti-European agenda that has been pursued by successive Tory leaders up to and, I am afraid, including Hague, has kept Scotland on the margins of Europe. Frankly, the European policies of Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives are all anchored in the firm and simple view that Scotland has no right to a seat at the top table. The title of today's debate, "Impact of the European Union on Scotland", is an eloquent reminder of how the Executive perceives our role in the big picture—we are a spectator rather than a participant. The EU has had a profound impact on Scotland, but why should that work only one way? What about Scotland's potential for having an impact on the EU? This Parliament should not be talking down Scotland's relationship with Europe. What I and the SNP want for Scotland is equality of status with other nations that are independent in Europe. In the meantime, I want there to be a stronger commitment to subsidiarity. What is the reality of Scotland's impact on the EU? Let us refer first to representation. We have no right to appoint a commissioner and no votes on the Council of Ministers. London Labour has recently negotiated away Scotland's impact still further, by agreeing to reduce the number of MEPs elected to represent Scotland. Scotland is basically being shut out of the main decision-making forums of the EU. When vital decisions affecting the livelihoods of the people who live in this country are being made in Europe, who is there to stand up for Scotland? Let us consider a couple of examples, starting with fisheries. It would take a real effort on the part of members to fail to realise both how important the fishing industry is to this country and what a difficult time it has been facing over recent years. Almost 5,000 people are involved in the catching sector of the industry alone, and the livelihoods of many more—about 26,000—are dependent on the industry. It has been said in the past, unfairly, that tiny, landlocked Luxembourg does not have a fishing industry, yet it still has a say in ours. That is not strictly true: there are five folk working at a fish farm in Luxembourg. However, they still have more say over Scotland's fishermen than Scotland does. In the forthcoming common fisheries policy review, a Luxembourg minister will have two votes in the Council of Ministers. When the European Commission discusses fishing, there will be a Luxembourg-appointed commissioner at the table. In Belgium, that most devolved of countries, the importance of fishing to Flanders has been recognised. As of January 2002, it is the Flemish minister who will, as of right, represent Belgium in  fisheries councils. Would that Scotland's fisheries minister had the ambition to demand equal status. In Scotland, by contrast, we do not have even a guarantee that a Scottish minister would be permitted to attend fisheries council meetings, let alone speak up for the interests of our industry. The minister who takes the lead for the UK in EU fisheries negotiations is not accountable to this Parliament—his remit does not extend to Scotland. He is able to cast the UK's 10 votes in the council, yet we have no say over how he votes. That is where those who say that we are better off as part of the bigger UK have it so wrong. If Scotland's interests dictate one course of action, but the interests of our more populous neighbour to the south dictate another, Scotland's interests will go by the board willy-nilly. With direct representation, we could speak for ourselves. On what are probably the much more frequent occasions, when the interests of Scotland and the rest of the UK coincide, there would be two distinct voices arguing for our position, rather than just one. Independence is a win-win situation for Scottish representation. There are also examples onshore of London Labour failing to stand up for Scottish workers. The recently announced job losses at Motorola were a body blow to Bathgate and to the people who have lost their jobs. However, Labour in Westminster continues to block the Council directive to supplement the statute for European companies, with regard to the involvement of employees. The UK is one of only two member states holding out against that rule change, which, although it might not have saved the jobs in Bathgate, would at least have given the employees extra time, more accurate information and better involvement in the decision-making process. Meanwhile, developments in the European Union have underlined how different things could be if only Scotland were independent. The minister mentioned the Nice summit. There, the EU came to terms with its anticipated enlargement, a process that the SNP strongly supports. An enlarged EU will give greater weight and prominence to small and medium-sized nations.

That is the kind of intervention that I expect from a party that constantly wants to act alone in Europe without looking for the agreement across Europe that most other countries seek to build before they make their points. I dare say that it was my upbringing in Australia that allowed Ben Wallace to become so distracted from his understanding of Europe as to mix up Austria and Australia—I would not have made such a mistake.

I want to move on a little.

On Australia?

That is an interesting and no doubt deeply held view, but it is difficult to understand how Scotland's votes in Europe could get any lower than they are at present, which of course is nil. On the far more numerous occasions on which Scotland's interests would coincide with those of the rest of the UK, the combination would be considerably higher than what is currently proposed for the UK. At Nice, the EU came to terms with its anticipated enlargement. As I said, the SNP supports that enlargement. An enlarged EU will give greater weight and prominence to small and medium-sized nations. It is clear after Nice, if it were ever in question, that Scotland would have significantly greater influence in the European Union as an independent nation than it has as part of the United Kingdom. It is ironic that while we are being asked today to welcome and support the accession of other, independent European nations to the top table of the EU, the Labour party here and at Westminster is determined to stop Scotland's independent voice being heard in Brussels. As a result of the Treaty of Nice, as many as 13  central and eastern European countries could gain permanent representation on the Council of Ministers. Scotland in the UK will continue to have no representation there. I think that the Treaty of Nice will safeguard the power of smaller nations in the EU. On the basis of the Treaty of Nice, independence would give Scotland the right to nominate a commissioner, which is a right that we do not have in the UK. It would guarantee Scotland a seat on the Council of Ministers, speaking rights and seven votes—just as Denmark, Finland and Ireland have. Within the UK, Scotland has no guaranteed right to attend, lead or vote in the Council of Ministers. While we are on the subject of attendance, the Executive should ask itself whether its deeds match its words. The truth is that the Executive has been content to allow Scotland's voice to go unheard more often than not. Its attendance record speaks for itself. Scottish Executive ministers have attended only around 10 per cent of the meetings of the Council of Ministers that have been held since the Scottish Parliament came into being. On the rare occasions when the Executive has been represented, it has never led the UK delegation, even on fishing, where the impact of decisions on the Scottish economy is so great and so much more important than the impact on the rest of the UK. It could be argued that the real work is done behind the scenes, and that we should not get carried away with getting faces into a photo call at the Council of Ministers. Perhaps there would be some validity in that argument if the record of Scottish involvement behind the scenes were any better; it is not. Scottish Executive officials have attended just 75 out of 4,500 EU working group meetings, at which many important decisions are taken. Where is Scotland's voice at those meetings? With independence, Scotland would have 13 members of the European Parliament—the same as for Finland and Denmark, which are independent countries with a population of 5 million, just like Scotland's. As long as we keep our bandwagon hitched to the rest of the UK, Scotland will lose seats in the European Parliament—the number will go down from eight to either six or seven. What is the Executive's response to that big picture? It has produced a joint paper with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that is startling in its lack of imagination and shallowness of ambition. It is, basically, a list of 11 principles that do nothing more than plead for the right to be consulted. Principle 5, which gives the game away, comes slap bang in the middle of the list. Let me share it with members: "The EU institutions must respect the Member State's  role in deciding the internal allocation of competences between it and sub-national authorities." Allow me to translate the jargon—members should remember that, in the terms of the document, we are a sub-national authority. Basically, principle 5 boils down to: "Nanny knows best"—that is what that sell-out principle tells us. The Executive wants the EU to ask it what it thinks but, at the end of the day, to listen only to Westminster. That is pathetic. The Executive has tied itself up in knots with internal contradictions. I invite members to consider principle 5 alongside principle 3 and to try to work out where the Executive is coming from. Does Jack McConnell want the EU to listen to Scotland or to Westminster? Is he calling on the EU to tell Westminster to butt out of Scotland's business? I suspect that that is what he really wants, and would that he were asking the EU to do that. Alternatively, is he telling the EU that, whatever Scotland says, it is Westminster's opinion that counts? To be frank, the document shows that the Executive is out of touch with mainstream thinking in the EU. Representatives from devolved Administrations in Belgium, Spain and Germany must be astounded at the timidity of our Executive's approach. Given the record of the UK and the Scottish Executive in Europe, they are not role models for other small countries. If all that the Executive is interested in achieving with its paper is serving its London masters, it is being extremely unhelpful to Scotland. In contrast, the SNP stands for Scotland. We are just as interested in developing the impact that Scotland can have in and on the EU as we are in examining the impact that the EU has had on our country—that is the one-sided approach adopted by the Executive. The SNP is in accord with the mainstream of European thinking on the development of the EU. We support the present confederal union in Europe and reject moves towards a European superstate. We support enhanced co-operation in a range of areas and, at the same time, we seek a stronger commitment to subsidiarity, with responsibilities returned to more localised levels where appropriate. The work has started, given devolution, subsidiarity and debates on governance. We can get the job done with independence in Europe. However, our representatives must lift their eyes and look at that bigger picture. If our representatives will not think big on Scotland's behalf, Scotland will continue to be left behind on the fringes of a rapidly developing Europe. I would like Jack McConnell to visit Ireland, Sweden or Finland to tell those countries how stupid they are to think that they should have  independent representation in Europe. I look forward to him telling those countries how much better off they would be if only they would allow another bigger country to conduct negotiations for them. The SNP's stance on Europe is part and parcel of our ambition for Scotland, which is unbounded. The minister may do his Jumping Jack Flash impersonation at events such as yesterday's European connection, welcoming assorted consuls general from the accession nations, but it is a pity that he does not do a reality check—Scotland will not be represented in such a way anywhere else in Europe. I shall give members a final look at some of those accession nations which, in a few short years, will have more say over Scotland's fishing, farming, environment and industry than we have at present. Estonia has a population of 1.4 million and became independent in 1991. Latvia has a population of 2.4 million and became independent in 1991. Lithuania has a population of 3.7 million and became independent in 1991. Slovakia has a population of 5.4 million and became independent in 1993. Slovenia has a population of 2 million and became independent in 1991. Let us add Scotland to that list. I move amendment S1M-1912.1, to leave out from "and welcomes" to end and insert:  "but regrets the lack of imagination and ambition shown by the Scottish Executive and Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in their joint paper on the subject; deplores the Executive's attendance record at EU Council meetings and poor representation at working groups, and recognises that, after the Treaty of Nice, Scotland would have significantly greater influence in the EU as an independent nation than as part of the UK."

No, I did not. Mike Rumbles is wrong.

There is a real feeling of déjà vu about this debate. We had another such debate just over a month ago, and I suppose that it is a measure of the minister's exasperation at his inability to get everyone to accept the Executive's version of events that we are being put through our paces again. It raises the awful spectre of "Groundhog Day" between now and 7 June—just to pick a date at random.  Has the Executive got anything new and startling to bring to the debate? After listening to the minister, I think that the answer has to be no. The message that we take from this debate is that the Executive is frustrated by the fact that people are not buying its spin. Perhaps it should ask itself why. The people of Scotland deserve better from the Minister for Justice than this continued self-congratulatory exercise. His Executive colleagues in the Labour party have even less scope for patting themselves on the back. Their party came to power in 1997 on the pledge that it would tackle crime and the causes of crime; however, recorded crime figures have risen consistently since 1997. Worse still, the incidence of violent crime has increased. The question is this: is the Executive doing better than the previous lot, who were not great themselves? However tempting it may be, it is inappropriate to base assumptions on the difference between crime figures in a carefully chosen year and now. It is far better to consider the general trends over recent years. Even then, we run the risk of getting tangled up in statistics and losing sight of the reality for people in Scotland and the way in which their experience matches up with the numbers that we cite. If the Executive wants to indulge in a statistical debate about the levels of crime, it must also recognise that the fear of crime is significant, despite the best efforts of our hard-working police officers. A System Three survey in The Scotsman revealed that people believe that there are now fewer officers on the beat, whatever the numbers might suggest. Of the respondents, 55 per cent thought that the crime rate had risen over the past five years and 59 per cent said that they felt more at risk now than they did five years ago. That fear of crime is even greater among more vulnerable groups, including our parents and grandparents. What a fine society we are presiding over for them. The Scottish Executive's 2000 Scottish crime survey found that 82 per cent of people identified crime as an extremely or quite serious problem. Let us consider the figures that the Executive is so proud of today. In the category described as "Non-sexual crimes of violence", there has been a 22 per cent increase since 1997. Vandalism has increased by 5 per cent since last year, and instances of handling an offensive weapon have increased by 3 per cent since last year and a shocking 36 per cent since 1997. That is evidence of the growing violent culture that is blighting many of our communities and causing the climate of fear that imprisons our old people in their homes. If members are honest, they will own up to that as the reality in our communities and in their constituencies.

Indeed, but the member will forgive me for selecting the year in which there was a change of Government at Westminster and the subsequent four years, especially as we presume that we are just a few weeks away from another Westminster election. We can choose to pick years at random; however, 1997 was not an entirely random choice of year, however uncomfortable it might be for the member to have to own up to that. I have talked about the debilitating effects of the fear of crime. Members will also recognise the frustration that is felt when the offences that we are talking about are carried out by young kids who are perceived to be totally outwith the control of the system. A survey that was completed at the start of 2000 for England and Wales ascertained that some 22 per cent of school pupils had committed a criminal offence in the preceding year. No doubt, many of those offences would not otherwise have come to the attention of the authorities. If we are honest, we would admit that it is highly unlikely that the figures for Scotland would be radically different. Clearly, there is a serious problem that has to be addressed. In Scotland, that will become increasingly important. Here, parents are already held directly responsible for their children's attendance at school. I think that it therefore makes sense at least to consider a further extension of the existing legal responsibility of parents for the actions of their children. While it would not be appropriate to charge parents and take them through the criminal courts for actions committed by their offspring, it should nevertheless be possible to institute a form of compensation order on the parents when the activities of their child have resulted in physical damage to property or tangible upset to a victim, as happens in Italy, for example. Any provision for such orders would have to allow for judicial discretion in imposing them and the ability to take the financial and other circumstances of the parents into account. Nor does any compensation order have to be confined to monetary compensation. In that way, parents may be encouraged to take more direct responsibility for their children's offending activity and the children may come to understand more clearly the consequences of their actions.  There have been a great many noises off, Presiding Officer. I do not know which members would like to intervene.

I hear what Gordon Jackson has to say and I will not get into a debate about how many single mothers raise delinquent children. I think that Gordon Jackson's comment was a little unfair on single mothers. I will point out, however, that the victim is just as likely to be a single mother as anyone else. We are in danger of ignoring the victim. I know that systems that are broadly similar to the one that I am proposing are in place in a number of countries. Eight European states as well as Norway and one province of Canada have some form of victim compensation scheme and most of them make specific though varied provision in relation to parental responsibility for such payments. We have to think seriously about moving towards having such a system in Scotland as one more part of the jigsaw that is necessary for tackling the problems in our communities. Of course, much of the success or failure of such initiatives depends on the ability of the police to play their part. Earlier, I mentioned the survey that found that a majority of people thought that police numbers had fallen. Indeed, in the Scottish Executive's figures, the numbers have only just climbed back to 1997 levels, which means that the recent perception that the numbers have fallen has been justified. We need to deal with the reality of people's experience rather than simply looking at the statistics and feeling smug. Such a perception fosters the fear of crime. If we are to tackle that fear, policing on our streets will have to become much more visible. That is not simply Opposition carping or the misplaced views of people who do not see the full picture. A succession of delegates at the Scottish Police Federation's recent annual conference in Peebles claimed that the Scottish Executive's published figures masked the truth of officers being taken out of front-line duties. The delegates passed a motion condemning the Scottish Executive's information on funding and officer numbers as "misleading and inaccurate"—their words, not mine.  The chairman of the Scottish Police Federation told his members: "The basic policing functions are in danger of being devalued or ignored because the resources we have are severely stretched. People are being found to cope with the requirements of new legislation, people are being found to handle the new bureaucracies established to monitor best value and the myriad of other requirements. And where are these people coming from? They are coming from the frontline, from the sharp end of operational policing." As John Darcy, a chief inspector from Northern constabulary, put it: "The public will not be fooled by upbeat pronouncements from politicians. They know that the blue line is getting thinner." While the Executive's spin doctors fail to make their chosen point, one ordinary police officer delivers himself of a devastating one-line soundbite. His one-liner is the reality behind the story that the Executive is trying to spin once more today. We cannot even get the official statistics to agree with each other. The Office for National Statistics gives the number of police in Scotland as 14,300 in the last quarter of 2000—648 fewer than the Executive claims. According to the ONS figures, the number of police in Scotland has been falling steadily since the fourth quarter of 1998. We are owed an explanation from the minister as to why those figures portray such a radically different picture, when the ONS says that it gets its figures from the Scottish Executive. When the minister says that the number of police is increasing, why does the Office for National Statistics tell us that the number is falling? Why, when both figures appear to originate from the same source, is the difference between them increasing at such a rate? Given that difference, is it any wonder that the minister's frequent pronouncements are greeted with such scepticism? If the growing frustration felt by rank-and-file police is not enough, we can turn to the Scottish Prison Service for another example.

With respect to the minister, that is not the point. The point is that the Office for National Statistics gives one figure—which it claims that it gets from the Scottish Executive—while the Scottish Executive gives a different figure entirely for the same quarter. I was much amused to note that, in the week following an almost unprecedented day of strike action by Scotland's prison officers, the Executive motion before us says nothing about that aspect of  our criminal justice system. I dare say that the Minister for Justice would rather not be reminded of the problems over which he presides, but I think that even he has to accept that the situation has got out of hand. Morale among prison officers is at rock bottom now, as even a cursory glance at press cuttings about events in our prisons will inform us. Prison officers on strike—that is unprecedented. The action could hardly have come as a surprise, yet the minister's silence on the matter is deafening. The cause of the strike was new shift patterns, which are the prison service's way of trying to squeeze a little bit extra out of prison officers and make up for the staff shortages. Those same staff shortages are claimed to be behind the closure of the high-security unit at Shotts prison, which houses some of Scotland's most notorious prisoners—men who will not easily be integrated into mainstream prisons. Just this week, I was advised of the refusal by the governor of Barlinnie prison to sign off a minimal upgrade, in other words electricity and in-cell sanitation—the dreaded slopping out—for B hall. Instead, he chooses to link that to an agreement on staff levels. The ending of slopping out is a humanitarian issue, and is a requirement under the European convention on human rights. It should not be used as a lever for macho management to put the squeeze on prison officers. The Executive seems to want to create the impression that it no longer has responsibility for the prison service. That is an interesting thought, so I had a look at my copy of the "Partnership in Power" year 2 document, which is produced by the Labour party, to see what it had to say. It is probably not meant to be in the public domain, but we will not quibble about that. It said precious little in fact. The following was almost the sum total: "The Prison Service will change. As it does, so too will the role of prison officers, which could evolve and expand ... We will modernise prison infrastructure." What a masterpiece in non-speak. "Evolve and expand". I hear the sound of hollow laughter coming from hard-pressed prison officers. In closing, I wonder whether the Deputy Minister for Justice—the document makes no mention of the Liberal Democrats in the partnership, so it is handy that Iain Gray, the deputy minister, is from the Labour party—would tell us how prison officers could take any comfort from the Executive's stewardship of the prison service. As we are talking about crime, I note that the SNP recently reported a string of thefts. I deplore it when Labour takes on the Tory mantle, but we have become accustomed to welcoming Labour members as converts to SNP policies. Drugs  courts were consistently argued for by the SNP and were just as consistently argued against by new Labour—until the point at which its members caved in and said, "Oh, all right then, you were right." Fair and honest judicial appointments were argued for by the SNP for years and were ignored by Labour members for just as long—until the point at which they caved in and said, "Oh, all right then, you were right." I remember that, when I first proposed that we should consider lifetime supervision for some sex offenders, that was pooh-poohed by the then Scottish Office minister with responsibility for justice, one Henry McLeish. That proposal is now one of those being advanced by Lord McLean. We were right there too. We have plenty more policies that we would be more than happy for the Minister for Justice and his colleagues to help themselves to, if they would only had the courtesy to acknowledge what they were doing. How about the 1,000 more police whom the SNP would like to introduce? The cost of doing that amounts to only one sixteenth of the previous year's Executive underspend. Will the minister really tell the people of Scotland that such an amount cannot be afforded? Instead of tinkering around the edges, let us give the police the resources that they need to bring about a step change in police numbers.

A thousand extra police officers around the country would mean a visible increase in front-line policing. Instead of simply setting targets, let us get crime in our sights. Let us take steps to bring about greater parental responsibility. Let us free our courts and our police from wasteful bureaucracy. Let us make real changes to tackle crime and address the fear of crime. Let us take a stand against crime. I move amendment S1M-1890.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "asserts that since 1997 the UK Government and the Scottish Executive have failed the Scottish criminal justice system and the Scottish people in (a) presiding over an increase in both the levels of crime and the fear of crime, (b) providing insufficient numbers of police officers at the front line, (c) failing to alleviate the serious public concern over the levels of youth offending and (d) overseeing a collapse in morale in the Scottish prison system and calls upon the Scottish Executive to bring forward a coherent programme which will both tackle the major problems currently being experienced across the Scottish criminal justice system and deliver a safer Scotland for everyone."

First, I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, and to members, for my mobile phone going off in the chamber earlier. As has been discussed, rape is a crime at common law. That means that, over the years, its definition changes through court decisions and judicial interpretation. I am not sure that Mike Rumbles is quite right in his assertions about an accepted, agreed definition. Even in common law, no matter how old the crime is, things change. The question that is raised by Lord Abernethy's astonishing judgment is what sex without the consent of the woman becomes. That is probably what has astonished most people and most, if not all, women would like the question to be answered. If it is not rape, what is it? It is a big question, which needs to be addressed. There is another crime in Scots law that deals with some of the points that members raised:  clandestine injury, which is sex that is perpetrated on a woman when she is asleep, unconscious or in some way incapable of giving consent. That is a common law crime, for which there have been prosecutions. The problem is that it does not cover the situation that we are talking about, in which no force was used, but no consent was given and the woman was not asleep. I think that most women will have assumed that no consent means no, and that men should not proceed with what they are trying to do. That is the aspect of the matter that astonished everybody. If Lord Abernethy is right, lack of consent is neither here nor there, and legislation might be necessary. It might be that lack of consent without force means indecent assault—we do not know. We need to accept that moving rape out of the common law and into statute brings its own difficulties of definition and interpretation. Proof will still be an issue and there is the question of how one shows a lack of consent—always the problem with rape. Let us hope that we will all be happy with the ruling of the High Court judges, whenever that is made, and that it will give us a definition of rape that fits our more modern interpretation.

As I was saying, the SNP is on record, over the past few weeks, as having supported the Executive's measures to eradicate foot-and-mouth disease, and we continue that support. We have, however, expressed concern over the fact that the support that is being announced for the tourism industry, and for industry as it is affected at large, has not been sufficient, given the extent of the crisis. The Executive has—rightly, in my view—asked organisations such as the Inland Revenue and HM Customs and Excise to take a sympathetic approach if businesses need to defer payments during the crisis. Why, therefore, was a letter from the Scottish Executive about meat hygiene inspection charges  sent to a business in my constituency, telling it that there will be no suspension of any recovery action as a result of foot-and-mouth disease? The letter was sent on the same day as the support package was being announced in the chamber last week. Why is the Scottish Executive demanding that "continued regular payments must be maintained" despite knowing that that must mean that firms will have to lay people off?

I thank the Deputy First Minister for that. However, I will give him just a little more information. The small business that is affected by the letter is a meat and game dealer, which has done no trading since the crisis began. The staff have been laid off—five people, or six, if one counts the owner. Two weeks ago, the First Minister said in the chamber that "There is real immediacy and urgency."— [ Official Report , 22 March 2001; Vol 11, c 879.]  If the situation was immediate and urgent two weeks ago, it is no less so now. I ask the Deputy First Minister not simply to investigate or look into  the matter but to give a clear commitment that the Executive will no longer send out such threatening letters and that it will do in practice what it says that it is asking everyone else to do and stop making such demands on struggling firms.

I hope that the Deputy First Minister will look into the matter as he claims that he will. I am sorry that he is unable to make the commitment that I have asked for today. [Interruption.]

While he is looking into the matter, will the minister also consider the advice that is being sent out by Scottish Enterprise? The document that Scottish Enterprise is sending out, presumably as part of the package of measures to deal with the crisis, says that businesses employing staff should consider "reducing staffing to appropriate levels for continuing business activity." They are also told to "advise staff who may be laid off to contact their local Jobcentre". There is a question about whether such advice is worth the £5 million that is being spent on it. Advice and letters such as that come as cold comfort to those who were expecting concrete, solid support in this crisis. Does not the Deputy First Minister understand the concern that what has been happening in the past few weeks has been nothing other than hyped press releases and that, on the ground, the reality tells a different story?

To ask the Deputy First Minister when the Scottish Executive's Cabinet last met and what issues were discussed. (S1F-995)

I thank the Deputy First Minister. As he will know, over the past four or five weeks the SNP has consistently put on record its support for the Executive's measures to eradicate— [Interruption.]

Now that the minister has given us information about the Hampden Park event this morning, at least we have an explanation for what seems like a singularly fatuous and self-serving Executive motion. The motion had me wondering whether the Executive could not think of anything more substantial to debate. Now we know where we are—the debate is an extended press release. There is a great deal to be proud of in the Scottish justice system. In every area—the courts, the prisons and the police—there are extremely committed people who work very hard to try to make things work. They have plenty of work to do, because crime and the fear of crime are major concerns for Scots. But for goodness' sake, let us not get carried away with self-congratulation.  I notice that the minister wants us to talk about the situation 10 years ago, but new Labour came to power in Westminster in 1997, on the promise of being tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime. Since then, levels of crime have risen. However one looks at it, that means that crime has increased, not decreased. Serious assault is up by 16 per cent; other violent crime has risen by 37 per cent; crimes that involve the use of offensive weapons have risen by 30 per cent; and robbery, car theft, shoplifting and fraud have all increased.

I can well understand why a Liberal Democrat might not want to be tainted with the record of the Labour Government, but the Liberal Democrats went into partnership with Labour in Scotland and I am afraid that they will have to bear that. Throughout Scotland, people are imprisoned in their homes by fear of crime. They are afraid to walk the streets alone, to go out or even to answer their doors at night. Other members know from their constituents the distress that is often caused by seemingly unchecked criminal behaviour that consists of seemingly minor offences, such as breaches of the peace, but that nevertheless intimidate a great many people, such as the elderly, those who are alone and the very young. The minister wanted us to have a debate that was based on private conversations that he may or may not have had this morning, but one issue is raised time and again by the people whom I am talking about: they never see a policeman on the streets. That could almost be a direct quotation from any number of people who come into members' surgeries. We know that that is probably a bit of exaggeration, but the truth is that the sight of more police officers on the streets reassures people. Police officers detecting and deterring crime—creating safer streets—will help to fight both crime and the fear of crime. That is why the SNP wants 1,000 more police on the streets, over and above the numbers that the Minister for Justice talked about today. For years now, police numbers have been low relative to 1997, which has undoubtedly contributed to the rise in crime and to the perception in many communities that things are out of control. The stark reality is that those years have cost us dearly. Even with the recent announcement that numbers will increase again, it is a fact that there are still fewer police than there were in 1997. Despite the song, things just have not got better.  It is difficult to see how low police numbers can be squared with a commitment to being tough on crime. Tackling crime is a job for the police, as the professionals, as much as it is for society at large, but just as we have the right to live our lives free from the fear of crime, so we have a responsibility to respect that right for others. I have already talked about the views of ordinary people. Let me refer to other frequently raised concerns. There are the concerns of people who have been the victims of crime, but who feel strongly that no one has taken responsibility for the crime, because the offender was under-age. The SNP believes that it is time that we took a long, hard look at what happens in other countries and grasped the nettle of parental responsibility. Instead of patting itself on the back, the Executive would serve the people of Scotland better if it applied itself to finding solutions to that particular problem. At the same time, that would address a situation in which victims are put in fear and the offenders are stuck in a cycle of reoffending from a depressingly early age. That cycle of offending leads to the bigger problem of reoffending in adult life. The most recent figures suggest that nearly half the offenders who are discharged from custody or given a non-custodial sentence in Scotland are reconvicted within two years. Those figures underline the need to ensure that prison regimes and post-custodial supervision are designed to reduce reoffending. It is absolutely clear that using prisons solely as a means of punishment and deterrent simply does not work. Rehabilitation is not a soft option; if there is no rehabilitation, a convicted criminal, once released, might soon revert to offending. For prisons to be successful at rehabilitation, the atmosphere and conditions in our jails must be conducive to that outcome. However, there has been a series of incidents in prisons throughout Scotland recently. It is high time that the Executive realised that there is a serious problem in our prison establishments. I have absolutely no doubt that cutbacks and rock-bottom staff morale are affecting the balance of power in our prisons. I cannot emphasise more strongly how low that staff morale is. It was bad enough under the Tories, but what kept staff going then was the expectation that an incoming Labour Government would be bound to make a difference. It certainly has—for the worse. If prison staff were sadly disillusioned in 1997, they have become even more so since 1999. The pressures under which prison officers must work are massive and the strains on the Prison Service are not conducive to a penal system that works at rehabilitating offenders to ensure that, when they walk through the prison gates, they do not reoffend.  As if it were not bad enough that morale in the Prison Service has collapsed almost totally under the new Labour-Liberal Democrat dispensation, the fiscal service is now in uproar, with threats of strike. It says a great deal for the management of our justice system that two key components of it—prison staff and prosecutors—have reached the point where the only option they feel they have left is to threaten strike action. If either or both took such action, there would be chaos, but the Administration cannot say that it has not been warned. There is not enough time for me to deal with other concerns. I conclude by saying that instead of bringing such pointless and self-congratulatory motions to the chamber, the Executive would have done a greater service to our justice system, and to everybody who works in it, if it had used some of its time to debate the very real problems that continue to exist within the system. I move amendment S1M-1807.1, to leave out from "the record" to end and insert: ", in considering the reduction in the overall numbers of police officers in Scotland since Labour came to power in the UK, (a) the overall increase in both the levels of crime and the fear of crime in that same period, (b) the serious public concerns about the levels of youth offending and (c) the low morale in both the Scottish Prison Service and in the Procurator Fiscals' Service; further notes that the commitment to be tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime has been a singular failure, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to bring forward a coherent programme which will both tackle the major problems currently being experienced across the Scottish criminal justice system and deliver a safer Scotland."

Neither the SNP leader nor the deputy leader was squirming at all when Kenny MacAskill was speaking. We have been inundated by the concerns of our constituents who work in the tourist industry. They are very worried about what the future holds for them. We are both well aware that tourism makes the biggest contribution to the economy of Perthshire. We represent constituencies that are directly affected by the effect of foot-and-mouth on tourism, although there is luckily no foot-and-mouth disease in them so far. I am surprised to hear members claim that such people are somehow not affected by foot-and-mouth disease. The tourism industry has already had a hard time in Scotland because of high fuel prices and the strong pound. The latest blow will make a lot of businesses go under completely. It is made even worse by the fact that many of the small operators in the tourism industry are farmers who have diversified in an attempt to supplement their incomes. They now face a double whammy. Perth and Kinross Council's local economic development department estimates that the local authority area is losing around £1 million per week in the crisis. The crisis has already been going on for something like five weeks. Businesses are running 20 to 50 per cent below what they expect for this time of year and bookings for July and August are being cancelled. The United Auctions mart in Perth has earned next to nothing for five weeks and 81 people have been laid off. From the start of the outbreak until 23 March, the visitor centre at that mart has received 3,500 fewer visitors compared to the same time last year. With no one coming to market, pubs and hotels are losing valuable non-tourist business. Will they be helped? All ends of the market are suffering. The Baincroft Bunkhouse in Crieff has reservations for 25 bed nights for March this year compared to 349 in March last year. That is catastrophic for such businesses. The Crieff Hydro Hotel is suffering huge losses, with empty rooms, cancelled bookings and the familiar story of the phone not ringing. That represents an expected loss of £70,000 in March alone. Gleneagles Hotel has already had cancellations of more than 200 bookings from the United States. Gleneagles Hotel and Crieff Hydro will, as far as I can see, not be helped by the package that is to be put in place. The folk at Gleneagles and Crieff Hydro who lose their jobs will be as hard hit as anyone else who loses their job in this crisis, and will need help. The problem all along has been a lack of consistent, accurate information. That cannot be  emphasised more. Without exception, people have told me—whether they are farmers or people working in the tourism industry—that what is desperately needed is a single source of information, so that people know what is happening. I will give a small but graphic example. The Perthshire Advertiser website announces no restrictions, for example, on the Knock of Crieff, which is one of the most popular walks in the area. However, the printed version of the newspaper says that the decision about the Knock has been put on ice. If people check with Crieff tourist office, they discover that none of the walks is reopening. That is a difficulty, because there are parts of the country where, in truth, much of what attracts tourists is not open and is not going to be open in the foreseeable future. That is what tourists will have to be told if they phone the Crieff tourist office. There is no way round that. There will still be a knock-on effect. One of the major criticisms of the handling of the situation so far is that of the lack of clarity about what should and should not be closed, and about what visitors can and cannot do. As far as I have heard, nothing in today's announcement will change that. The SNP's plan of action was published last week. The Executive desperately needs to get a real grip of the tourism industry and provide a single, authoritative clearing house for information. Most of all, it needs to put in place the extensive financial help that is urgently needed immediately. That must be expedited, because the losses are occurring right now, and need to be offset right now.

Will the member give way?

Will Phil Gallie give way?

I thank the member for giving way; as always, I listen to his comments with interest. However, is he talking about the same European convention that the rest of us are talking about, which I believe was ratified by Winston Churchill in 1951?

I again welcome the concept of the European convention on human rights and, by extension, the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill, which will ensure that the people of Scotland benefit from participation in the convention. There is a temptation to think that the measures in the bill have been forced on the Scottish legal system, but a great deal of what is proposed enhances our system and should probably have been introduced even if we had not had the impetus provided by the need to comply with the ECHR. To me, that underlines the importance of the fact that we signed up to the ECHR in the first place. Last March, out of interest, I asked the Crown Office how many devolution issues had been raised in the Scottish courts since the incorporation of the European convention. Although it took until 9 January this year to get a reply, which might be some kind of record, it turned out that between 20 May 1999 and 29 October 2000 just under 1,000 such issues had been raised. Eighty-five per cent of cases raised matters under article 6 of the convention, which deals with the requirements for independence and impartiality, particularly in our justice system. Only 37 cases against the Crown were successful. We should regard that as a good result for the Scottish justice system, which has shown itself to be robust. Given that our justice system  derives from principles that were laid down centuries ago, we should be extremely proud that it stands up to 21 st century scrutiny from a human rights perspective. I am sure that we have not exhausted the changes that are likely to be required to be made—for example, there is widespread agreement that the age of criminal responsibility is likely to require examination—but no doubt other changes will surface in more appropriate legislation. The Justice 1 Committee should be commended on the clarity of its report. I commend my successor as convener on keeping up the good work of the committee. I have no doubt that those who came to the bill without much prior knowledge of the issues will have had no difficulty in getting to grips with its general thrust and the justification for the proposed changes. I want to consider some of the key areas briefly in turn, although I will not try to be exhaustive. On existing prisoners and the setting of the punishment part of the sentence, I note that the minister has claimed that judges are better placed than ministers to decide how long a prisoner should serve as a punishment and a deterrent. That is certainly true. Having himself been an Opposition justice spokesperson in the past, the minister will understand that I regularly get phone calls from journalists asking me to comment on one court case or another in which the sentence, in the journalist's view, has been particularly lenient—or particularly harsh, although that is usually the case in only a minority of calls.

I am not sure what point Mr Gallie is making. A judge sets the punishment part of the sentence and the Parole Board for Scotland will consider a potential release date, but the period served cannot be less than the punishment part of the sentence. I am always loth to comment on particular cases. My view is that the judge was there listening to the evidence and I was not, and neither was the Minister for Justice or anyone else who gets such phone calls. The Faculty of Advocates and the Law Society of Scotland have taken different approaches to the lack of opportunity for parole before the expiry of the punishment period. The faculty takes the view that, under the bill, instead of being faced with hopeless uncertainty, prisoners will be faced with hopeless certainty. The Law Society of Scotland prefers to focus on the fact that, hopeless or not, prisoners will have greater certainty about their  eventual release date. There is merit in both points of view and the issue would benefit from further investigation. What was more interesting when the implications of the bill dawned on the press was the great fuss about what the proposals might mean for existing life prisoners. I recall some typically sensational headlines about how up to 500 lifers could be released. We can all be assured that that will not happen but I am concerned about the fact that, because all those cases will have to be reviewed, there is a huge potential problem in terms of court timetabling and the impact that the added work load will have on our justice system. Our courts and the Crown Office are already under massive strain. The minister must address the resource implications, even if those are time-limited—the end point will be when all the reviews are done. While I am on the subject of sentencing, let me say that, whether we like it or not, the public have concerns about consistency. I plead for consideration to be given to the creation of some form of national sentencing review commission, which would be an independent advisory panel to provide support, guidance and information to judges. Such a panel exists in England and Wales and, although we may not want to copy exactly the remit and membership of the panel that operates down south, we should recognise that it has an important function and includes lay membership, which would be welcomed in Scotland.

There are concerns about gender issues in sentencing, as there have been for a long time. Such a panel would be useful as a sounding board that would be able to reflect more generally society's feelings about what may or may not be considered to be appropriate at a particular time. That would not bind the hands of judges and sheriffs, but it might give them more information and a greater understanding of where society is coming from on such issues. In the main, the proposals on the Parole Board for Scotland are uncontroversial. There is only one issue that needs to be clarified—the make-up of the tribunal to decide on the removal of Parole Board members. The argument centres on whether one of the tribunal members should specifically not be legally qualified. I appreciate the minister's apparent reluctance to insist on the requirement for one non-legally qualified member of the tribunal, and I share his puzzlement that lawyers do not seem to be highly regarded in society. However, for the sake of public  perception, he may wish to examine that issue more closely.

I thank the minister for that clarification. I had not picked up that detail from his speech. I now consider all the Parole Board issues to be fairly non-controversial. The review of the position of convicted criminals raises the question of legal representation and how it is to be funded. I do not think that the minister dealt with that in his speech, but I am not entirely sure. I have questioned the abuse of the legal aid system by some prisoners who sued the Scottish Executive on what seemed to be spurious grounds, but this is a different matter. The Justice 1 Committee's report makes it clear that the Scottish Legal Aid Board and the Executive have not yet reached consensus on the issue. The question must be resolved as soon as possible and before those cases start to head towards the courts; if it is not, we will be in a mess and I do not want us to be caught on the hop again, unprepared for what might be considered a foreseeable eventuality. I opposed the introduction of fixed fees and I remain convinced that they were the wrong way of tackling the legal aid bill. The bottom line should be that the legal aid system ensures a level playing field in the representation that is available to all. I am extremely concerned that the changes have introduced some serious inequalities into the system. The implementation of the convention will bring a positive benefit in the relaxation of the fixed-fees system to allow for exceptional cases, but there is uncertainty and confusion about the practicalities of the change. I hope that the minister will elucidate what progress has been made on what the Justice 1 Committee describes as unresolved issues. Civil legal aid has long been the poor relation in the legal aid system, so I concur with the concerns that the Justice 1 Committee expresses in paragraphs 77 and 78 of its report on the Executive's failure to provide a list of the tribunals or other bodies that will be considered for legal aid. The Executive could not even define the criteria to be used to define what would be exceptional; it could provide only a list of likely criteria. We need to know what those criteria will be. We need that information before stage 2, not at stage 3 as the minister suggested. Otherwise—unfortunately for the minister—more than just the Faculty of Advocates may smell a rat. The sooner that we receive that information, the better. Stage 3 is way too late.  As for the use of SLAB solicitors, I ask only whether it is the intention that SLAB should use in-house solicitors for the situations that are envisaged in paragraphs 82 and 83 of the committee's report. I have no difficulty with SLAB's instructing solicitors, but I would be concerned if it began to use in-house solicitors, because that would raise more long-term issues than have been canvassed at stage 1. I will deal now with the vexed question of remedial orders. There is concern about the proposal to confer a new power on Scottish ministers to make remedial orders and about the consequential lack of opportunity to amend the orders. Many will consider that a means for the Executive to bypass Parliament. In recent days, we have seen how people need little encouragement to think that that is happening. Professor Gane of the University of Aberdeen hit the nail on the head when he said to the Justice 1 Committee that "just because something needs ... done quickly does not mean that the Executive will necessarily get it right with its proposed solution."—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee , 14 February 2001; c 2154.] I note that the Executive could not easily suggest an example of how the provision might have been used in the past. It is all very well for the Minister for Justice to assure us that the powers would be used only in extreme or compelling circumstances, but if he cannot give examples of when they might have been used in the past, it is difficult for Parliament to know what he means by that. In the Parliament's short history, I can think of two examples that might have fallen into that category. The first was the Mental Health (Public Safety and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill—the so-called Ruddle bill—which went through Parliament in six days. The second was the Bail, Judicial Appointments etc (Scotland) Bill, which was also passed quickly. It is significant that the Executive had to take on board changes to that bill when its original proposals did not comply with the ECHR. Both those bills passed full stages of the legislative procedures. One was passed in considerably less than 60 days. The other was also passed in less than 60 days, which is the period for which the orders would have to be laid before they could be passed. Therefore, I am not sure why we cannot rely on the existing standing orders for some of the apparently compelling cases. An e-mail, which arrived this morning but which I have not had time to look at properly, suggests a way around the perceived dilemma through the use of the existing standing orders. I note that the Subordinate Legislation Committee has also expressed concerns about the proposal. Professor Gane put the problem  succinctly. He said: "Using special procedures to remedy demonstrated conflicts between legislation and Convention rights is one thing ... but to use such powers in respect of possible conflict is quite another." I heard the minister's comments, but he has still not given us any examples by which we might judge the proposal. We could still face a situation in which regulations cannot be amended. The length of time that regulations would lie before Parliament suggests to me that we should revert to the procedures that are already available to us. Let me turn to a wider matter. For me, all these concerns underline the need for a Scottish human rights commission to advise the Parliament and the Executive, to issue guidance and to promote good practice. We have discussed a human rights commission before. It is not some strange, exotic beast. Many such commissions already exist—there is one in Northern Ireland—and the United Nations strongly endorses them. The SNP wants a commission that would fulfil a wide range of functions. It should promote good practice in government and among public authorities. It should promote greater access to justice and advise on wider international human rights obligations. The commission should not only provide advice to the Executive, Parliament and other public bodies, but foster a wider awareness of human rights principles among the public. Let me give an example of what a commission could deal with. A Crown Office human rights working group was set up in 1998. The Crown Office is greatly satisfied with that, because it is now in a better position than the defence in relation to human rights issues—presumably because it is rather better prepared. We are entitled to be concerned about how equitable that is. Public money is being spent on only one side of the equation. Let us be clear—that is what has been happening until now. Any human rights commission should also provide a scrutinising function for draft legislation and policy. It is most frustrating for MSPs to be routinely refused detailed information about Executive advice on ECHR issues. I know that the Executive, in the person of the Minister for Justice, has not ruled out setting up a Scottish human rights commission, but neither has the minister committed himself to the principle. I wish that he would do so and I hope that he does so today. I also know that we are to have consultation that will include a "should we or shouldn't we" question and that the consultation will also cover the detail of what a commission might look like, if we were to go down that road. However, I note that the minister did not want to be pressed on the time scale when he was before  the committee last month. I press him to give one now. We are four weeks down the line and there is as yet no word of when the consultation might come about. I would very much appreciate some comment on that when the deputy minister winds up. He should at least declare for a commission in principle, even if he remains uncertain about the detail. The European convention on human rights is important for the people of Scotland. It is important not only for public bodies, such as the Parliament and local authorities, but for individuals. I respectfully hope that the minister will answer the specific questions that have been posed today, notwithstanding our general agreement to the bill.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Is it correct for the First Minister to mislead Parliament in that way when the only place in Scotland where the Tories are in power is on Perth and Kinross Council, where they are in formal coalition with the Labour party?

I listened with interest to the Minister for Justice's promise that the ministerial override would be an incredibly rare event. I am reminded of Donald Dewar's remarks during the passing of the Scotland Bill that Westminster legislating on devolved affairs would be an incredibly rare event. It is has turned out to be an incredibly frequent event, the consequences of which the Parliament has to deal with. I hope that the Minister for Justice's comment today does not turn out to have exactly the same meaning as Donald Dewar's  comment all those years ago. For a long time, the SNP has been deeply committed to the concept of freedom of information. It has certainly been part of the party's policy profile for more decades than I have been a member. In 1999, it was one of our manifesto commitments. We pledged to introduce a freedom of information act to ensure that all citizens have the same right of access to information as the decision makers. For that reason, the SNP broadly welcomed the Executive's announcement that it would introduce a freedom of information act. I suppose that I should not have been too surprised, given that the Minister for Justice is Jim Wallace. I know that he has had a long-term, personal commitment to legislation on freedom of information. I understand that, on his election as a Westminster MP 16 years ago, he was asked the automatic first question that every new MP is asked—which private member's bill he would like to promote—to which he replied, unhesitatingly, that he would like to promote a freedom of information bill. I am afraid that I have not checked Hansard, but I presume that he never got lucky in the ballot for private members' bills. However, Mr Wallace got lucky, although he may not always have felt so, when he became a power broker in the negotiations to form the Scottish Executive. As a result, he found that an opportunity to introduce a freedom of information bill was available to him at last. I welcome the publication of legislation, although that is not what is before us today, despite what some might wish us to think. The Liberal Democrats may have been a little premature with their self-congratulations. Their draft UK manifesto and the Scottish Liberal Democrat website both trumpet the introduction of freedom of legislation. Indeed, the main masthead of the website carried for a while a scrolling banner that read: "After only one year, Scottish Liberal Democrats have made a difference, delivering on our promises—a far-reaching freedom of information bill". Two years down the road, we now have a draft bill. I noticed with some amusement that the website has been changed to read that the Scottish Liberal Democrats have "set in train a rigorous freedom of information regime". I am glad that the Scottish Liberal Democrats made that clear, because the truth is that we do not yet have a freedom of information bill and we have not yet progressed beyond the announcement of consultation on draft legislation, which I hope is not the Lib Dems' definition of delivery. If it is, I hope that they never take charge of the postal service. Joking aside, I welcome the fact that the draft Scottish bill is stronger in three key areas than the  UK Freedom of Information Act 2000. Although that act reached the statute book in November, it will not begin to come into force until May 2002. I suppose that it was thought to be safer to get the general election out of the way before opening up files that might cause embarrassment. The draft Scottish bill is stronger, as the minister outlined. The test for prevention of disclosure is stronger, with a "substantial prejudice" test for Scotland in comparison with the simple prejudice test for the UK. The powers of the Scottish information commissioner, who will be able to order the release of information, rather than merely to recommend its release, are also stronger, and there is a wider extent of Government policy material that must be released. I sincerely hope that as the draft bill makes its passage through the parliamentary processes it will be amended to ensure even better access to information than is currently proposed rather than move towards the more restrictive UK model— which, in my more pessimistic moments, I believe to be the likely outcome. We should not become too complacent because, so far, the Scottish proposals look better than the UK proposals. For a start, some of the most headline-grabbing issues that the Parliament has dealt with have involved either information being unnecessarily withheld, resulting in a lack of scrutiny by Parliament, or disclosure of information being delayed for so long that that scrutiny was held up. The Chhokar case, the Carfin fiasco, lobbygate and the Holyrood building are all examples of issues where the withholding of information resulted in either lack of scrutiny or delay in scrutiny, which is just as important, by the Scottish Parliament. The real test is whether the draft bill would have made any difference to those rows. I am sure that colleagues will deal with specific areas in which the extent of access to information allowed by the draft bill is unsatisfactory. I will concentrate on a couple of areas from my own field of interest, taking as my first example the row surrounding the Chhokar family case. In a statement to the Parliament, the Lord Advocate acknowledged failings in the level of support and information provided during the case of the murder of Surjit Singh Chhokar. However, the veil of secrecy under which the Lord Advocate acknowledged he operates is not going to be lifted from the workings of the Crown Office. Private prisons is another example, and I have found it greatly and consistently annoying that those involved in the running of a private prison are able to refuse to disclose detailed information about costs on what I believe to be the questionable ground of commercial confidentiality. The draft bill will do nothing to bring the accountability of those  who run a private prison up to the same level of our other prisons. The Chhokar case points to one of the most disappointing omissions from the draft bill—the Crown Office. As a lawyer, I understand some of the care that must be taken in relation to what can and what cannot be disclosed about criminal allegations, but society is simply no longer prepared to accept the bland refusal to disclose any information that greets most requests for information to the Crown Office or the procurator fiscal service. Only this week, MSPs will have received details from yet another family—the Cawley family from Giffnock—which is just as puzzled and frustrated by the way in which the Crown Office handled the murder of Christopher Cawley on 8 September last year as was the Chhokar family by the way in which Surjit's murder has been dealt with. Sadly, all MSPs will have become familiar with the other families and victims who are equally nonplussed at decisions taken in secret that often are not communicated to them and about which they feel they have every right to know more. We have let down all those people by not even attempting to widen freedom of information in that area. I will refer briefly to other class-based exemptions. For example, there is a broad exemption for confidentiality. I mentioned commercial confidentiality in relation to private prisons, but there is a broad exemption that would allow regulated companies or lobbyists to avoid scrutiny merely by agreeing with authorities that information should be kept secret. We must examine that proposal much more closely. As I understand the draft bill, there is a proposal to allow restrictions on disclosure in existing or future legislation to take priority over the provisions of any freedom of information bill. One of the briefings that we received said that there are about 250 statutory restrictions on disclosure in UK legislation. I wonder whether existing disclosure bans in specific pieces of legislation will be examined, either with a view to repealing those bans or to allow freedom of information legislation to override them. I also notice that, unfortunately, the Secretary of State for Scotland and the Scotland Office will come under the less strict UK regime, rather than the Scottish regime. That means that the ministers in the Scotland Office, whose predecessors have already insulted the people of Scotland by refusing to appear before committees of the Scottish Parliament and whose department has a ballooning budget, a shrinking remit and a political role will be subject to the weaker test for disclosure of information that is in the UK Freedom of Information Act 2000.  While the draft Scottish bill may well be an improvement on the UK act on a number of levels, I am afraid that in one important area it is not only worse than the UK act but will act as a deterrent to inquiry, denying access to information to those who cannot afford it. I refer, of course, to the proposed system of charging for information. We are in the process of creating a freedom of information regime in which the ability to gain access to information is determined by the size of a requester's bank balance. To add insult to injury, organisations can use cost as a reason for refusing requests. Under the draft bill, if the cost of locating the information does not exceed £100, there will be no charge; but if the cost is more than £100, the person making the request will be asked to pay the excess. If the cost is more than £500, the person making the request may not get the information at all. What on earth is that about? By contrast, the regulations on fees made under the UK legislation specify that up to 10 per cent of the reasonable, marginal costs of complying with the request may be charged. That is a maximum figure and there is no requirement on an authority to use that formula or to impose any charge at all. In conclusion, the draft bill is, in theory, marginally better than the Westminster regime but it is unlikely that it would have affected any of the major difficulties with disclosure that the Parliament has already experienced and disclosure will cost the curious Scot more than the curious Englishman will be charged for his information. That is not good enough and it is why the SNP's welcome for the draft bill is muted. I hope that, over the next few months, the Minister for Justice can be prevailed upon to turn the draft bill into something more like the bill that I suspect he would have introduced had he been lucky in the ballot for private members' bills all those years ago. I move amendment S1M-1750.1, to insert at end: "but nevertheless regrets: (i) the proposed high and potentially prohibitive cost of applications; (ii) the extent and nature of the exemptions, in particular the exemptions afforded to the Crown Office, and (iii) that independent decisions by the Information Commissioner may be vetoed by the First Minister, and further expresses its concern that the passing of a Freedom of Information Bill in the terms proposed by the Executive would make little difference to the culture of secrecy which continues to pervade the governance of Scotland."

Does the minister accept that, whatever the process of consultation, the people of Perthshire, Angus and the Mearns have expressed a consistent, sustained view that appears not to have been taken on board at any time by those who are conducting the review and producing the report? The issue is the extent to which the consultation is real rather than apparent. It can be real consultation only if the people who are making their views known have some confidence that those views are genuinely being taken on board. The problem is that people in Tayside simply do not believe that their views are being taken on board.

I am pleased to have this debate this evening, but I am not quite so pleased to see that the Minister for Health and Community Care is not in the chamber. Unfortunately, it has been par for the course over the past 18 months to two years that the Minister for Health and Community Care has not wanted to address any of the concerns and problems of the people of Tayside about what is happening in the national health service there. Uncertainty has been the watchword for the health service in Tayside over the past few years. The acute services review has caused a great deal of anxiety and insecurity among patients, practitioners and the general public alike. The final report from the co-chairs of the review, Professor David Rowley and Dr Andrew Russell, has now been published—it is a weighty tome, as members will see. Although there is still to be a three-month period of formal public consultation before the final decision is officially reached, the people of Tayside believe that the final decision was reached some time ago. They believe that the consultation to come will be a cosmetic exercise and that the entire process has been a sham and a farce. The proposals that are of particular concern to me and the people of Perth are the plans to remove consultant-led maternity provision and 24-hour children's services from Perth royal infirmary and to centralise them in Ninewells hospital in Dundee. I have colleagues who have particular concerns about the implications of the review for health services in Angus and Dundee, where the concern is that Ninewells will become overburdened. My colleague Andrew Welsh very much hoped to be in Parliament this evening; unfortunately, Heathrow is fog-bound and he has  been unable to get back to Scotland in time. He has been working hard in his part of Tayside to further the interests of his constituents. My main concern is, of course, Perth. Taking maternity and children's services away from Perth royal infirmary is akin to ripping the heart out of the hospital. There have been warnings over the past few months that a loss of paediatric cover would pose a threat to the accident and emergency department. That possibility has not even been addressed by the report. Over the past year or two, there has been a vigorous public debate in Perthshire; both the public and the professionals have participated fully in that debate. The clear perception all along has been that no one involved in the review has listened to anything that has been said. There is now some cynicism in the public's response to any announcement on the health service in Tayside. The public think that the aims of the review and the charade of the consultation process that has been associated with it have been cost driven, that its management has been publicity driven and that its direction has been politically driven. Three years ago, Tayside Health Board assured me that there were no plans to close the children's ward at PRI. Since then, a petition to oppose any reduction in children's services at PRI has received 10,000 signatures, and two public meetings have been held, each of which was attended by more than 1,000 people. Five thousand people demonstrated in the streets of Perth and hundreds marched up the Mound to demonstrate at the Parliament on St Andrew's day, delivering more than 20,000 postcards to the Minister for Health and Community Care—who, unfortunately, did not see fit to meet the people who had come here. Despite all that, Professor Rowley still proposes centralisation. He dismisses the thousands of genuine expressions of concern as the work of a "vociferous minority" and the public concern as "emotionally held". Of the hundreds of communications to me about the threat to PRI, not one has supported any of the frequently leaked proposals that have characterised the process. Vociferous the representatives of the Hands Off PRI campaign may be—and I welcome them to the Parliament, particularly the organisers Kate Gillanders and Julie Fielding—but a minority they are not. They speak for Perthshire. It is Professor Rowley who is not listening. In an injured response to the criticism, Professor Rowley insisted that he was "presenting a range of options". However, the truth lies in phrases in the report,  such as "it is difficult to come to a conclusion other than that a single service is the only viable strategic option", which he said of paediatric services, or "it is difficult to come to any logical conclusion other than that a single site model for maternity services is appropriate." In the face of such comments, Professor Rowley continues to insist that, somehow, a range of options will be proffered to the public. The final report paid no attention to the important issues of distance and transport links. People who face an extra 20-odd miles of travel along the notorious A90 Perth to Dundee road to give birth, attend clinics or visit loved ones have raised those issues time and again. The conclusion of most is that the process has been a sham. Those who are responsible for the review seem thirled to a centralist agenda. They have come up with a solution that threatens to set area against area and will be no good for any part of Tayside. I want the Health and Community Care Committee to set up an inquiry into the review process. Apart from ignoring public opinion, the process has now been responsible for destroying public confidence in the national health service in Tayside. That matter should be of concern to every member. Susan Deacon has been conspicuous by her absence here today and in Tayside throughout the past two years, apart from one interview with Radio Tay, in which she committed a major gaffe. She had to admit her ignorance of the fact that waiting lists in Tayside soared by 47.3 per cent from September 1999 to September 2000. Acute services reviews are causing problems in places other than Tayside and similar stories are emerging around the country. Public confidence in the consultation process of each review is at rock bottom, but the minister refuses to take any responsibility. She refused my invitations to come to Perth to hear what the public have to say. She refused to meet the campaigners when they came to Parliament. She has shrugged her shoulders and said that the decision is not up to her. She even chooses not to attend today's debate. I hope that members of the Health and Community Care Committee who have attended the debate—I see some of them here—will agree that somebody needs to get a grip and restore public confidence in the delivery of health services in Tayside and throughout the country. They can play a part in that by undertaking an inquiry that will actually listen to the views and evidence put forward by public and professionals—views and evidence that, so far, have been summarily ignored by the acute services review in Tayside.

I make a special tribute to the courage and persistence of all the bereaved families who, throughout the past 12 years, have worked tirelessly. In no small part,  they have been part of the process of getting us to where we are today. I join in the tributes being made to all those involved in the trial, from the local police officers, who would, of course, have been among the first on the scene, right through to the members of the legal teams, a number of whom are known personally to me and all of whom have worked extremely hard over a very long period. I know that the Parliament will agree with all the tributes that have been made and with me when I say that this trial has shown the Scottish justice system to be robust and effective in the eyes of the world. A small jurisdiction it may be, but it can certainly stand proud in the international community. Despite the overwhelming international publicity and pressure, the three judges have steadfastly maintained their independence and have abided by the fundamental principle of our law, that it is the task of the prosecution to prove guilt, not the task of the accused to prove innocence. Sometimes, that can make things difficult in the eyes of the public, but it is extremely important. I have two questions. First, I add my voice to the concern expressed by the local member that we do not close our minds to the idea of an inquiry in the future. I would like at least to hear from the Lord Advocate that, should there be an inquiry, he will pledge his full support and will indicate his intention to co-operate fully. That should be put on the record. Other questions need to be answered that cannot be answered in the context of a criminal trial. Secondly, I was interested in the Lord Advocate's comments about the international criminal court. Does he agree that any such court would have to reassure the international community, as it was reassured in the Lockerbie trial, of its independence from political pressure, particularly the independence of its judges? Such a court would also have to establish rigorous rules of evidence that would be acceptable right across the board, which is something that might be more difficult in the doing than it is in the saying. I would appreciate the Lord Advocate's comments on how, from the Scottish perspective, some of that could be built into any future international criminal court.

Will the minister accept that the real difficulty arises in the local authority funding decision-making process? We have heard plenty of examples of parts of the country where rape crisis centres and Women's Aid refuges have come under severe threat—even threat of closure—because of local decisions. That needs to be addressed as much as the national funding.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am not sure whether this is a point of order as defined in standing orders, but the temperature in the chamber this afternoon has been dropping as the hours go by, to the point that it has become uncomfortable. I am well aware that that might be partly a function of the lack of bodies for the debate this afternoon, but could you check the situation, because it has been appalling?

Let me make it clear at the outset that the Scottish National Party supports the broad thrust of the document and the action plan that accompanies it. It is important that the Parliament puts on record its recognition of the neglect that victims have suffered within the Scottish criminal justice system over many years, decades and, perhaps, even centuries, although—luckily for us—our recollection does not go back quite that far. However, the publication of the document should not only be about self-congratulation; it is equally important that we lay down a marker for the future. The action plan should be only a starting point for further improvement and there is no doubt that we need to improve. We must, for example, improve the flow of information that is made available to victims and we must make that information available in a way that is readily understood. For those of us who have worked within the system in the past—that includes the minister and me—there is a tendency to forget that what seems self-evident to us is not necessarily so self-evident to those who are not familiar with the system. Any such provision of information must mean the taking into account of any cultural and linguistic differences that might exist—a lesson that I am sure has been learned from the Chhokar case. The publication of the document has given the minister the opportunity to reannounce a list of projects of which members are, perhaps, already aware. However, it has to be said that the plan is a little light on the detail about financial support. Real financial support will be essential for the many and varied voluntary organisations on which the delivery of the action plan depends. For a number of years, I have been concerned at the inconsistency of provision throughout the country. There is inconsistency of approach and inconsistency in funding. Rape crisis centres and women's refuges in particular have faced a constant struggle to survive, as local authorities—which are themselves strapped for cash—have slashed budgets for outside bodies. That is a difficult matter for us to control and to take cognisance of, but it results in a patchwork of provision throughout Scotland, which can be to the great detriment of victims in many parts of the country. If organisations are to be expected to play an important part in the delivery of a national strategy—such as that which is anticipated by the action plan—we must examine closely the  possibility of national core funding to enable them to do so consistently. That will allow them to avoid the vagaries of local decision making and it will ensure that we bring about an end to the problem of postcode provision. The SNP is happy to see the victims steering group being given the higher status for which Victim Support Scotland has been campaigning. However, the action plan is unclear about the precise nature of that higher status. A number of questions arise. How often will the victims steering group meet? What influence or involvement will victims organisations have on the group and what powers will the group have—other than by way of an annual report—to hold agencies to account? I hope that the minister will address those questions in his closing remarks. The victims steering group is an extremely important vehicle for enabling victims organisations to have input into the development of the process that is being started here, but it is essential that that vehicle is allowed to grow. It must be said that Victim Support Scotland is not the only victims organisation in the country. I was concerned to learn, for example, that when it was contacted on Monday, Scottish Women's Aid knew nothing about the action plan. Most media attention for the action plan is directed at the proposal to pilot the use of victims' statements about the effect that crimes have had on them. I suspect that that will—understandably—be the continued focus of media attention. There are merits in victim impact statements, although I would have liked more information about how they work in other countries. However, I would like to sound a note of caution. For a start, it is unclear from the action plan—it might be cleared up by the minister in his closing remarks—whether it is intended that those statements will be taken prior to conviction or prior to sentencing. If that is to happen prior to conviction, how early in the process will it happen? Perhaps the minister will clarify that at the end of the debate. There are different views on victim impact statements, even among victim organisations. I remember—from evidence that was heard in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee—that, while Victim Support Scotland was in favour of a pilot scheme, Rape Crisis had concerns, especially if such statements would be taken very early in the process. It should be noted that what was envisaged by Victim Support Scotland was a system whereby the statement would not be made by the victim, but by "a properly trained police officer" who would  "not simply repeat what the victim says in court."—[ Official Report , Justice and Home Affairs Committee , 22 May 2000; c 1294.] That is a quote from evidence that was given at that time. I would like to hear more about that. My main concern, which is a reflection of the concerns that were expressed by the Scottish Rape Crisis Network, is that the way in which the victim has apparently been affected by the experience could end up influencing conviction or sentencing in the wrong way. One person might, understandably, be very emotional and still visibly shaken by their ordeal a considerable number of months after it happened, while another might appear to be quite unaffected, and be dealing with the emotional impact very differently. Sandy Brindley of the Rape Crisis Network highlighted clearly the difficulty in evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on 30 May, when she warned of the danger of introducing what she called "a hierarchy of suffering"—something that is already an issue with Criminal Injuries Compensation Board awards. I know that there is concern that that sort of difference in response also has an effect in the early stages of cases—especially rape cases—when police officers are forming their opinions on the merits of a complaint. That is not merely an academic point. Members may recall the terrible rape and armed robbery case in 1987 that became known as the Ealing vicarage case. The judge's comment was that, as the trauma that was suffered by the rape victim was "not so great", he would be lenient with the convicted rapist. The judge apologised in 1993, but I am not sure that that apology helped matters. What he meant to say—apparently—was that the victim's trauma was "not so great" because she had the support of a good family. That highlights the danger of allowing the apparent emotional impact of crime to influence too strongly the sentencing and prosecution procedure. People do not respond, express their emotions or present themselves in the same way, although the impact of a crime might be just as great. None of that is to say that victims' impact statements should not be introduced, but they must be piloted carefully, with those concerns borne in mind. We cannot allow a new inconsistency to creep into our sentencing, which is already being criticised from sheriffdom to sheriffdom because of inconsistencies. Will there be a mechanism for ensuring that that cannot happen? If so, what will it be? I hope that the minister will address those points in his summing up and confirm that the action plan is not the end of the story, but the beginning. I move amendment S1M-1556.1, to leave out from "commends" to end and insert:  "recognises the long-standing neglect of victims within the Scottish criminal justice system which the strategy seeks to address, in particular the need for better support and involvement of victims throughout the criminal justice process, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to give higher status to the Victim Steering Group and ensure that sufficient resources are in place for the successful implementation of the Strategy."

As I have done before during Sewel motion debates, I want to place on record—yet again—my concern at the frequency with which that mechanism is being employed in the Parliament. I presume that it was to reinforce the doctrine of Westminster parliamentary sovereignty, as opposed to the  sovereignty of the people, that Westminster made sure that the Scotland Bill contained a catch-all clause allowing Westminster to go on legislating for Scotland, even on devolved matters. The power was supposed to be used only rarely, as was recognised by the late Donald Dewar when he said: "there is a possibility, in theory, of the United Kingdom Parliament legislating across those areas, but it is not one which we anticipate or expect."—[ Official Report , House of Commons, 28 January 1998; Vol 305, c 402-03.] What might have been more difficult to anticipate was the readiness of the Executive to allow Westminster to use that power so regularly. In previous debates on specific topics, I have conceded that there might be some practical expediency in using Sewel motions from time to time. However, the Parliament should not be about practical expediency only. I am not convinced of a pressing need for the issue to be dealt with in that way. After all, I understand that we are scheduled to have an international criminal court bill introduced in the Parliament in April. The SNP is more than happy to endorse the international criminal court itself. However, we could find ourselves in a situation in which the Parliament will, properly, legislate in areas that concern it and are to do with the court—with the important scrutiny that stage 1 allows—but, for other purposes that are equally within the competence of the Parliament, it will not legislate. Why not? I do not believe that the justification as set out in the Executive's memorandum, or as set out today by the minister, is sufficient. I have one reason for saying that: the operation of international criminal court orders, judgments, warrants and requests in Scotland is a very important matter. Why should that not be subject to the scrutiny of the Parliament as well as anywhere else in the UK? Normally, when these motions come to a vote, the SNP allows them to go through. However, I am reserving judgment on this one until I have heard all the contributions. It seems extraordinary that, notwithstanding the separate Scottish legislation that is planned, and which we will support, we are proceeding in this fashion. One day, I hope that the Executive—or the Government or whatever—will come to its senses and cease to use this procedural device, which was never meant to be anything other than a rarity. This is Scotland's Parliament; let Scotland's Parliament legislate.

I wish to withdraw the amendment.  Amendment, by agreement, withdrawn.

When reading such a motion, I find it a little difficult to know whether I can endorse something of which I have absolutely no knowledge. I wonder whether the matter should have been tackled by way of a ministerial statement, with a subsequent debate a week later. From the wording of the amendments, both Opposition parties have had some difficulty with the motion, which is perhaps vague to the point of pointlessness. There can be no doubt that the justice system has dismally failed victims of these crimes. As this is a very important area of our current law, it would have been helpful if we had had some advance indication of exactly what was being proposed. Thus far, our justice system has largely been unable to rise to the challenge; however, there is absolutely no reason why that should have been the case. The truth is that existing common law, particularly through the use of breach of the peace, could—if the will were there—deal effectively with stalking and harassment cases. I agree with the minister that the danger of trying to introduce an apparently new statutory offence lies in the difficulty of definition and the possibility that, right from the start, the definition would not be sufficient. Who, 10 years ago, would have thought of making specific provision to tackle cyberstalking? If we had enacted a specific crime at that time, we would already be having difficulties with it. Sentencing limits for breach of the peace are limited only by the court in which the case is heard. It is theoretically possible—although very unlikely to happen—that a life sentence could be handed down for a breach of the peace if the case  was taken to the High Court. Of course, that does not happen. That has been the problem in Scotland—there has been an inability to respond to the challenge using the mechanisms that we already have. Such mechanisms have rarely been used or have not been used effectively. Within the system there has been an apparent inability to charge properly and hand out appropriate sentences, which is unfortunate as the beauty of our common law—especially the charge of breach of the peace—is its very flexibility. Although the failure of the system to deal properly with these crimes has led me on a number of occasions to express the rather reluctant view that we may eventually have to create a new statutory offence, I remain convinced that we can get things right within the available framework. However, for that to happen, there must be a change in practice, which I suspect will require a major change in culture throughout the system. Without a change in that culture, any new statutory offence could be equally ineffective. This is not a new debate. In 1996, we had exactly the same debate in committee at Westminster, on the Crime and Punishment (Scotland) Bill. I raised an issue then that concerned me, which was touched on marginally by the minister, although he did not go into the issue. When someone is being sentenced following a conviction, the sheriff or magistrate has before him or her a schedule of previous convictions. Breaches of the peace are logged in the schedule as nothing more than that. The only guide to the seriousness of the offence is the sentence, which is likely to be minor—perhaps a fine. It is the previous convictions that the sheriff or magistrate will use as a guide when he or she decides what the sentence will be for the case before them. It is possible for fiscals or the advocate depute to ascertain in advance details of previous convictions, so that at least it can be known what comprised a specific offence, but that does not always happen. People often have long schedules of previous convictions, many of which will be for breach of the peace, but there is little indication therein that a pattern of behaviour might be developing. However, in cases of harassment, it is important to spot such a development. It did not seem such a radical step to start indicating on those schedules whether a breach of the peace was of such a nature. The former Scottish Office minister who was responsible for those matters, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, responded positively to the suggestion that breach of the peace should be so indicated on schedules of previous convictions. He subsequently confirmed that the Lord Advocate was actively  "considering the possibility with a view to implementing it." In his closing remarks in that debate, speaking of adding "harassment" in brackets after "breach of the peace", Lord James added that "there are precedents for that: 'theft' can have 'shoplifting' added in brackets after it, so that, if someone is continually involved in shoplifting, that will be picked up. It should be possible to note that harassment has been involved in breach of the peace offences so that appropriate disposals will be made in the event of a long history of offending."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 18 December 1996; Vol 287, c 974, 978.] Some weeks later, Lord James wrote to me saying that the changes that had been suggested would be implemented, and that breaches of the peace that fell into the category of harassment were to be recorded as such. That would have helped enormously. One of the difficulties with harassment is that a number of apparently trivial individual incidents can together cause the problem. A qualification of a breach of the peace would allow a judge to assess the crime more effectively when it came to sentencing. Tougher sentencing would also begin to reassure victims, as the public perception of breach of the peace is that it is a minor crime. Indeed, victim organisations have talked of the feeling of being let down when they discover that the offender has been charged only with breach of the peace. Such a change would have helped enormously. However, despite the fact that the commitment was made on record, as far as I am aware, that change was never implemented. Perhaps it fell down the back of a filing cabinet, following the change of Administration in May 1997. It would still be welcomed by the Scottish Police Federation and the Law Society of Scotland.

I am obliged to the minister for that useful information, which I have been unable to get from other sources. I have been advised widely that nobody who works in the courts is aware of that measure ever having been implemented. Clearly, if it has been used at all, it has been used only a handful of times. Nevertheless, it should be an important part of  assessing sentences. Sentencing is about punishment. That small change did not require legislation, nor do many such measures. It would make a difference if it was implemented properly and consistently. Sentencing is about punishment, but we must also consider protecting victims and potential victims. The minister talked about non-harassment orders, the existing provisions for which have also been raised with me, because of the difficulty that arises: there is no specific provision in the legislation for interim orders. I understand that a degree of creativity is going on in a number of courts in order to deal with that procedural difficulty, but the solution that one or two sheriffs appear to have arrived at might well be challengeable. I suggest that it would take a relatively simple legislative change to sort out that difficulty, and I hope that the minister will consider allowing interim non-harassment orders. As I have little time left, I will write more fully to the minister on that issue. I hope that the Minister for Justice will take to heart the lesson that he must not just identify from the consultation process the areas of practice that could be improved on—he must ensure that those improvements are implemented and he must monitor closely the progress that is made. Most of all, he must be absolutely insistent that the law that exists right now be used to its fullest extent. I move amendment S1M-1515.1, to leave out from "and endorses" to end.

Give him a job.

I am sorry to say that, in the circumstances, I regard the Lord Advocate's statement as wholly unsatisfactory, particularly after such a catastrophic sequence of events for the Crown Office. Does not the Lord Advocate recognise that the whole culture of the Crown Office has been under sustained criticism for a considerable time? All MSPs have experienced in their offices people's concerns about the workings of the fiscal offices and the Crown Office. People feel that there is a culture of secrecy and a tendency to refuse to explain or to justify, which has partly led to the situation that is before us. The Lord Advocate must answer two major questions in considerably greater detail. First, why must there be two separate inquiries? He must surely accept that any allegations of institutionalised racism should be dealt with as part and parcel of a single inquiry into the whole decision-making process of the Crown. Extracting that issue for a separate inquiry is likely to lead to the same concerns that have been expressed about the handling of the case. Secondly, the Lord Advocate claimed that there are several reasons why a public inquiry was inappropriate. Does not he understand that the Chhokar family are prepared to wait for as long as it takes to get justice? They are concerned to see that justice is done. In view of that fact, some of the Lord Advocate's reasons for not having a public inquiry are simply unjustified. Insistence on an inquiry that is anything other than public will do nothing to alleviate the concerns of either the Chhokar family or the wider public. I ask the Lord Advocate to explain in considerably more detail why he thinks that a public inquiry would halt any continuing anti-racist work in the justice system. As for his attempt to present such an inquiry as a "backward-looking exercise which would focus on events that took place 20 months to two years ago", what on earth will the inquiry be about if not those events? I believe that the Lord Advocate must answer those questions in considerably more detail to allay people's concerns—the inquiry should be  and must be in the public domain.

What about the Executive amendment?

That would not have happened in my day.

I hope that none of your comments affects matters that have appeared in party manifestos over a number of years, Presiding Officer. Today's subject for debate, for example, appeared in the Scottish National Party's manifesto 18 months ago, in the run-up to the Scottish parliamentary elections. After all this morning's coverage in the press and on the airwaves, the speech that I am about to make could probably just be handed to the new deputy minister so that he could make the speech as well. There might be a little repetition this morning, but I make no apology for having raised the subject. It is only because the SNP has insisted on having the debate in Parliament that we have heard an unequivocal statement from the Executive, which we hoped for for a number of years, but which was not forthcoming. Like some other members, I was in the chamber for most of yesterday afternoon. When I got back to the SNP's offices, a little buzz of excitement was awaiting me, because the Executive had spent the afternoon briefing the media that it accepted, in principle, the idea of drugs courts as outlined in the SNP motion. That could be seen as something of a victory for the SNP. The former Deputy Minister for Justice already gave a helpful hint that the Executive accepted the idea in his briefing to the Sunday Herald . I wish that every SNP motion had that effect. However, the outgoing deputy minister's hint was a little surprising, given the tenor of some of his other remarks. In recent months the Executive has been at sixes and sevens on the matter. Clarification of the Executive's position would be useful, although I am not certain that we will get it today. The Executive amendment in effect removes all mention of drugs courts from the motion. That seems surprising, given the heavy briefing that it gave that it would accept in principle the idea of  drugs courts. Members may call me naive, but I think that if the Executive truly accepts the principle of the motion, it should be gracious enough to reflect that in its amendment. Although I would not necessarily expect the Executive to accept the slightly mischievous reference to the SNP's manifesto, it is surprising that the Executive should attempt to amend the motion to remove any mention of the thing that it claims to support in principle. We have a new Deputy Minister for Justice. I welcome him and congratulate him on his appointment to his new post. I also offer sympathy for the fact that he must be on his feet so soon after moving to a new department. I hope that we will have the same cordial and generally constructive relationship that I enjoyed with his predecessor. However, I am rather worried that today's debate will produce unobjectionable words from the new minister, but no concrete proposals, time scales or any indication of when the Executive might turn principles into practice. I sought a constructive debate about specifics—I hope that that is what we will have. We should not have to rehearse the problems that are posed for society by the misuse of drugs—the cost, as we all know, is enormous. There is the cost to families of a disrupted and chaotic home life that impacts on every family member, regardless of whether they take drugs. We know about the devastating effects on society as a whole and on the health service in particular. The total cost is measured in blighted lives in Scotland. We all agree about the extent of the problem, just as we agree that what we have been doing until now has not worked. The problem seems to be getting worse, rather than better. Despite the fact that drug legislation is a reserved matter, we know that an enormous amount of work can be done and that effective change can take place in Scotland. I hope that Scotland can be an example to the rest of the United Kingdom, rather than continually looking over its shoulder and blindly copying what Westminster does. The drugs courts proposal centres on the criminal justice process. It cannot stand in isolation—it is an initiative that would impact most directly on that system. That is what I want to talk about this morning. We know that the criminal justice system in Scotland is overloaded with work that can be directly related to the use of drugs. The police cost of tackling drug crime and the criminal effects of drug abuse was, at the most recent estimate, £120 million per year. The Scottish Parliament reference centre research note on drug misuse that was issued earlier this year said:  "In 1997, drugs-related crimes accounted for 14% of all convictions in the Scottish courts." That figure represents only cases where drug-related crime was the main offence and in which that offence was possession, intent to supply or whatever. That figure does not include convictions for crimes in which the underlying problem was drug misuse, such as theft, housebreaking and other convictions—the list can go on for page after page. Many members have seen schedules of previous convictions, most of which are a direct result of drug use, although they are not drug offences. Most evidence suggests that about 60 per cent to 70 per cent of offences that result in court appearances can be traced to a drug use problem. That is a colossal resource problem for the criminal justice system. I do not know whether the existing cost figures factor all those elements into the equation—they are the tip of the iceberg that lurks beneath the surface. We must also remember the number of young offenders who are implicated in those colossal figures. The recent report of the advisory group on youth crime is a commendable document. Equally commendable is the fact that the Executive accepted all the group's recommendations. Many of those recommendations could have been commended if they had been made for adult offenders. The drugs courts concept fits very well into the ethos of that report. I do not deny that some elements of what might be found in a drugs court are already in place in some parts of Scotland. Drug treatment and testing orders were introduced in 1998, but are available only in certain areas of Scotland. They give the power to impose drug treatment—including random drug testing—with the consent of the offender, but they tend to be used only in high-tariff cases. As I understand it, only a small number of DTTOs have been made, which suggests a rather conservative approach to their use. There are also arrest referral schemes. It was my good fortune to speak last Friday at the launch of the Perth and Kinross arrest referral scheme. The scheme enables arrested persons to make contact with relevant agencies while their court case proceeds. There are several partners in the scheme, including the police, Perth and Kinross criminal justice social work department, Perth drug and alcohol team, and NCH Scotland. All the partners in that scheme think that it is the first of its kind in Scotland. The Scottish Executive health department thinks that there is another in Clackmannan and that there might be schemes in Edinburgh, Glasgow and Tayside. Without clear guidance on what constitutes such a scheme, however, the actual number cannot be confirmed. There is unnecessary confusion, but it is clear that  such schemes are largely self-starting, that they are not overseen and that no targets have been made for setting them up in Scotland. Both the initiatives have been welcomed by the SNP, but surely it would be better to ingather such schemes and set them up under a single, coherent framework—drugs courts. We seem to be inching toward that, but with no overall strategic direction. It is time that we tackled the issue head on. I raised the issue of drugs courts with the Deputy Minister for Justice's predecessor—Angus MacKay—and with his predecessor, who is now the First Minister. What are drugs courts? They are distinctive environments that are set aside with clear rules. Participants' performance is immediately and directly communicated to a judge, who rewards progress or penalises non-compliance. There are sentencing concessions, but they are made only in response to successful participation and treatment. Such courts deal with users, but not dealers. They should be mainly about diversion from custody. That fits in with another aim, which is to reduce the prison population—an aim that the SNP shares with the Executive. The aim of drugs courts is to provide a treatment-led response to drugs and drug-related crime that builds on partnership between all relevant agencies. They bridge the gap between punishment and treatment for the user and the discipline that is imposed on the offender is challenging. I would term it an aggressive intervention at the point of maximum impact, when the first jail term is likely. In practice, such courts would work as follows. On being charged with an offence, or after agreeing to plead guilty, an offender would be assessed for drugs court suitability and brought before the nearest drugs court—or the most likely one—as soon as possible. The drugs court works as a team. It would be non-adversarial and offenders would have to attend court regularly for review. The important point is that offenders would see the same people every time they came before the court. The proposal already has considerable support in Scotland. The Scottish Drugs Forum, the Scottish Police Federation, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, and the director of Scotland Against Drugs would all welcome drugs courts. In the past, ministers have not wanted to dismiss the idea completely, but the former Deputy Minister for Justice was on the record as saying that drugs courts would not fit in to Scotland's court system. I am not sure why he would think that and I can only assume that there has been a major change of heart about the issue since the end of August, when that reason was last advanced by the outgoing Deputy Minister for  Justice. In truth, Scotland's sheriff court structure does provide opportunities for the development of drugs courts. Equally, the children's panel system offers a culture of non-adversarial proceedings that could be extended to such courts. Drugs courts—or, at least, the model that is beginning to appear in the spread of countries that I listed—are essentially methods by which we can divert from custody those individuals for whom custody is the next most likely disposal option for a judge. They allow a relationship to be built with the individual and have shown a degree of success. They are not the complete answer, but they may be part of it. Drugs courts require investment in the infrastructure of rehab and through care to work properly. Scotland is not a model of such provision, so I concede that at this stage it might be reasonable simply to develop a drugs court model that is appropriate for Scotland's justice system and pilot it in an area where the provision of back-up services is at least adequate. Let us not hang about, however. There is already extensive international experience to call upon. At the time of the Irish commission in February 1998, there were 238 drugs courts in operation in the USA, with two or more about to start and 147 more planned. Goodness knows what the number is now. There are pilots schemes in Wakefield and Pontefract and one is about to start in Dublin. Let us get moving—let us turn the undoubted agreement in principle into practice and let us do so quickly. I move, That the Parliament recognises the complex nature of the drugs problem in Scotland; accepts that addressing the problem requires effective law enforcement working in partnership with well resourced rehabilitation and treatment strategies; acknowledges the role that a system of specialist drugs courts could play in dealing with drug-related crime; notes that the Scottish Drugs Forum and CoSLA support the establishment of drugs courts, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to develop an appropriate pilot scheme with a view to moving towards the establishment of drugs courts in areas of Scotland where adequate rehabilitation and treatment resources exist, as proposed in the Scottish National Party's 1999 Election Manifesto.

I listened carefully to the First Minister's speech at the beginning of the debate and I did so with growing bewilderment about what any of it meant. From his comments, I managed to glean that he wanted to renew a commitment to openness, accessibility and accountability and that, in his view, the section 23 power was not in question. After that, he stepped in sewage up to his oxters, with his nonsensical attack on John Swinney for not being in cahoots with the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee in respect of behind-the-scenes negotiations. That said a great deal more about the First Minister's attitude and, perhaps, the Executive's attitude to their relationship with committee conveners than it did about Mr Swinney, who has behaved impeccably throughout. If, instead of turning his back on proceedings, Mike Watson had listened to the comments that the First Minister made and to which Mr Swinney reacted, he would understand perfectly well what the problem was. He would  know that what the First Minister said was outrageous and that it has serious implications for the way in which the Executive deals with Parliament's committees. Apart from opening a huge can of worms, what was the First Minister's speech about? As I said, the First Minister wants to renew his commitment to openness, accessibility and accountability and he said that the section 23 power is not in question. In order to get to that we heard not a blizzard, but rather a drift of words that meant very little, but which implied that everything is fine and dandy as it is and that there need not be any change. It is interesting that comments about the need for the Executive to be accountable have revolved mostly around its accountability to Parliament. We have forgotten the other side of the equation—the responsibility of Parliament to the people of Scotland. The Executive is required to be accessible, open and accountable to all the people of Scotland. At the moment, that is patently not the case. This Parliament was supposed to be a fresh start—it was supposed to represent a change from the practices of Westminster. I listened to what Mike Watson said about that, but even at Westminster, the Belgrano and Westland investigations resulted in material being made available, such as that which we are discussing. This afternoon, members of the Executive and a number of Labour and Liberal Democrat MSPs have uttered fine words about freedom of information. The motion also speaks in those terms. However, this is about promising and never delivering. We have heard how the Executive's claimed commitment to openness fell at the first hurdle, with the handling of the documents that were associated with the SQA crisis. Others know a great deal more than I do about the ins and outs of that—I will not rehearse the arguments, some of which we have heard this afternoon. I am considerably more concerned about the general issue that has been raised as a result of the exam crisis and the debate, and its implications for the future. Let us consider some of the arguments that have been deployed. We have heard about the nuclear option. I listened to Annabel Goldie's speech—she is right to say that until back-bench Labour and Liberal Democrat MSPs are prepared to stand up for themselves, we will not be able to exercise the powers of this Parliament in full. However, there is nothing in the wording of section 23, or in the debates that took place in 1998, to suggest that it was to be deemed a nuclear option. Some other sections of the Scotland Act 1998 that were termed nuclear options during the debate on the Scotland Bill have been used rather more  frequently than section 23 has. Following on from David McLetchie's remarks, I would like to draw members' attention to the exception regarding procurators fiscal under section 23(10), which suggests that the section was designed almost as a mini freedom of information act within the Scotland Act 1998. It seems that the section is being put to one side and that an attempt is being made to subordinate it to codes of conduct that do not have statutory backing. I listened to what Pauline McNeill said—she might want to read the first few lines of section 23. That will provide her with the answer to her rather pointless question about its extent. In my view, the "Code of Practice on Access to Scottish Executive Information" cannot be put in section 23's place. Much reference has been made to freedom of information. As John McAllion said, it is vital that we have that debate. At the moment we do not have a freedom of information act, with or without an acceptable regime. If this afternoon's debate is anything to go by, that does not matter. We can legislate on freedom of information until the cows come home, but we will not get an acceptable regime from the Executive. That is an absolute disgrace. The debate will continue, because we have a duty to the people of Scotland. I believe that the First Minister has shown today that—within a couple of weeks of coming into office—he is utterly bereft of any ability to understand what the Parliament is really about and what the people of Scotland really want. All he does is put together cliché after cliché, while we are expected to listen and to believe that what he says is something new. It is nothing of the sort. This afternoon, the First Minister has been found seriously wanting and the Executive has been found bereft of principle.

Will Mr Rumbles let Michael Russell intervene, then?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Perhaps you could give us guidance in this debate about the relationship between committee conveners, committee members and the Parliament. When I was a convener, I regarded conversations between me and my clerk as a matter not for my party convener but for my committee members and the Parliament. Is that relationship now to be redefined? Are we now in a situation where committee conveners are responsible first and foremost to their parties and not to this chamber?

Hear, hear.

Presiding Officer, you will have noted that I was putting a line through certain sections of my speech so that I would finish it in on time. I start by placing on record again my concern at the frequency with which the mechanism of a Sewel motion is being employed in Parliament. At the time of the debates over the then Scotland Bill, one clause stood out as representing a matter of concern—that was the catch-all clause that allowed Westminster to go on legislating for Scotland, even on devolved matters. Of course, we were continually reassured that that power was intended to be used very rarely indeed. The First  Minister—then the Secretary of State for Scotland—said on 28 January 1998:  "there is a possibility . . . of the United Kingdom Parliament legislating across those areas, but it is not one which we anticipate or expect." Since the turn of the year, in the justice remit alone, there have been three such rubber-stamping exercises, which have been dubbed Sewel motions. That figure suggests to me that such motions are becoming—and again I quote the then Secretary of State for Scotland— "a practical part of the daily passage of politics . . . in this country."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 28 January 1998, Vol 305, c 402-403.] That is a suggestion to which the First Minister has strongly objected. The Executive memorandum on the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Bill stated: "It would remain open to the Scottish Parliament if it so wished to amend or repeal in the future any Scottish provisions enacted by the passage of the Bill." That was missing from the memorandum on the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Bill and I note that it is absent from the memorandum that we received in advance of today's debate. No matter how important the topic, or how valid the reasons for opting for a Sewel motion, we are abdicating our responsibility to the Parliament if we fail to assert our present and future legislative competence over the policy area in which we are allowing Westminster to legislate in our stead, purely for reasons of practical expediency. The new convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee pointed out to me that a drawback of Sewel motions is that they are much less likely to be subject to the kind of committee scrutiny that the Parliament has prided itself upon. In this case, of course, there is some practical expediency to be gained by invoking the procedure—that is why the Scottish National Party is not opposing the motion. However, the arguments that have been made for a common approach to sex offenders throughout jurisdictions within the UK are strong, although it might be argued that, logically, we should extend the cross-jurisdiction approach further than the remainder of the UK. There is no doubt that it is an issue on which international co-operation is required and that that would receive support. I note in passing however, that neither the Irish, with whom we share a border, nor the French, with whom we have a direct link through the channel tunnel, are allowing Westminster to legislate on their behalf. Having said that, the SNP fully supports legislation to increase the safety of children and we have argued for the sort of improvements that  are before us today. I note in particular that the minister intends to consider further the proposed new restriction order that will be made on conviction. I hope that that process addresses the issue of introducing lifetime supervision of serial sexual offenders. If a repeated pattern of sexual offending exists, it is unlikely that there will ever come a time when that pattern will not need to be controlled. If serial sexual offenders are to live within our communities, we need a mechanism in place that will ensure that they are under supervision for as long as they are at liberty; the SNP has called repeatedly for such a mechanism to be put in place. I hope that the Executive is at least considering that. Tragic cases such as that of Scott Simpson, who was murdered by a man who was seven months into a nine-month supervision order, show that we cannot simply depend on supervision orders, however long they are in place. Much more must be done to address offenders' behaviour while they are in prison. There is little point in imposing prison sentences and supervision orders if no steps are taken to tackle the offending behaviour in the first place. Until the resources and programmes are put in place to do that, the motion—and any other proposals about registers, supervision orders and so on—will be nothing but sticking-plaster solutions. I know that the minister will want to see progress made on that in future and I look forward to him responding positively to my suggestions.

I thank the minister for coming to Parliament to give his statement today, although I hope that he will forgive me if I reserve a more enthusiastic welcome until we have been able to go through the figures carefully. In the past, we have discovered that once the headlines have been and gone, things do not improve quite as dramatically as was indicated initially. Indeed, we had an experience of that this morning, to which the minister referred. When the Justice and Home Affairs Committee questioned the Lord Advocate about the headline figure, he told us about the Crown Office budget of £22.5 million over three years. That turns out to be £22.5  million at current prices, using the method of triple counting over the three years. When that figure is broken down, it does not look quite as generous. By the end of the question and answer session, the Lord Advocate was reduced to responding, "Well, that's what Jack McConnell thinks he's giving me." We look forward to going through the figures with a very fine-toothed comb indeed. I hope that the minister's optimistic estimate of the increase in the number of police officers on our streets will happen in practice, although I notice he was rather cautious in his statement, saying that the number "should be able to exceed" the previous figure of 15,000. One would at least hope that the number would reach that previous figure; an extension on that would be regarded as a major bonus. On prison funding, the minister outlined a long list of areas that required expenditure, and said what the increased expenditure was expected to cover, but he did not specifically mention slopping out in Scotland's prisons. I raise that matter now because of the imminent implementation of the Human Rights Act 1998. Has the minister made an estimate of the cost of ending slopping out now, should there be a challenge to that practice after 3 October and were that challenge to be—as is widely anticipated—successful? What time scale does he envisage for ending slopping out, given the likelihood of that challenge? How does that potential challenge fit into the figures that the minister has given us today? A small amount of money seems to be expected to cover a great many things, including the ending of slopping out. I do not see how it can all be achieved.

A key question for the Executive must be whether this programme will effect positive change in the lives of our citizens. I look forward to the spending statement next week. However, I think that some opportunities are being missed. I will comment on some of the justice proposals that have been made today. I do not want to confine my comments to the proposals that have been announced because I think that one or two other matters, on which proposals have not been announced, need consideration. On the proposals, three bills out of eight are on justice, but two of them have to be described as essentially reactive—the international criminal court bill and the ECHR compliance bill. The international criminal court is a welcome development—it is very worthy—but it is unlikely to affect Scots materially in their justice interests. While ECHR compliance may be required in terms of legislation, I see that there is nothing about making other aspects of our justice system compliant. I have in mind a recent Prison Reform Trust document, which suggested that a large number of areas in the prison system throughout the United Kingdom are likely to be challenged under human rights legislation. It is a pity that when we talk about ECHR compliance we are talking about it in narrow legislative terms. In truth, only the evidence (sexual offences) bill that was announced today can be described as proactive. It is likely to be very welcome. I await the detail, but I cannot imagine that there will be much opposition to it now that the Conservative party leadership has ensured that Brian Monteith and Phil Gallie are quiet.

I will move on a little, if Johann Lamont does not mind. The majority of people will be content with that bill and will be happy that it is being proposed. I would like more detail on its extent and how confined it is going to be, because other issues are important in respect of vulnerable witnesses. I wonder whether its title can be changed and its scope extended a little, to examine sex offenders in Scotland. There is no mention of that, but important moves could be made there, including consideration of a proposal that the SNP has long argued for: the imposition of lifetime supervision orders for some very violent and serious sex offenders. I would be interested to hear how narrowly confined that bill will be. There are huge omissions. The First Minister talked about the freedom of information bill. I have no doubt that the Minister for Justice wants to see that sooner rather than later. A land reform bill was promised last year. It was delayed and I know that a draft bill may finally emerge in February 2001, but I do not understand why it has been so badly delayed. It is the piece of legislation in the land reform package that was most eagerly awaited and about which I received most correspondence, yet it is still missing in the Parliament's second year. Could the Executive not consider splitting some of the legislation? It seems obvious that we could proceed with the access proposals earlier, rather than wait for the crofting right to buy to be drafted into the other right to buy. As convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, I appreciate that it might appear odd that I should plead for more rather than less, but we have to consider what is most appropriate. Last year, three of the eight bills that were announced were justice bills. Three out of nine this year is slightly less onerous on paper, but the reality last year turned out to be five out of 12. I would like to tease out what extra legislation will appear, as I have no doubt that that will happen. The issue is surely one of balance. For example, there are no initiatives on drugs in the criminal justice system, as I would have liked there to be. Legislative changes could be made that would make a difference in that area. I make the plea again that the domestic violence element of the family law bill be taken out. Let us get on with addressing that problem sooner rather than later, as it has a direct impact on a huge number of people. People in Scotland want the Parliament to legislate on such matters now; they want the Parliament to be proactive rather than reactive. It is difficult to explain to women who are desperate for more effective remedies that setting up the international criminal court should take priority. I do not think that the vast majority of people think  that it should. I will make one last plea on long-term care, which is not in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's remit. It occurred to me while the First Minister was talking about the regulation of care that the vast majority of carers are not professional carers, but spouses and adult children. What is the Executive doing to make the lives of those carers better? As far as I can see, the Executive is doing precious little, if anything.

I broadly welcome today's white paper and the Minister for Justice's announcements. The white paper's proposals are particularly welcome in several areas; for example, those concerning separation and grounds for divorce are appropriate in our society. However, I understand that they might be controversial in some quarters and I wonder whether it might be useful to ameliorate some of that controversy by giving the role of mediation a much higher profile. The minister said on 20 January that he did not intend to make mediation compulsory, but I wonder whether it might be worth considering that, at least in relation to mediation of the divorce rather than mediation with intent to bring about reconciliation—the two things are different. That might help in dealing with the controversy. I welcome the provisions in chapter 7 of the white paper that deal with the financial provisions for cohabitants. That issue was raised in the  statement in January and I am glad that movement has been made, although I await the details. While I welcome the moves that have been made regarding unmarried fathers and step-parents, I still hope that there will be mention at some point of an enhanced role for grandparents. I am sure that all members have received correspondence from the organisations that are being set up to try to place grandparents at the centre of the family, especially as regards their role in relation to young children. The statement says nothing about grandparents, nor does the original consultation document. I want the minister to recognise that the issue is felt strongly in the country. Perhaps the role of grandparents could be considered with a view to enhancing it. Domestic violence is the most important subject that I want to talk about, and there will obviously be a difference of opinion between the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and the Executive on the best way of dealing with it. Will the minister give a commitment that any Executive proposals on dealing with domestic violence will be treated urgently and will not be wrapped up with a general family law bill that might not be approached as urgently as domestic violence ought to be, particularly when the issues relate directly to the threat of violence? Many of the points in the statement are about property and the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981. As the minister knows, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee decided that that was a complicated and cumbersome approach and that there might be a simpler way of dealing with the threat of violence. I want the minister to give a commitment that legislation on domestic violence will not be held back because of a bigger, less controversial bill on family law in general.

Can the First Minister clarify the extent of the consultations that he has had with consumers and suppliers, which would have been expected under the implementation of section 1 of the Energy Act 1976, albeit the Government has moved directly to implementation of section 3?

Will the minister give way?

And ministers.

With the exception of the emergency Mental Health (Public Safety and Appeals) (Scotland) Act 1999, which was passed in the aftermath of the Noel Ruddle affair, this must count as some kind of record for getting a piece of legislation on to the statute book. It feels as though the bill was introduced only about three and a half minutes ago. Paradoxically, we have run a marathon in that time to reach this point. Unlike the Conservatives, the SNP does not bewail the incorporation of the European convention on human rights: we regard it as the  minimum standard that we should seek to achieve in all that we do in Scotland. For that reason, we have accepted the need to make changes to bail. The truth is that there will be precious little difference in the granting and refusal of bail. I wish that the Conservatives would accept that, instead of taking the line that they have taken today. In practice, the bill will not make that big a difference. Although the speed with which the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has had to deal with the bill has been breathtaking, I do not want to repeat my criticisms of that today. I understand why the minister was so concerned to have this bill passed. The impact of the Starrs and Chalmers case, which effectively found against the use of temporary sheriffs, was immediately felt in Scotland's courts, and the extent to which the justice system had come to rely on the extensive use of temporary sheriffs was perhaps not fully understood until they were no longer available. Arguably, that was a failure of previous Administrations, who did not monitor the situation. The use of temporary sheriffs had been criticised for a considerable number of years. A main concern was that it was a way of getting justice on the cheap, as temporary sheriffs do not have rights to a holiday entitlement and other benefits—although that fact may give rise to what Phil Gallie anticipates as a trade union for sheriffs. Critics were equally concerned that the annual process of hiring and firing substantially reduced the appearance of impartiality, which is essential in our courts. Some of those critics were well known and wrote in the press years ago—people such as Ian Hamilton QC, who has been concerned about the use of temporary sheriffs for many years. Unlike the Conservatives, I believe that it is right that, where possible, the Executive should anticipate successful challenges. My criticism in the past has been that the Executive did not properly anticipate challenges and that it did not do so in the case of Starrs and Chalmers, although it had been widely predicted that the Starrs and Chalmers decision would be unfavourable to the use of temporary sheriffs. Was any assessment made of the likely effect on court rotas of the withdrawal of temporary sheriffs? It almost seems as if the Executive was caught by surprise by the impact of their removal. The result has been a period of profound disruption in Scottish courts. Trials have been set down for dates many months in the future and other business has been delayed almost indefinitely in some areas. Those who use our courts will be relieved when the new part-time sheriffs are in place and there can be a return to some semblance of normality, although the events in the High Court in Glasgow  last week suggest that normality in Scottish courts may be relative. Surprisingly, the section on justices who are councillors turned out to be the section that generated most correspondence. Understandably, that came mainly from individual councillor JPs. Unfortunately, the alternative mechanism that they identified as preferable to removing them from the bench was not a measure on which the Parliament was competent, even if it had been politically acceptable, which is doubtful. That will be of little comfort to them, but it is difficult to see how the potential problem could have been solved other than by what is proposed in the bill. Despite the short time scale for processing the bill, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee identified some serious shortcomings that required to be rectified before it would allow the bill to proceed. To its credit, the Executive accepted almost all of the committee's recommendations. On behalf of the committee, I thank the Executive for doing that. With the agreed amendments, the SNP can support the bill. It is hoped that the woes of court practitioners will now be alleviated.

I disagree slightly with the minister. In my view, it is perfectly appropriate to seek to remove the involvement of the person responsible for prosecuting crime in Scotland from appointments to the bench. That issue is likely to be debated again in the judicial appointments consultation. I understand what the minister has said about the bill, although I thought that he downplayed the role of the Lord Advocate a little. If he is content to have that on the record, I am content to hear him talk about the appointments in the terms that he is using today. In view of the fact that the judicial appointments consultation is on-going, I will seek leave to withdraw the amendment. A broader issue should be addressed. The fact that legislation is triggered by the need for compliance with the ECHR does not mean that we need do only the absolute minimum that is required for compliance. There are always opportunities to do more with any legislation, to achieve a better result. The fact that the ECHR does not demand that we do something does not mean that we should not do it. I ask leave to withdraw the amendment.  Amendment 28, by agreement, withdrawn.

I am, I confess, a bit puzzled by what Mr Gallie has just said. When I read his amendment, it did not occur to me that he hoped to deal with the position of the clerks of the court in the district courts. Under no circumstances do clerks of the court institute proceedings in the district court, and section 10 is about the people who are, at present, entitled to institute proceedings. The clerks cannot do so; they merely give advice on the law to justices of the peace, who are generally not legally qualified. I do not see how the amendment even begins to address the situation of the clerks.

I detect a certain amount of anxiety beginning to develop among members about when they will manage to get any lunch, so I shall try to be as brief as possible. Amendment 28 was triggered by expressions of  concern by a rather eminent law professor in a university not very far from the chamber, so I put it out for discussion today. At stage 2 there was an interesting, although brief, discussion generated by amendments lodged by Phil Gallie, in which he attempted to change the reference in section 11 to "the Scottish Ministers" to a reference to "the First Minister". We sought to establish what was meant by the term "the Scottish Ministers", and Phil Gallie asked whether it included the law officers. In his response, the minister talked about the definition of the Scottish ministers that appears in the Scotland Act 1998. However, he did not address directly the issue of the law officers. I would like him to deal with that today. Members will be aware that the law officers are the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland. The Lord Advocate may have one of the oldest continuous public roles of anyone in any country in the world. It would be interesting to make a comparison with some other countries, but I suspect that the position of Lord Advocate has existed in Scotland longer than any comparable position in any other country. It is a role with a very long history. The law officers are the ultimate source of advice to the Government on all legal matters. They are members of the Cabinet in their own right and they are independent of the Secretary of State for Scotland. The Lord Advocate is the principal law officer of the Crown in Scotland, responsible for investigating crime and for prosecutions in the High Court, sheriff courts and district courts. He discharges those functions through the Crown Office and the fiscal service. He is constitutional and legal adviser to the Government on Scottish affairs, and he is responsible for the Scottish parliamentary counsel. The real issue is that the Lord Advocate is responsible for the prosecution of all crime in Scotland. Cases are brought in his name. The fact that the Lord Advocate has a dual legal-political role has caused some concern in the recent past about his impartiality, particularly as regards appointments. We have had some bruising debates in the chamber about the role of the Lord Advocate. In the Lord Advocate's absence, the Solicitor General tends to take on his responsibilities. Concerns have been expressed about the process by which appointments to the bench are made. Starrs and Chalmers was a case brought under the ECHR in which the appointment of temporary sheriffs, involving the Lord Advocate, on an annual basis, with no security of tenure, was found not to be compliant with the relevant article of the ECHR. I know that Starrs and Chalmers was principally about tenure, but the issue of tenure arose only  because of the fact that the person doing the appointing was the person responsible for all criminal prosecutions in Scotland. Indeed, it is possible for the Lord Advocate to give advice while trials are happening. Given those circumstances, I would like the minister to say something about the role of the law officers in respect of judicial appointments. He may simply fall back on the line that he took at stage 2, which was to point out that a judicial appointments consultation is under way and that all these things will be dealt with in due course. However, today we are passing legislation, and we ought to clarify whether in the bill we are perpetuating a situation that has already given rise to a great deal of criticism and concern. Perhaps we ought to think rather more carefully about that. I move amendment 28.

How would Mr Gallie feel about sheriffs sitting on the bench and being politically active? Would he see that as acceptable? If not, why is a councillor sitting in the district court acceptable?

Executive amendment 4 is clearly technical, and we have no difficulty with it. Amendment 23, which deals with justices, is effectively the same as Mr Gallie's earlier amendment covering part-time sheriffs, and my views are the same as they were earlier. I wish to ask a question about amendment 22. I am not clear about how it would come to the notice of the sheriff principal if a justice was creating some difficulties in district courts. I would be interested to know how a sheriff principal would be in the position to realise that that was happening.

I have listened with interest to the various speeches, and have noted Gordon Jackson's expectation that part-time sheriffs will never behave in such a fashion as to put courts in disarray. I confess that I had not thought that any sheriff would be so unprofessional as to walk off in the middle of a trial. I was thinking of a scenario in which a sheriff who is booked to work for a week or two somewhere decides part way through not to continue. Gordon Jackson is quite right that it would be profoundly unprofessional to walk out in the middle of a trial. Given that everybody seems to be absolutely reassured that the issue of notice does not require to be dealt with in the bill, I will seek the approval of members to withdraw amendment 17.  On amendment 19, however, I am not sure that my concerns have been addressed. There is reason to think that new section 11B may be used as precisely the kind of fast-track provision about which concerns have been raised. The minister said that if the sheriff principal had a view on the standard of work of a part-time sheriff, it would be entirely appropriate for him to make a recommendation against reappointment. The bill already gives three specific reasons for the removal from office of part-time sheriffs. A sheriff principal may, for whatever reason, think that a part-time sheriff was unable to do the work, was neglecting his duty, or was misbehaving—goodness knows that that is entirely possible.

Mr Robson completely misses the point. Of course the sheriff principal is in a position to know that. The sheriff principal can recommend to the Scottish ministers that a part-time sheriff should be investigated and dealt with under the procedures in the bill for the removal of part-time sheriffs. That would allow the part-time sheriff to go to the tribunal. The difficulty is that, if action is taken four years and nine months into a part-time sheriff's term with a quiet word by the sheriff principal in the ear of the appropriate minister, and then that sheriff is not reappointed, where is the sheriff's recourse to any kind of natural justice?

That is a very interesting interjection, which suggests to me that the provision is intended to be used as a fast-track procedure. Under that procedure, the part-time sheriff would not have recourse to the protection that is provided in the provisions on tribunals. What recourse would the part-time sheriff have if the refusal to reappoint took place in the way in which Mr Jackson described? Amendment 21, in the name of Phil Gallie, deals with the tribunal procedure and so I am of the view that there is no contradiction with amendment 19. My concern is that we will have a set of part-time sheriffs who, for one reason or another, never get to trigger the tribunal procedure because they fall into the interesting new category introduced by Mr  Jackson. That is why I intend to press amendment 19. I listened with interest to the comments on amendment 20 and have decided not to move the amendment. I have heard some interesting comments about the dual role of the Lord President in certain circumstances and I remind Mr Robson and other members that many senior members of the judiciary and the law officers have dual roles. It may be that the principle that Mr Robson seeks to apply in respect of the Lord President should apply across the board; Mr Robson may find that he is on a different side of the argument from some of his colleagues when we debate those measures. I have no difficulty with Executive amendment 3, which is straightforward and responds to concerns that were raised at stage 2. I have already dealt with amendment 21, which the SNP will support. We consider that amendment to be reasonable; it does not contradict amendment 19.  Amendment 17, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendment 18 not moved. Amendment 3 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to. Amendment 19 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham].

I am not entirely sure why Phil Gallie thinks that the two amendments are mutually exclusive. Amendment 21 relates directly to the tribunal procedure, whereas amendment 19 relates to an entirely different provision, under which the tribunal procedure would not be triggered and would, in effect, be avoided. That is the issue that I sought to address in my amendment. I do not think that the two amendments are at all contradictory.

I do not want to make a speech, but I would like to ask a question for clarification. Despite the number of legally qualified people on the SNP benches, I am not certain about the current situation as it relates to full-time sheriffs and I am not sure whether the  level of remuneration of full-time sheriffs is contained in orders. I appreciate that Mr Gallie assumes that that is the case, but it would be helpful to establish whether it is. There is an argument for keeping part-time appointments on the same basis as full-time appointments where remuneration is concerned. I would appreciate the minister's addressing directly the issue of equivalence. [Interruption.]

I am not sure that this is a huge issue of principle, but I would like the minister to address a specific question. What happens at present with the appointment of permanent sheriffs? Are their annual incomes determined by order? If they are, there ought to be the same arrangement for part-time sheriffs; if they are not, I would accept that those of part-time sheriffs should not be either.

What is the current position? Perhaps Mr Jackson has the answer.

It is always a challenge, particularly in the Scottish Parliament, to come up with things at stage 3 that have not already been digested, pre-digested and probably regurgitated long before. However, the three amendments in my name in this group cover three issues that we did not debate extensively at stage 2. Although amendment 17 is the lead amendment, it is perhaps not the most important in the group. It is a fairly straightforward amendment whose reason for existence will be absolutely clear to all members. It seeks to include in the bill a specific notice period for the resignation of part-time sheriffs who choose to go of their own accord. It appears that, under the bill as it is currently drafted, sheriffs could sit on the bench one morning, phone up in the afternoon and say that they are resigning and not sit the next day. I am not sure whether we would want to allow that. I am not suggesting for a moment that that is likely to happen very often. I am sure that part-time sheriffs who choose to resign will, in most cases, want to serve out some period of notice, if for no other reason than to ensure that their colleagues and the sheriff principal in their area are not woefully disadvantaged. On the other hand, the bill does not state a period of notice, which means that there is nothing to stop somebody resigning at a moment's notice and leaving. That could be rectified by including a minimum notice period. Amendment 19 is rather more substantial and is a little more important in the broader scheme of the bill's provisions for part-time sheriffs. Concerns have already been expressed about the fact that, as it stands, section 6 allows a sheriff principal to recommend to the Scottish ministers that a part-time sheriff should not be reappointed after the expiry of a five-year term of office. We had some discussion about that at stage 2. I do not want to quote extensively what the minister said but, as I recall, his comments were  along these lines. He expected that the sheriff principal in question would draw to ministers' attention matters of some importance, and that it would not simply be an issue of somebody's face not fitting. He said that he expected that that would be the basis on which such a recommendation would be made by a sheriff principal. Of course, the bill does not actually say that, and anybody who has dealt with law over a long period of time will know that, whatever was intended, the law of unintended consequences can sometimes come into play. This could be one of the areas in which there may be unintended consequences of not making clear in the bill what the level of reasoning should be for such a recommendation. It is fair to say that the only foreseeable reason for such a recommendation would be unfitness for office by reason of inability, neglect of duty or misbehaviour. It is hard to imagine what other reasons the sheriff principal could have for making such a recommendation, but there are already provisions for the removal of part-time sheriffs in those circumstances. I am concerned that, under section 6, the sheriff principal's recommendation could become a way to fast-track the removal of certain part-time sheriffs without triggering any of the tribunal procedures that are provided for in the bill. In effect, a sheriff principal or ministers may decide that ridding themselves of a particular sheriff mid-term might be messy and difficult and that it would be easier to wait until the five-year term is up. The sheriff principal could then recommend that the appointment not be renewed and the situation could be resolved without fuss or mess. The problem with that is that it appears to create the potential for fast-track firing, without the protections that the tribunal provides.  We are introducing new procedures—procedures that are required to be compliant with the ECHR—to reform a situation that we have had to accept is no longer appropriate. I would like to hear the minister deal with the issue that I have raised, as I believe that it is a genuine question that needs to be addressed. Amendment 20 is fairly straightforward. It would enable the Lord President, as well as the Scottish ministers, to initiate an investigation. We think that that is a sensible line, as the Lord President is in a position to know whether such an investigation may be required. It seems entirely appropriate that he, as well as ministers, should have the power to initiate an investigation. I would be interested to hear what the minister has to say on that point. I move amendment 17.

I have a sense of déjà-vu about the debate, as the Justice and Home Affairs Committee dealt with stage 2 of the bill only last week. I suspect that at exactly this time last Wednesday morning, we were having almost exactly the same debate. I do not want to go over all the arguments that took place then. However, members should be aware that to agree to the amendment would effectively negate the whole point of part 1 of the bill. We had clear evidence earlier in our proceedings from Professor Gane, among others, that not to legislate on bail to bring our provisions into line with the ECHR would inevitably lead to a challenge, which would inevitably be successful. I urge Phil Gallie to accept what almost everybody has said, which is that once we remove the restrictions, it is highly unlikely that people will get bail who would not previously have got it and that anybody will be in a different position. All we are asking Phil Gallie, the Conservatives and everybody to accept is that if we do not make that change, there will be a challenge. The challenge is likely to come at a point of maximum emotional impact, when people are incapable of being objective. It is far better to have this discussion when we can be objective. For those reasons, the Scottish National Party will not support the amendment.

I acknowledge what the minister has said in thanking the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, but he will probably not be surprised to hear that in my capacity as the convener of that committee I have some hard words to say about how we have had to deal with the bill. From the committee's report, members will see that we have had only a very short time to consider the bill. The report is the closest any committee has yet come to refusing to agree the principles of an Executive bill. Only the possibility of the bill being amended at stage 2 prevented that conclusion being reached.  The committee has tried to respond to the Executive's request that the bill be treated as a matter of urgency and we understand the desire to get it passed as quickly as possible. After all, there has been severe and widespread criticism of the situation that has developed in our courts as a result of the case of Starrs and Chalmers, in which it was decided that a court that is presided over by a temporary sheriff is not an independent and impartial tribunal according to the ECHR. The consequent suspension of the use of temporary sheriffs has resulted in near crisis conditions in many Scottish courts. It is therefore entirely understandable that the Executive wants to move quickly to resolve the problem. Equally understandable is the decision to use the legislative opportunity to deal with some other aspects of ECHR compliance. What has been less acceptable to the committee, however, has been the combination of delay in introducing the bill and the demand that it be dealt with in an extremely short time. Given the introduction date of the bill, adherence to existing standing orders would have made it quite impossible to progress the bill even to this stage before the summer recess. Standing orders have had to be suspended, as for the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill, which has led to the almost farcical position in which we find ourselves today—debating the bill at stage 1 and voting on it at 5.30 pm, with amendments at stage 2 having to be lodged by 5.30 pm tomorrow. There can be no doubt whatsoever that this was not what the consultative steering group had in mind when it designed the committee structure and standing orders of this Parliament. The committee had to begin its stage 1 considerations on the basis of a draft bill, before the bill was introduced, and this week members have been asked to lodge draft amendments with the clerks before today's debate, to allow the clerks to minimise the effect of having only 24 hours in which to work. To say the least, that is a wholly unsatisfactory state of affairs. To add insult to injury, this turned out not to be quite such an uncontroversial bill as was originally promised. The committee should have had a greater opportunity to hear from other witnesses, especially as the Sheriffs Association told us that the outcome of part 2 of chapter 1, relating to part-time sheriffs, would be no more ECHR compliant than were temporary sheriffs and that a similar challenge would inevitably follow. In addition, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee had to disadvantage witnesses considerably by asking them to respond to invitations at incredibly short notice. I am grateful to all the witnesses for accepting those invitations, although, on at least one occasion, the result was  to add further to the problems in the Edinburgh sheriff court, as the sheriffs who gave evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee could not be in two places at once. I am also grateful to the members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and to the clerking team for their hard work, good humour and considerable forbearance throughout the brief but hectic progress of the bill thus far. Once again, they have shown their ability to work effectively under extreme pressure. I hope, for the Parliament's sake, that the clerks never invoke the European working time directive against us. I also hope that the Executive will heed those criticisms. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee can deal with a heavy work load; its members have shown themselves capable of colossal amounts of work. What is becoming more and more difficult is dealing with that work load under the time constraints the Executive insists are necessary. I shall now cease to speak as a committee convener and turn to the bill and the issue of bail. Once the European convention on human rights was incorporated, it was absolutely inevitable that some changes would have to be made to the law of Scotland. There is no point in adopting the ostrich approach—and I hope that no one will do that today. In the case of bail, changes were necessary. Without them, there would inevitably have been challenges. That would no doubt have happened at the worst possible time, in the context of a hugely emotional case with all the subjective issues it would have involved. It would have been irresponsible of the Executive not to ensure that such a situation was avoided. I am also convinced that when the changes are enacted, we will see little if any difference in the bail decisions in our courts. Suggesting otherwise, as some might, would be wrong. Where, however, the representatives of victims organisations do indeed have a reasonable point is in the continuing demand that victims be informed of bail decisions. There is evidence that that is not happening. Victims should perhaps also be informed of the reasons for bail decisions. I am pleased that the minister is to look favourably on the suggestions that have been made by those organisations. I look forward to seeing the detail of his proposed amendments and I thank him for the concessions that he has made today. The issue of temporary and part-time sheriffs is infinitely more problematic. I will not dwell on the length of time that it has taken the Executive to introduce proposals to correct the situation in our courts as a result of Starrs and Chalmers. What does need to be addressed, however, is the serious criticism that there are real flaws in the bill that mean that further challenges under the ECHR  are inevitable unless the bill is amended. The first of those flaws is in the mechanism in section 6 for removing a part-time sheriff. The fact that the proposed tribunal was to comprise individuals who had been nominated by the Executive; the fact that it could have been argued that two out of the three members were not independent of the Executive; and the fact that no appeal mechanism seemed to have been provided gave cause for great concern that the section would not be compliant with the ECHR. In my view, there should be appeal mechanisms. I thank the minister again for the concessions that he has made today and I look forward to seeing the detail of the amendments to assess whether, given the evidence that we have heard, they make the changes that are required.

Yes, I was aware that although it might have been possible to legislate, it was equally likely that changes would be made by procedural means. Clearly it is better to make changes in the way the minister suggests, because that can be done far more quickly. The second of the flaws in relation to temporary and part-time sheriffs lies in the fact that the appointment of the new part-time sheriffs is to run for only five years. The minister addressed the concerns in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's report, but there seems to be potential for undermining the perception of the independence of those sheriffs. Given that that potential problem is the very point that brought about the current situation, it seems extraordinary that we might leave that same door open. I am still not sure why we could not simply put part-time sheriffs on to permanent contracts and make them subject to the same mechanisms that apply to full-time sheriffs. However, the minister's concession today of automatic reappointment is welcome. Again, I look forward to seeing the detail of those amendments at stage 2—which, of course, will be next Tuesday morning and perhaps next Tuesday afternoon and perhaps next Wednesday morning as well. The new procedures for hiring and firing—if I can use that phrase—justices of the peace will be more open and transparent. It has to be said that the measures in the bill as regards JPs would have been entirely in judicial hands, unlike the situation for part-time sheriffs, which was an interesting contradiction in the bill, but the  decisions on personnel would still have been made by ministers. Again, I thank the minister for the concessions that he has made, because this was a matter of some concern to members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and to those from whom we took evidence. Once again there is no appeal mechanism after removal or suspension. I heard what the minister said but I wonder whether he agrees, as evidence to the committee suggested, that that is likely to give rise to challenge. I would like the minister to comment in more detail on that in closing. As it is, the SNP's view is that such appeal mechanisms ought to be in the bill. All members will have received letters protesting about the proposals that would effectively bar councillor justices of the peace from sitting on the bench. There are arguments for and against that. It is certainly unusual that JPs can be party political but sheriffs cannot—there is something of a contradiction there. There is conflicting evidence, however, on the need for an outright ban. It has been suggested that barring councillor JPs from adjudicating on cases involving the authority of which they are a member would have been sufficient. I would like the minister to say whether that was considered by the Executive before it came to the conclusion that an outright ban was the only way forward. Finally, I am surprised by the omission of any mention of clerks of the court. I understand that while there has been no actual challenge to councillor JPs, there has been a challenge to the position of clerks of the court, who in the district courts are employees of the local authority. I should declare a past interest: in the 1980s I clerked in Dumbarton district court so I am well aware of their input, which is essential, vital and frequently welcome. JPs are not usually legally qualified and the clerks keep them right on the law. I hear Bill Aitken laughing. He perhaps feels that that is not the case. I assure him that when I clerked in the district court it was the case. Perhaps the minister will explain why JPs are being legislated for and clerks are not, particularly since it is the position of the clerks that has been challenged. The SNP will vote for the bill at stage 1, but our view is that there are serious issues that must be addressed before it reaches stage 3. The Minister for Justice has gone some way towards that, but there are other points that I hope he will take on board at stage 2 so that the bill at stage 3 is more acceptable. I hope that he and the rest of the Executive will take on board the very serious points I made as convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee about the time scales now imposed in two contemporaneous bills, which  lead one to the conclusion that the scrutiny powers of this Parliament are seriously compromised.

It was a fine performance.

I have been a passionate advocate of Scotland's traditional arts and music for a long time, so this debate gives me great pleasure and an opportunity to put that advocacy on the record in Parliament. To my knowledge, this is the first time that Scotland's traditional music has been the subject of a parliamentary debate in the UK. That is an extraordinary state of affairs, given that it is a unique and vital part of our culture. Arts and culture are rarely debated at Westminster and—as I recall—such debates tend to take place on election days, if at all. On such days, attendance in the chamber is—for obvious reasons—sparse. That merely reinforces the lack of any real parliamentary interest in culture. We do things better here. However, debates on the arts, including the one that was held in the Scottish Parliament, have focused on the national companies—opera, ballet, orchestras and so on—almost to the exclusion of anything else, yet none of those cultural endeavours is unique to Scotland. However, Scotland's own music, song and dance are unique. If they stop evolving, are neglected or die out, something absolutely irreplaceable is gone from the world—not just from Scotland. They deserve the utmost recognition and support at every level. Although this might be the first debate on the subject, I promise the minister that it will not be the last. At the material level, we should not forget the immense contribution that has been made to Scotland by the traditional art forms. The things that make people elsewhere in the world care about Scotland and that bring them to Scotland  are the things that are unique to Scotland. A joint report by the Scottish Tourist Board and the Scottish Arts Council about increasing visitor access to traditional music is imminent. Research carried out as part of that project indicates that access to traditional music is a major factor in tourists' minds when they decide to come to Scotland. The British Council does good work in taking performers overseas and there is a welcome new development called Celtic Fling that will take place in North America next year, which was helped along by Scottish Enterprise. Although there are large markets overseas for Scottish traditional music, all the activity in getting the music to those audiences tends to be driven from that end, rather than being pushed from this end. That seems remarkably short-sighted of us. Initially, my motion was triggered by the demise of the Edinburgh Folk Festival. I know that there were issues particular to the running of the festival that gave rise to concern and that mean that its end might have come about for many different reasons. Goodness knows—folk festivals come and go for a variety of reasons. However, what has happened in Edinburgh has set off alarm bells in the traditional music community throughout Scotland and has helped to identify the need to push that art form up the cultural agenda. I want to address some of the wider issues that are touched on by my motion and to record the huge amount of interest in the debate. I have had support from many people—too numerous to mention—including performers, promoters and teachers. They are people whose names are extremely well known—Arthur Cormack, Michael Marra, Ishbel MacAskill and Sheena Wellington. They are people of great standing in the community and they are all concerned about the priorities of the cultural agenda in Scotland. It is also important to give recognition to some of the work that has been done in recent years by the individuals and organisations that have put in enormous amounts of time and effort, much of it on a voluntary basis. The Traditional Music and Song Association does valuable work and Celtic Connections in Glasgow has been a resounding success. A few local authorities, such as Fife Council, have made a commitment to traditional music that all local authorities should make. I should add to that list all the organisers of folk festivals and folk clubs the length and breadth of Scotland. Much of the work has, quite rightly, gone into education. The fèis movement should be mentioned in that regard. I have enough material for a debate on that aspect of traditional music. Perhaps we will have that debate one day. Tonight, however, we should recognise the huge  debt that we owe to the many people who are involved in the organisation of the 29 different fèisean that were held in Scotland in 1998-99. What is needed now is central funding to allow the fèisean and—separately—Fèisean nan Gàidheal to develop. There are exciting developments in the teaching of traditional music in Scotland, particularly at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama—which runs what I believe is the only course of its kind in the UK or in Ireland—and at the Piping Centre in Glasgow. However, demand far outstrips supply. The example of the Easterhouse arts project in Glasgow is salutary, with more young people wanting to join the classes than could be supported. It is important that there should be equality of access to traditional music throughout the country and society, but that is not the case now. There are serious issues of social inclusion to address in this debate, as in many others. We should remember Arthur Cormack's words: that traditional music does more than just keep tradition alive—it keeps social history alive. The work of Sheena Wellington and Gordeanna McCulloch makes us very aware of that. I suggest, therefore, that the minister take a long look at the apparently shelved report of the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum, which includes a raft of recommendations in this area. The recommendations are—in the main—achievable with existing resources. I know that the matter might not be wholly within the remit of the Deputy Minister for Culture and Sport—it may be within the remit of the Minister for Children and Education—but it is relevant to what she is doing in relation to culture. Things are much better now than they might have been, but there is still a perception that Scotland's traditional arts and music are something of a Cinderella when it comes to support, especially financial support. That is not difficult to understand when total Scottish Arts Council spending on traditional arts is not much more than £250,000 to £300,000. The national companies, by contrast, swallow up something in the region of £12.6 million. Even with lottery money, there remains a serious lack of infrastructure and core resources for the traditional arts in Scotland and one-off projects mean that there is no continuity. The Scottish Arts Council now accepts that traditional arts require greater recognition. It would have cost only about £1 million to implement the recommendations of the council's report on traditional music in Scotland. Instead, only £53,000 is available. With that level of funding, the Scottish Arts Council will struggle to attain its published ideals. With the advent of the Parliament, the time is  right for greater recognition and support to be expressed politically. The minister has an excellent opportunity today and through the national cultural strategy to do that, and to affirm that Scotland's music will no longer be the poor relation in the cultural life of our country. I hope that she will take that opportunity.

As if Labour never had any.

In my view, issues of crime and punishment cannot be reduced to simplistic slogans. Today we have had a typical Tory response on any law and order issue—totally unfocused, ill thought out and produced without any sense of responsibility for the effectiveness of what little was suggested. Listening to the Tories, people would be forgiven for assuming that crime rates went down between 1979 and 1997. Instead, they went up by about 40 per cent, if not more. Mr Gallie might at least have the humility to admit that if there were an easy solution, 18 years would have been sufficient time to find it, but the Conservatives did not. Therefore, there can be only two conclusions: either he has to admit that there is no easy solution, or he has to admit that the 18 years of Tory rule were 18 years of incompetence in the area of law and order, because those are the only conclusions that the crime rate increase justifies on the basis of his own logic.

Mr Gallie has already had a chance to make a speech. He should restrict his interventions to questions. I listened carefully to what he said, and what I heard is what I would describe as a farrago of simplistic nonsense, which did not deal with some of the complexities involved in the issue. I want to focus on one or two issues that relate to the adequacy of resourcing of the system at all levels. I do not have a great deal of time, so I will cover only a few of the issues. My colleague Tricia Marwick will address the issue of victim services in more detail, but suffice it to say that right now the role of the victim in the process—we have seen plenty of headlines on that recently—and the role of victim services are hardly likely to inspire confidence. The Executive has to address that matter more urgently that it is currently doing. I am aware that some initiatives are on-going, but they are not anywhere near enough and they are not moving fast enough. I hope that the minister will address that directly.  The fiscal service is another area that is all too frequently overlooked, but it is equally vital. The suspicion continues that under-resourcing of the service leads to cases being marked for no  proceedings, which has a direct impact on public confidence. We know from recent months that the courts have had problems that are of a particular origin, but I also know from conversations with sheriffs of my acquaintance—

I have heard from more than one sheriff that problems arise as a direct result of the lack of enough fiscals to cope with the work load in the criminal courts. That goes back to the comments that I made about the fiscal service. That example shows a fundamental problem with the criminal justice system, which I admit is not easy to deal with. I do not look for a simple one-line answer. One cannot address one area in isolation without there being an immediate impact elsewhere. More police and more efficient policing inevitably lead to a greater clear-up rate and more cases referred to the fiscal, which means more stress on the fiscal service and more court time taken up. It is a circular system, which means that if one part of it is plucked, all of it will be affected. My concern is that that knock-on effect is too frequently overlooked, with troubling consequences. Phil Gallie talked about public perceptions of sentencing and detention. I am always amazed at the ease with which Phil can refer to the numerous conversations that he has with his constituents, as if somehow we are to believe that it is not a self-selecting group. As politicians, we cannot ignore the issue of public confidence, but we need to test more carefully the true attitudes of the public, and not assume that the more lurid tabloid headlines necessarily reflect reality, which I fear is what Mr Gallie does. In the past, I have seen research—I am sorry that I cannot give proper references, but this occurred to me only when I was listening to Mr Gallie—which suggests that when people are confronted by the realities of cases and potential disposals, their views about appropriate sentencing might not be as clear-cut as Mr Gallie seems to think. It would be useful if the Executive considered looking at attitudes to sentencing and detention, whether of youths or of adults, because there are some confused messages about. Some of those confused messages relate to young people and to the apparent incidence of crime being committed by young people. The issue of the age of criminal responsibility has been raised before in the chamber. The truth is that Scotland has one of the lowest ages of criminal responsibility in Europe. Whether the Tories like it or not, it is almost certainly challengeable under the European convention on human rights. In my  view—and in the view of a great many other professionals—that challenge will be successful. To refuse to consider it now would be utterly irresponsible. I accept the—

I will run out of time, otherwise I would let the member in. I welcome the review of the age, but the truth is that most young offenders go before the panel anyway. They go there for other reasons, allied with any crimes that they might have committed: truancy, substance misuse, being beyond control or whatever. Changing the age of responsibility will not change that, so I must challenge the Tories' approach to 16 to 18-year-olds. Do they really think that sending youngsters in their mid-teens to court for relatively minor offences will be helpful to anyone? It is not cost-effective and there is no evidence that it will deter repeat offending, which should be the fundamental aim of what we are trying to do with young people. Although I know that this aspect is not entirely within his remit, I say to the minister that if the hearing system is to deal with the age groups that we are discussing, the issue of resourcing the appropriate disposals must be taken on board. I listened carefully to what he said about money. There is concern that that issue is not being taken on board. I know of one case in Glasgow: a 10-year-old boy who has not been to school in 18 months, has been on home supervision requirement for the whole period and has still not been allocated to a social worker. He is not offending now, but there is no guarantee that he will not do so. That case is one of many. Sources in Glasgow City Council will privately admit that more than 600 child care cases are waiting to be allocated to a social worker. That is a big stumbling block when it comes to dealing with youth crime, and in regard to the initiatives that are being put in place. That is the point at which we can try to turn young people away from crime. I listened to the minister talking about money. What I really want to hear from him is whether he can guarantee that the money which he is talking about today will plug that gap right across Scotland. Otherwise, any youth crime initiatives will be undermined. In the few minutes available, I could not hope to address all the relevant issues; my colleague Michael Matheson will deal with issues related to drug crime. However, I would appreciate it if, in his reply, the minister would spend a little more time talking about the resourcing of the system overall and the reality of the knock-on effect that one aspect of the system has on the other. I move amendment S1M-1008.2, to leave out  from first "notes" to end and insert: "recognises that issues of crime and punishment are complex; contends that to ensure public confidence a criminal justice system requires to be effective, which in turn depends on adequate resourcing at every level; further recognises that there is some identifiable concern amongst the public about both current sentencing patterns and the effectiveness of detention; welcomes the fact that Scotland has human rights responsibilities as a result of the incorporation of the European Convention on Human Rights; and calls upon the Scottish Executive to consider the establishment of an accurate review of public attitudes to sentencing and detention which would inform both the judiciary and the Scottish Prison Service and further to address urgently the current under-resourcing of all parts of the criminal justice system in Scotland."

I welcome the minister's statement. I am tempted to ask whether he would have been making it if Parliament had not voted for the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill, but that might be pressing a rather tender spot. Could the minister be a little more explicit about the time scale for this reform? He said that the Executive intends to introduce legislation in the parliamentary year 2000-02. That can be as soon as May next year and as far away as May the following year, with the resulting act not coming into force until considerably later in 2002. It would be helpful if the minister could give us a better idea of when he wants this legislation to be in operation. My next point concerns the composition of the working group. It was not until I read the statement at 25 past 9 that I realised that I was getting an invitation to serve on the working group. With my committee convener's hat on, I would like to ask whether committee conveners are the most appropriate persons to serve on the working group, given that the three committees concerned will have to deal with whatever legislation emerges during stage 1 consultation and so on. The Parliament may want to consider whether committee conveners are the right people for this job. Conveners are meant to retain a sense of impartiality in their work, which may be difficult if they have had a hand in producing the legislation. I want now to address some of the more specific issues that the minister raised. In his statement, he did not mention the system of summary warrants. The minister will know from the evidence that all three committees took at stage 1 of the  Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill that this aspect of current procedure was identified as a major problem area that needed to be overhauled. It does not include, for example, the time-to-pay orders that are popular in other areas of diligence. Can the minister confirm this morning that examination of the summary warrants system will form part of the working group's remit? That will be key to any change in the law of diligence.

On a point of order. Is it in order for a member to accuse other members of being quiet when that member refuses point blank to take any interventions?

Will Mr McLetchie give way?

He is feart.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I would like to begin by dealing with one or two issues that this debate is not about. First, it is not about boxing—it never has been and it never will be. I know that individual members have their own views on boxing—one member in particular may have a very particular view—but to suggest that the opposition to the spectacle planned for 24 June comes only from those who oppose boxing is quite wrong. I, personally, do not oppose the sport. The debate is not about boxing, because what I refer to as the spectacle has little to do with boxing and everything to do with circus. In the welter of accusation and counter-accusation, I know that some small voices from the boxing fraternity have been heard, pointing out that Michael Tyson is hardly a good advert for their sport. I can only agree with that—this is not sport, but spectacle. Many of those who attend the spectacle will do so in the hope that they see blood. Secondly, the debate is not about Michael Tyson being black. His victim, Desiree Washington, is black. Perhaps if those who shout so loudly about Tyson's civil rights stopped to consider the civil rights of the black woman he raped, they would be a little more circumspect about what they say. However, in some quarters, circumspection is somewhat lacking. Thirdly, several commentators have made great play of the fact that Tyson has done the crime and  served his time. He has, but this is not about a refusal to forgive and to allow a man who has tholed his assize to get on with his life. We are not dealing with just one crime of violence; Tyson has a rape conviction, has spent time in jail for road rage, demonstrated a total lack of control in the ear-biting episode with Evander Holyfield and is the subject of further investigations as a result of allegations made against him by a waitress. That is a pattern of behaviour in which the common factor is Mike Tyson's inability to deal with his own aggression and an apparent lack of remorse for anything he does. What the debate should be about runs the risk of being lost if we do not state it now. It is about the values of society and how seriously society is prepared to view violence in general and violence against women in particular. We have already had a lengthy debate about domestic violence in this Parliament. Recently, the Executive launched a consultation paper on stalking and harassment. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee is considering a committee bill that would extend the power of interdict in a way that would benefit a great many people—mostly women—threatened with violence. Violence against women is something that both the Executive and the Parliament take very seriously, as evidenced by the debates that we have had, the motions that have been lodged and the parliamentary questions that have been asked. Naturally, much of what we discuss centres around potential changes in the law, which would either make successful prosecution easier or make the whole judicial process less daunting for the victim. Equally, we are concerned to deter assailants where possible. We may consider early identification of the propensity for violence, followed by support and education to teach men ways in which to deal with their anger without resorting to violence. We may examine the penalties imposed on those who are convicted and take a view on whether the sentences send out the right signals to offenders. In all the discussions, both formal and informal, on violence against women, one view has come up repeatedly: if we are to make real headway we must know what signals and messages we are sending out to young people right now. The omens are not good. In previous debates, reference has been made to research carried out on behalf of the Zero Tolerance Trust, which investigated young people's attitudes towards violence, sex and relationships. The findings of that research are worth considering, because they are germane to this debate. They provide the real background to the whole debate and the extent of the problem that requires our attention. The depressing truth appears to be that young  people tolerate both physical and sexual violence against women. The research showed that between one in four and one in 10 young men think violence against women is okay, depending on prevailing circumstances. When it comes to forcing a woman to have sex—that is how it is described in the research, but otherwise known as rape—the picture is no better. The research revealed that one in five young men think it is okay to force a woman to have sex if he is married to her. One in seven think it is okay if they have been going out together for a long time. One in 10 think it is okay if the man is so turned on that they cannot stop. More depressingly, a further 16 per cent were unsure in that case whether it was okay. Six per cent thought it was okay if the man had spent a lot of money on her. Six per cent thought that it was okay if she had slept with loads of men. Overall, the research indicated that one in two boys and one in three girls still think that there are circumstances in which it is okay to hit a woman or force her to have sex. The findings make depressing reading indeed. I make no apology for quoting those findings extensively because, significantly in view of this debate, the attitudes and actions of adults and mass media messages were seen as key. The Zero Tolerance Trust states in its information that "media representations were often used as reference points helping young people to justify certain ways of looking at the world or making sense of their own experiences." That is a key statement for society and this Parliament to consider. Young people do not learn in a vacuum. Zero Tolerance rightly points out that what is important is understanding how young people are socialised. That means understanding the role played by media images. With Tyson, the message is that no matter what the crime, the level of violence, the fact that your behaviour has included rape—a crime right up there with murder—you can go on, live your life, make megabucks, be a hero, be surrounded with all the trappings of success, and gain preferential treatment from officialdom. If we do not challenge that head on in every way we can, by default we collude in that image. It is therefore entirely proper that we should question the apparent adulation of an individual such as Mike Tyson and seek to address the problem of the message that that sends out. This Parliament may not have power over immigration, but it does have responsibility for justice and education, and both of those areas are key to this debate. It is this Parliament that will develop any strategies for dealing with the problem of violence against women. It is this Parliament that has to devise the appropriate criminal justice responses. It is this Parliament that  is concerned with the way in which our children learn and grow. Therefore, this Parliament also has responsibilities in this debate that cannot be ignored. We are perfectly at liberty, of course, to take on board Frank Warren's helpful suggestion that the spectacle of Mike Tyson fighting in Glasgow will be an ideal opportunity to focus on the issue of violence against women. One could almost imagine that Mr Warren's motives are totally pure and that he really believes he is doing society a great service by allowing us this opportunity. I will not court disaster with the Presiding Officer by being blunt about what my own views are of that breathtakingly disingenuous approach. I am sure everyone in the chamber can fill in the blanks. But in any case, if—and I say if—this fight goes ahead, all the relevant groups and individuals will undoubtedly try to ensure that some balance is maintained in the coverage.

One of the simple answers to that, which Mr Watson might be surprised to hear, is that I was convening the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on Monday afternoon, trying to get the Executive's legislative programme through as quickly as possible. I said that I would be sad if we simply accepted that the fight will go ahead and that there is nothing that can be done in any forum to alter the decision, no matter how late in the day. The Home Secretary's decision was unfortunate, unwise and unwelcome. It was also wrong. I am well aware that strenuous attempts are being made by back-bench Labour MPs at Westminster to achieve a reversal of that decision. I welcome those attempts and I wish them every success. Those members may have channels of communication that are not open to me. Equally, I believe that strenuous attempts should be made in Scotland to achieve the same result. Who knows, one or other of those attempts may be successful. It is the potential for that successful outcome on which we should focus. During the past week, a great deal of controversy has surrounded the decision itself, the  way it was reached and its implications. I do not want to rehearse all that, but one or two things should be highlighted. First, the issue was considered sufficiently important for it to be decided that this Parliament's views should be conveyed to the Home Office in advance of the decision being taken. The Minister for Justice and, I think, the Presiding Officer, made the required calls. It is a pity that the minister was unable to speak directly to his Westminster counterpart. It is even more to be regretted that having been assured that no decision had been taken, within a few hours it transpired that a decision must already have been taken because extensive briefing of the media had already been under way. Perhaps Barbara Roche, the minister to whom our Deputy First Minister spoke, was unaware of that. We must assume so. Secondly, it now transpires that the Home Secretary had, some 12 days previously, met the principals promoting this event. The Home Secretary is not, as I understand it, required to consult on an issue such as this, but if he does begin to undertake consultation it is not unreasonable to expect him at least to hear from those—including representatives of the Scottish Executive—who might have an opposing view. At no stage was that done. Arguably, it should have been done anyway. He cannot have been unaware of the likely furore. He chose to disregard it. That was, at best, unfortunate. That unbalanced level of consultation is, in my view, a real flaw in the process of coming to a decision. Just as flawed is the reliance on the economic argument for justification. Surely I am not alone in the chamber in feeling that the demand for tickets should not govern whether the fight goes ahead. There are undoubtedly many things that, if allowed to proceed, would engender the same level of interest. It is hard to avoid the conclusion that a number of the ticket buyers will be interested only in the possibility of another exhibition of Tyson's complete lack of control. Like the crowds that will gawp at a tragedy, they will be there in the hope that something outrageous will happen. If we take the view that demand is all, that could be used to justify legalising many things that are currently illegal. Simple demand is never considered sufficient—not even for those who state their belief in the free market as vociferously and frequently as the Conservatives. Even they do not accept that simple demand should dictate everything. It is never considered sufficient and never should be; otherwise, we would be selling tickets to public executions. We should not rule out any potential means of stopping this fight. We have asked that that include not ruling out a judicial review of the decision. The minister must know that a great  many judicial reviews are taken each year, a significant percentage of which are initiated by the Government, local authorities and non-departmental public bodies. There would be nothing unusual in the Scottish ministers seeking to apply for a judicial review. I am sure that they have done so frequently in the past.

I do not know where Mr Chisholm has obtained his legal advice; the advice given to us is that a judicial review is perfectly proper and appropriate in the circumstances. Its success cannot be predicted, but there is no reason not to do it. Despite the disappointing tone of the Tory amendment and the Executive amendment to it, it should be kept in mind that any judicial review is not about whether the Home Secretary has the constitutional right to make a decision, but whether the decision he made was flawed. He, along with every other minister, is subject to the same processes—he will undoubtedly have been judicially reviewed in the past.

With respect, I must finish. I am getting close to the end of my time. Women's groups throughout Scotland support the idea of a judicial review—my colleague Gil Paterson will speak more about that. I very much hope that the message we send out from this debate is not, "We will leave it up to cash-strapped voluntary organisations to do what it is within the power of the Executive, with all its resources, to do." That is my plea to everyone in the chamber today. I will finish on a lighter note. I have been much entertained by the comparison between those who object to the Tyson fight and cackling geese. Geese are useful: they provide an efficient early warning system. I suggest that, from here on in, all individuals and women's groups active in the field of violence against women adopt the cackling goose as their motif. I would be proud to be so described. I move, That the Parliament notes the decision of the Home Secretary to grant a visa for Mike Tyson to enter the United Kingdom; is concerned that his decision was taken without any genuine consultation with members of the Scottish  Parliament, Scottish Executive or relevant women's groups; further notes that Mike Tyson has at no time expressed public remorse for the crimes of violence for which he has been convicted, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to ensure by whatever means possible, and if necessary by arranging for a judicial review to be sought, that the boxing match scheduled for 24 June 2000 at Hampden Stadium does not go ahead.

I add my voice to the general welcome for the statement. In particular, I welcome the minister's phrase: "Treatment benefits drug misusers and cuts drug-related crime." He will agree with me, therefore, that treatment should continue throughout the entire process of the justice system, and his statement shows that. As he might expect, I am interested in his experience of the New York drug court. He will know that the Scottish National party has been arguing for such courts in Scotland. I wonder whether I might tempt him to expand on what he thinks we can learn from that US practice, especially given the recent newspaper hints that he might be a convert to that policy.

Now that it is clear to everyone what an exciting time the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has, there will no doubt be a queue of members wanting to join the committee for the delights that are in store for us—which have been ably outlined by the minister. As the committee convener, I record my appreciation of the work of the members of the committee. Only a handful have a legal background, but those of us who have a legal background were not much better off when we came to deal with some of the issues that arose during our scrutiny of the bill. Needless to say, my thanks are also due to the clerks, who shared the burden with us. The clerks had to undertake a great deal of work behind the scenes to get the committee through stage 2, and were up against constant deadlines for the lodging of amendments. Those same clerks had to be involved in all the background work to prepare the amendments for stage 3, and our appreciation of that is unqualified. I am sure that all members will join me in thanking the clerks. The committee expressed concern about the interaction between this bill and other bills that are planned by the Executive, and about the difficulties that that poses for us. This is not a stand-alone bill, although we were obliged to treat it as if it was, which continued to give us some difficulty throughout stage 2. For that reason, when it is enacted, the bill will not immediately come into force. No attempt was made to amend section 1, which is designed to leave open the commencement date. I mention that fact, as it shows that there is nothing novel about such a provision. I now refer to the principles of the bill. The abolition of feudal tenure will be of great satisfaction to people in Scotland and to the Scottish National party. It was a key commitment of the SNP's land reform policy in the run-up to the elections last May, and it is testament to the widely expressed need for such a reform that the major parties were committed to a similar bill in the run-up to May. From Phil Gallie's earlier comments, I take it that we can now include the Conservatives in that commitment, as they have decided to join the majority in favour of abolition.  The bill is integral to any programme of land reform and would always have been required as the first piece of legislation in any package of reform, no matter how it was designed. However, I must reiterate the concerns that I raised this afternoon about the omission of any reference to the public interest in the bill. Effectively, the bill introduces a form of absolute ownership with which a great many people might have problems, and it runs counter to a widely held belief that the people of Scotland should have ultimate ownership of the land. According to that principle, we would be able to run public interest arguments as and when they were necessary. During the stage 1 debate, I referred to Andy Wightman's concern that, without some overt recognition of the public interest, we might find ourselves bound more tightly in matters of what we can and cannot do, despite there being a demonstrable social or environmental need. Those concerns continue to be widely held, and I am unsure whether what is being passed today resolves that issue. Time will tell, no doubt, and the minister should not be surprised if we return to that issue in discussion of future land reform legislation. I remain firmly of the belief that Scotland should not become a series of parcels of land that are in the absolute ownership of individuals, organisations, offshore trusts, charities or whatever. The public interest should be enshrined explicitly somewhere as a principle, so that, in future, recourse can be had to that principle in the courts if necessary. Although that might sound like an academic argument, recent events have shown that there is nothing academic about land ownership in Scotland. There is a continuing row about the putative ownership of the Cuillin by the MacLeod, and it is a great pity that no one anywhere seems to want to do anything about that. I cannot help but wonder whether that is because it might open a can of worms. Perhaps some of the so-called landowners would turn out to be nothing of the sort—it is surely time that we found out. I regret that we have not been able to include any requirement in the bill about registering land information. Attempts to do so have been ruled inadmissible, which is unfortunate. We are missing a vital opportunity to begin the process of finding out exactly who owns land in Scotland. It is difficult to see how any system of meaningful land reform can exclude the fundamental point that the first thing we must be able to ascertain is who owns Scotland. That can remain a live issue, as the debate over the ownership of the Cuillin has shown. Although I do not want to step too far out of the confines of today's debate and trespass on the  debate secured by John Farquhar Munro, I suspect that I am not the only one to be disappointed by the blank refusal of the Executive—or any agency—to undertake the proper research to determine that particular ownership once and for all. As I said, perhaps such an inquiry would simply open a can of worms. From my experience at Dumbarton District Council in the 1980s of trying to ascertain the ownership of land around Dumbarton rock—a file that I inherited from my predecessor and with which some poor junior solicitor is still struggling, for all I know—I am aware of how difficult this exercise can be in Scotland and of the real problems that it can cause. Tying compensation payments to a provision of registering a land interest in Scotland would have provided additional information for public consumption. Regrettably, we were unable to lodge that amendment and have now lost that opportunity. As I said at the outset, the bill is broadly similar to the one that the SNP would have wanted in its own land reform package. My belief that it could have been an even better bill does not diminish the SNP's welcome for it and I heartily endorse it today.

As convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, I welcome the amendments lodged by the Executive. Members will be glad to hear that I do not propose to excite them with any further detail on those amendments.

Is Mr Gallie advising us that the Conservative party will instruct  Conservative councillors in the administration of Perth and Kinross Council to desist?

We have here clashing views, which will not be resolved in this debate. However, I ask all members to keep hold of the comments that I made earlier. Ultimately, the debate is about where the public interest lies, and my answer to John McAllion's question is that once we have done away with an explicit ability to act in the public interest, the legislation will be open to challenge. Everyone refers to planning legislation and so on, but until now, all the legislation that we have dealt with derives from the power of a Parliament that is, in itself, sovereign. However, as the Parliament is not sovereign, which we recognised, we must state explicitly the basis on which the Parliament acts. We need an explicit statement of that position, whether that is given in the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill or in any of the other land reform bills that are coming up. I would be happy if the minister were to reassure me that such explicit protection of public interest will be in the land reform bill. However, thus far, I have not heard that—I have heard nothing. We may have heard the arguments of one professor versus those of another professor, but where does the concept of the public interest lie if we do away  with amendment 1? There is no answer to that.

We, too, welcome this group of amendments. It is important to emphasise that what they avoid is the possibility that people would sell their houses and then traipse off to other parts of the country while still paying instalments that were due under the previous arrangement. Without the amendments, a situation could arise in which folk all over the country might have long-running trails of due instalments behind them. That would be a bizarre situation to get ourselves into if what provoked that was the sale of a house that released the money to pay off the total. Despite Phil Gallie's comment about the amendment's complicated language, it is really a tidy-up provision for the whole system, and I commend the minister for introducing it.  Amendment 20 agreed to.  Amendments 21 to 23 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.  Section 11—Service under section 8(1)

Will Mr Gallie point me to where precisely that will be enshrined in law, once the present system is abolished?

I refer Gordon Jackson to my comments about potential challenges under ECHR. Article 1 of ECHR talks about people's right to enjoy their property without interference and ensures compensation if that right is interfered with. My concern is that we are laying ourselves wide open to challenges. Nowhere else will the basis on which the Parliament makes laws about the restrictions be stated explicitly. A challenge under ECHR would be upheld and—let us face it—the Executive's line on ECHR has been that it cannot predict where the challenges will come from.

I do not for a minute disagree with the examples that the minister gives of elected bodies protecting the public interest. However, does he accept that his argument could equally be made about the Governments of the states in the United States of America? The argument does not stop them being challenged, and does not stop compensation being demanded from them in a way that I think we would be laying ourselves open to here. At the moment, the Parliament in the United Kingdom works as the Crown through Parliament. I wish to remove that and replace it with something else entirely, but we have not done so yet. However, if we remove the protection in respect of land ownership, where will protection lie if there is a challenge? If we are not careful, any planning or conservation legislation could be challenged under the European convention on human rights.

I must ask the minister not to misrepresent what I said. I have explicitly stated on at least three occasions this afternoon alone that these amendments are not about retaining the feudal system.

Amendment 1 is a paving amendment for the substantive amendment in this group, amendment 37. I will begin by reading the effective parts of amendment 37 because it is important that we establish that what is being suggested is that "on the appointed day the rights of the Crown and the Prince and Steward of Scotland to create a new feudal estate, to charge a feu duty and to enforce a feudal burden are abolished; but nothing in this Act shall be taken to supersede or impair any other property rights or interests held by virtue of the ultimate superiority of the Crown or the superiority of the Prince and Steward of Scotland for and on behalf of the public interest." A subsection follows. It is important to stress that the amendment arises directly out of the long-running debate about where the public interest lies once we move  to a system of absolute ownership. This is the first and certainly the last time when members will see me on my feet arguing for the retention of anything to do with the Crown. I emphasise that this debate is really about the question of the public interest. We discovered that it would be difficult to have admitted any amendments directed toward the public interest that did not mention the Crown. Therefore, the amendment has to be argued in those terms. The amendment attempts to ensure that the public's interest in land is provided for explicitly. That aim is supported by many organisations in Scotland, including Land Reform Scotland and the Scottish Land Reform Convention, which is sponsored by, among others, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the voluntary sector and the Churches. For example, during a visit to Westminster, the Church of Scotland church and nation committee wished to discuss land reform and its concerns about the introduction of absolute ownership. Those concerns have not gone away. The Scottish National party favours the inclusion of a provision whereby the public's interest will be explicitly protected. We have argued for a number of years for the reform of Scottish land laws, to give all communities a real say in their future, and we have long wanted an end to feudal tenure. However, we also firmly believe in the sovereignty of the people. The danger is that without such an explicit statement in this or some other bill, creating a system of absolute ownership might cause us difficulties in the future. In evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on 29 March, at stage 2, the Executive argued that retention of a Crown right to act in the public interest would mean retaining the feudal system. Nothing could be further from the truth. That is explicitly not the intention of the amendment—a reading of the amendment would reveal that fact. I heard the Minister for Justice on "Good Morning Scotland" today referring to the iniquities that occur under the present system—he will get no argument from me about that. However, the Executive has argued separately that sections 56 and 58 are sufficiently drafted—presumably, the Executive will continue to argue that, even if its amendment is agreed to today—for the purpose of public interest. On 15 March, the Deputy Minister for Justice told the committee: "The purpose of the bill . . . is to introduce a system of outright ownership of land."—[ Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 15 March 2000; c 921.] It would be foolish to propose that that could not lead to danger, especially as the public interest is not explicitly stated anywhere in the bill. If it were,  we would not need to make these arguments today. In the context of the bill, the arguments can be made only in terms of potentially remaining Crown rights. I accept that much of the debate in this area is about potential. During the stage 1 debate, I referred to the opinion of counsel, which I had just received, that "the Crown owns all land for the benefit of the community of the realm." I think that "for the benefit of the community of the realm" is just another way of saying "in the interest of the public". It was also his opinion that section 56 did not save any rights of the Crown in or over the land held for the benefit of the community. Neither was he of the view that the law is clear as to which rights over land derive from the royal prerogative and which from the paramount superiority. Specifically, counsel was not clear about the category that the regalia majora and the regalia minora fall into—I do not want members to fall asleep, as this is important. The Scottish Law Commission discussion paper, which was published in July 1991, noted: "The origins of the Crown's rights to the regalia both minora and majora are uncertain and the extent of these rights has never been clearly defined. Accordingly, we cannot be sure that an unqualified abolition of the paramount superiority would not affect the crown's right in the regalia." The Law Commission is to be congratulated on recognising the vagueness that lies at the heart of the present system. The amendments seek to recognise the truth of the extent of that vagueness. The express view of many is that public interest had indeed been part of the Crown's remit. If we accept, as I think that we must, that the present rights of the Crown are vague, we must accept that it is possible that they include the public interest. This may become more important in future. When the Crown legislates through Parliament to control use of the land, what is the basis of that control if a system of absolute ownership has been introduced?  At the risk of getting Phil Gallie overexcited, that question might not remain entirely academic if there is ever a related challenge under the European convention on human rights. There are problems with the system of absolute ownership in the United States of America. There, owners may demand the right to be compensated by the state Governments for any and all restrictions placed on land use. Why do we imagine that we will not, sooner or later, find that point being canvassed in a court in  Scotland on some planning matter or other? If that day comes, what will our answer be? It is because of such questions that so many people feel that there should be a general saving provision in the legislation—that is what amendments 1 and 37 attempt. The Executive has sought to deal with the concerns through amendment 13. That is confined to the specifics of the regalia majora, which the Law Commission has already indicated are very vague, but it is not a general saving amendment, and it is still our view that that is what is required. I stress again that feudal tenure is to be abolished, and rightly so—that is explicit in amendment 37. Frankly, I would not have minded an abolition of the monarchy bill but, until that comes along, we have to argue in the context of the potential vagueness of the Crown interest in land. That is a vagueness which the Law Commission report of 1991 recognised. I commend that view and amendments 1 and 37 to the chamber. I move amendment 1.

I quote from a previous debate on a bill to abolish warrant sales, a bill proposed by Margaret Ewing in the House of Commons in 1990. Brian Wilson, who is a Labour minister in the UK Government, said that "we should acknowledge unanimously that the warrant sale is a peculiarly Scottish evil. It is a dreadful system. It has no redeeming feature."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 9 February 1990; Vol 166 c 1189.] I agree with Brian Wilson that it has no redeeming feature—it is one of the few times that I will agree with him. I am sure that Brian would agree with me today. Like many others, I am at a total loss to understand the stance taken by the Executive on this issue. In my view, the opponents of warrant sales are entitled to look sceptically at the record of successive Administrations until now, to look sceptically at the current Executive's rhetoric and to continue with that sceptical stance into the future despite the minister's assurances. Consider the amendment that is before us. First, it asks us to abolish the present system. That is a fine statement of principle, so why not take the opportunity right now to do so? Secondly, it says that we need to ensure rigorous pursuit of debts. Passing this bill will not prevent that from happening. If the Executive thinks that there will be deficiencies in the remaining procedures, it is entirely open to it to do something about it before implementation of the bill. The amendment goes on to say that, in the meantime, there should be secondary legislation. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee's recommendations suggest a delayed implementation to allow any other measures to be put into place. The amendment goes on to talk about establishing another working group. Well, pardon us all if that does not sound hugely innovative. The minister has told us of the potential membership of that group, but he has not told us of a proposed time scale for the group. In any case, there is nothing to stop it happening today, when we pass the bill, as I intend that we should do. The amendment ends on a note of breathtaking surrealism, agreeing the principle of abolition but not agreeing the principle of abolition. We are in serious Lewis Carroll territory here. Not one of the  Executive's reasons for refusing to support the bill stands up in reality. There is another iniquity inherent in this refusal to support the bill. The committees took extensive evidence, both written and oral, from a large number of organisations over a considerable number of meetings, sometimes at major cost to their business programmes. We did that because all of us recognise the importance of hearing all sides of the argument. We took on board a number of the concerns about the imbalance that abolition might introduce into the debt recovery system. Three different committees independently came to almost exactly the same conclusion: pass the bill but delay implementation, precisely to allow any resulting imbalance to be addressed by the Executive, but within a reasonable time scale. Indeed, I would argue that the conclusions and recommendations in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's report are carefully thought out, responsible and, above all, reasonable. The Minister for Justice referred to paragraph 48 of our report. I would refer him to paragraphs 47, which is helpfully highlighted for his interest, and 49. We considered those recommendations to be enormously important. In my view, all the committees have acted responsibly. For the Executive to take the view outlined in this rather churlish amendment would mean that a colossal amount of work and time, not just of members but of hard-pressed clerking staff, had been, in essence, totally wasted. It would send a message that the considered views of the committee are to be set at naught, even if they are truly representative of a cross-party consensus—which, on this issue, is clearly the case. I strongly urge the Executive, even at this eleventh hour, to allow its amendment to fall. To do otherwise does a disservice to the committees, to the Parliament as a whole and indeed to the people of Scotland, who almost certainly would find this piece of legislation utterly appropriate and totally welcome.

Does not the minister agree that conversations that he and I—I in my capacity as convener and he as Minister for Justice—have are frequently not meant for public consumption. I respect that—I do not expect the minister to attack me for that.

The minister is well aware that until yesterday I was under the impression that the bill that was to be put before us after the Easter recess was the same bill, but including ECHR compliance. That it will not be was not public knowledge. That makes it extremely difficult to plan. Will the minister accept  that?

I question how many members of this Parliament have a full understanding of precisely what they are voting on in regard to the motion. The members of the media who have contacted me have uniformly expressed extreme frustration at the Executive's unwillingness to be at all forthcoming about its intentions on intrusive surveillance. As far as the public domain is concerned, it seems that, until today, the only announcement was the minister's comment last month that "the Scottish Executive is about to introduce a Bill which will provide legislative cover for the agencies involved in operations involving intrusive surveillance techniques." Otherwise, there has been no fanfare, no further press release and no further information.

I am fascinated by the minister's intention to use that format from now on to make important announcements which, presumably, he wants to keep as quiet as possible. Members of the press have had an extremely difficult time over the past week—I know that because they have told me—trying to find out anything about the Executive's intentions on what it will do in this Parliament about intrusive  surveillance. As the minister said, a bill has been going through Westminster, although it had its second reading only on 6 March. It was introduced in February. It is instructive and a good thing about this Parliament that it is only the advent of the Scottish bill that has generated press interest and scrutiny in Scotland. I make no comment on whether that should or should not have been the case. It is, I freely admit, a lesson in not taking our eye off the ball in regard to Westminster. However, the coverage that both the Westminster bill and the proposed Scottish bill have now received means that this Parliament should tread very carefully indeed. We already know that the incorporation of the European convention on human rights in Scotland, especially given that it concerns the actions of this Parliament itself, goes a good deal further than it does with regard to Westminster, which stays stubbornly thirled to the outdated doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty. This Parliament is in a more modern vein, and cannot afford to be as quite as cavalier as Westminster. For that reason alone, we should be protective of the rights of the people of Scotland, and get the maximum advantage of the incorporation of the ECHR, and not agree willy-nilly that Westminster should be allowed to legislate on devolved matters. Despite the doom-laden prophecies in the run-up to May last year, the Scottish National party has taken a responsible attitude to previous Sewel motions. Where we have agreed, there has been very good reason to agree. I recall my comments in the debate on the motion on the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Bill, regarding the equalisation of the age of consent. That was a Sewel motion on which we registered our agreement. I said then: "as a matter of principle, the SNP does not want Westminster to continue to legislate in devolved areas, which unfortunately seems to be happening almost routinely, not just on this subject, but on others that concern us rather more."— [ Official Report , 19 January 2000; Vol 4, c 227.]  For that motion and that vote, it was perfectly clear that not to have agreed that Westminster could proceed would have set back the projected equalisation in the age of consent by years. The legislation that we were discussing had begun its life before the Scottish Parliament's own birth. An exception could be made at that time, for that reason. At the time of that bill, the Executive was also keen to point out in its memorandum that "it would remain open to the Scottish Parliament if it so wished to amend or repeal in future any Scottish provisions enacted by the passage of the Bill."  I note with some amusement that a similar reassurance is missing from today's memorandum. Why should we also make an exception for this legislation? The truth is that the Executive has given no real reason why this Parliament should concede that Westminster can simply go ahead and legislate for us this time. I read the memorandum accompanying the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Bill. Paragraph 8 states: "It is clearly desirable from the point of view of simplicity that a body that operates throughout the UK should be regulated by a single statute rather than being required to switch to a different regulatory regime". All I can say is: really? One wonders how on earth we have survived for the past 300 years with two distinct legal jurisdictions on this island. A debate about the merits of the bill, either in whole or in part, is not appropriate. Nevertheless, we would all be interested to hear from the minister whether there has been any substantive consultation at a ministerial level on the provisions of the bill. If there has been, what form did it take? After all, strictly speaking, we are not being consulted on the bill today. The Law Society has suggested that, in issuing interception warrants and authorising disclosure of communications data, provision should be made for consultation with the Advocate General for Scotland when the basis for interception is in the interests of state security or the safeguarding of the UK economy. On the other hand, it suggests that consultation with the Lord Advocate would be appropriate when the interception is justified for the purpose of detecting or preventing serious crime. Has any discussion taken place on those lines? Has any thought been given to those, or similar, suggestions? The late introduction of the bills that the minister has spoken about today and the expectation of fast turnround times put this Parliament's committee system under considerable stress. I suppose that, as convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, I could take the view that, with this motion, the Executive is being solicitous of the work load of my committee. Today might be about the Executive doing whatever it can to reduce that work load, including the option of using Westminster as a spill-over Parliament. Is that the reason why we are discussing this matter? Is the Scottish Parliament so busy, and does Westminster have so little to do, that any excuse to send things south must be grabbed? Excuse me if I doubt that. Even if my tongue were not in my cheek on that point and it were true, it would have serious implications. I mentioned that it is instructive that only the advent of the Scottish bill generated the  press and public scrutiny that was deserved. That speaks volumes for our Parliament and is a good reason why we should not agree to the motion. The motion is, predictably, bland. It is couched in terms that suggest that the provisions of the bill are entirely benign. That may be so and the minister tells us that it is so. However, recent coverage suggests otherwise and the debate in Scotland will focus on the implications of the bill, particularly the suggestion that it will legitimise activities that are not legitimate at present. Concerns are being expressed in Westminster by the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives. Given that a Liberal Democrat minister is pressing the legislation here, it is of considerable interest that at Westminster, a colleague of the minister, Simon Hughes, described the bill as "going too far in favour of the state and against the individual."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 6 March 2000; Vol 345, c 787.] Given the substantial concerns about the bill and the lack of a compelling argument from the Executive, the SNP wants to ensure that the maximum number of provisions are subjected to the extensive early scrutiny afforded by the procedures of this Parliament. I urge Parliament to support the SNP amendment. I move amendment S1M-733.1, to leave out from "as set out" to end and insert: "and accordingly agrees that the provisions within the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Bill which relate to devolved matters should be considered by the Scottish Parliament."

I thank the minister for his kind comments about the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. I want to join him in thanking the members of the committee for their work and for surviving the endurance test that they have been put through to get us to this stage. The Deputy Minister for Justice, the Deputy Minister for Community Care and the Executive team have also been part of those long proceedings and we all appreciate their work, particularly at stage 2. We had some careful debates during stage 2, because we were well aware of its controversial aspects and everyone was concerned that our debates—no matter our personal opinions about various amendments—should be conducted in a logical, sane and coherent way. Notwithstanding some of the more alarmist coverage that I occasionally read in the press, I think that we achieved that aim. However, I should say that such coverage was most unhelpful in our attempts to have a sensible debate on these matters. I also want to thank the committee clerk and the clerking team, who worked flat out for the  committee and made things a great deal easier at stage 2 than they would otherwise have been. Every one of us owes them a great debt and we are extremely lucky to have such good clerks working in the Parliament. I note that they were here throughout this afternoon's proceedings, and I suspect that the Presiding Officer and his deputies will have been as grateful for their assistance as I have been over the past months. I will briefly address the bill in general. I reiterate what I said in the stage 1 debate: had the election outcome in May been other than what it was, the Parliament would still have been debating this bill now because it was also part of the SNP's manifesto. I suspect that any bill that we had introduced would have been in much the same terms as this one, so it is evident that there is support across the chamber for this item of the Executive's programme. Everybody recognised that there was a clear need for reform. Because of the controversies that have arisen over certain aspects of this bill, there has been a tendency to overlook the difficulties that people have faced until now. It would have been helpful if those difficulties had also received coverage. A large and increasing number of people have to deal with a member of their family who will now be described as incapable, and currently encounter problems in doing so. This bill will make it considerably easier for them to deal with members of their family who are incapable. Equally, who can decide what about medical treatment of an incapable adult is highly uncertain at present. Doctors can feel unprotected, even when they make relatively minor or routine decisions about treatment, or may feel that they have to delay necessary treatment until some kind of authority has been given. We should be clear that the bill clarifies the legal justification for administering medical treatment that might otherwise be regarded as common assault—that is the kind of thing that we tend to forget. Although I may wish that certain amendments had been carried, I know that even organisations that have concerns that have not been met have not asked us to vote against the bill. That is a measure of what the bill achieves in its totality. I have one question for the Executive—I do not know whether the Deputy Minister for Community Care plans to make one of the winding-up speeches. I think that some time ago the Executive stated its intention to create a Scottish commission for the regulation of care, as recommended in the white paper "Aiming for Excellence". Measures to create such a commission have not been included in the bill. If the Executive still intends to introduce such a commission later, when is that likely to happen? The minister could perhaps say a few words about  that because it may have some bearing on what we have been debating. I thank the Deputy Minister for Justice, everybody who has been involved with the bill and everybody in this chamber. We have managed to get through a long and arduous process relatively unscathed and I think that the Parliament can be proud of itself.

It is worth putting on record some points about the issue. It was interesting to listen to Phil Gallie, in respect of the concern that he has. If people listened carefully to him, they will realise that his concern may apply to all relationships of only six months. In fairness to him, people should not jump to what might otherwise be an obvious conclusion. These are amendments to section 76, which is the interpretation section. As it stands, it would effectively exclude same-sex partners completely, regardless of the length of their relationship. At stage 1, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee agreed unanimously—across all parties—that section 76 required to be changed, as it simply did not reflect the reality of modern society. We included that clear recommendation in our stage 1 report. At stage 2, both the Executive and Nora Radcliffe, from the Equal Opportunities  Committee, lodged amendments to try to achieve the aim on which we had all agreed. After debate, both the Executive amendment and Nora Radcliffe's amendment were withdrawn, and the Executive undertook to lodge a revised amendment. That could be held up as an ideal example of what can happen at stage 2. Here was a situation in which, in effect, both sides were agreed on the principle that we were trying to achieve, and in which there was real debate about the best wording of any potential amendment, to satisfy that principle. Both sides were prepared to admit that the wording of the amendments was not quite right, and to return with a slightly different wording to try to realise the principle. That shows how, at stage 2, even when there is broad agreement on an issue, there are still aspects that need to be dealt with if a committee is doing its work correctly. Via that procedure, we now have what is probably the best possible compromise amendment to realise the principle effectively. We are putting same-sex partners in the same position as unmarried heterosexual partners. The bill will apply the same test to both categories of relationship, but will not enter the minefield of deciding whether there should be equivalence between married and unmarried relationships. There are issues that might be considered in another place, concerning whether six months is an appropriate length of time for any of those relationships. However, the key objective is to introduce an aspect of equality into the bill, and I hope that individual members will express their opinions on that aspect today.

I do not wish to speak in opposition to the amendment; rather, I wish to raise a question. Is there a potential knock-on effect on the local authority, because it is not notified? Might a local authority think that it should check up on a situation, if it has no information to the contrary? Has that aspect been considered?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. This arises out of my experience of voting on amendments in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. There have been two occasions today when amendments have been taken out of numerical order—we took amendment 133 just now and we voted on amendment 154 earlier. However, an earlier group included amendment 145, which we did not vote on because we would eventually reach it according to numerical order. We seem to have confused the system. We appear to be taking amendments out of numerical order, notwithstanding the earlier decision.

My questions are for the minister, because on the face of it Phil Gallie's amendment is not hugely controversial, particularly as we have already had debates about keeping the bill in line with the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 on other matters. The minister may be correct, but I am curious about what he said. Does he have the figures for the number of approved medical practitioners under the act? How is approval obtained? Is it extremely difficult to get, or is it relatively straightforward? Would it create a big obstacle in future if more medical practitioners were to apply for such approval?

It is clear to all members that the amendments are fairly technical. It is also fair to say that some aspects of the amendments reflect issues that were raised during stage 2 at meetings of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, where questions were asked about the bill's compliance with the Hague convention. As convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, I should say that that shows that the Parliament's committee system is capable of raising issues that might not have been at the forefront of even the ministers' minds. I  congratulate the minister on lodging these amendments, to which I think he will find little objection.

The SNP has no objection to these amendments. However, I would like the minister to clarify what resources local authorities will receive to carry out the functions to which he has referred. Has any assessment been made of the extent to which that function will put pressure on local authority resources? If so, what has it shown? If a local authority found that resourcing was a problem, how would that be solved?

I am grateful to the minister for his comments. When I first examined the amendment, there did not appear to be anything intrinsically wrong with it, although I was not clear as to specifically why the different wording was better than the existing wording. I think that I recognise the definition in the amendment as coming from the Alliance for the Promotion of the Incapable Adults Bill. I recall that its concern centred on people with a brain injury or other physical impairment, such as a stroke, which would cause them communication difficulties. One of the difficulties that I have when I consider the amendment in relation to the existing definition is how the existing definition does not cover those conditions already. I cannot see in what way it fails to do so. The deliberations on the bill have been undergone with a recognition that the Millan committee was examining similar issues. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee decided that either we would consider the matter as if there was a blank page and we would invent a definition of some of those matters, or we had to accept that we would work with existing definitions and carry out a review when the Millan committee reported. In the circumstances, the concern is correct that if the amendment is accepted and a definition included in the bill that is different from the definition in the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984, we might find that Millan will require further amendment to be made. There is therefore very little to drive this amendment being accepted. I would be interested to hear Phil Gallie indicate precisely why the wording is better than the existing definition in respect of acquired brain injury or stroke and why we should unilaterally invent a new definition, when we know that the Millan committee will require us to review the situation.

I congratulate my colleague, Alex Salmond, on obtaining this members' debate. As another MSP with prison interests—when I was first elected, I had three prisons in my constituency, but  boundary changes have changed that to two—I know only too well how incredibly important those institutions can be in a local population. I heartily endorse what Alex had to say on the wider impact of the closure in the circumstances. This possible closure comes against a background of other, announced, closures. The possible grand total now stands at four—against, according to evidence given to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, a projected continued rise in prison numbers. That does not make a great deal of sense, and the minister will have to address that point when he responds. I expect the minister's response to include reference to the fact that he is not in charge of operational decision making and that this matter falls into that category. The minister is responsible for setting out the overall policy. Ultimately, the minister is the only person who can be held directly accountable—that is the way in which our democracy works. The chief executive does not have a democratic mandate. The minister sets the parameters in which the chief executive must reach decisions. Will the minister say how the proposal for Peterhead fits into the wider prison policy? I refer the minister to the report of HM chief inspector of prisons for Scotland, in which he says how impressed he is with what goes on at Peterhead, commends its success in reducing drug use—the prison was becoming almost drug free—and the STOP programme, to which members have already referred. As with the closure of Dungavel prison, the reward for success seems to be closure. That is not the way forward. Clive Fairweather also said in his report that at Peterhead "a lot of effort was going into helping prisoners to address their offending behaviour, more so perhaps than we have seen elsewhere." It seems astonishing that we are suggesting that such prisons should close. Not 30 minutes ago I spoke to a prison officer who is in Pitlochry at the Prison Officers Association annual conference. He said that the closure of Peterhead prison would be a nightmare for the rest of the Prison Service because, without disrupting other prisons, it would be very difficult to deliver programmes on offending behaviour on the same basis as at Peterhead. He also said that the segregation that would be required in other prisons would result in much more restrictive regimes for the prisoners displaced from Peterhead. I reiterate my question to the minister. What does the projected closure of Peterhead mean in the context of overall prison policy?

If we can spare the time.

Does Gordon Jackson think that, if the age of criminal responsibility was set at eight, it would survive a challenge?

I would like to say at the outset that the Scottish National party starts from a position of unequivocally supporting the incorporation of the European convention on human rights into Scots law. Nothing that has happened in the past nine months changes our commitment to that in any way. I add in passing that it is refreshing to know that now when someone utters the words human rights, journalists and others sit up and take notice instead of yawning. Recently, there has been some controversy over a court decision which stated that activities in this Parliament would be subject to court review. The SNP does not fear that. After all, if we consider it objectively, that is the way in which the vast majority of democratic Parliaments work, and it is wholly in keeping with the old Scottish constitutional doctrine of popular sovereignty. The Westminster notion of the sovereignty of Parliament has always been the notion that sat oddly in Scotland. It is worth pointing out that  Westminster is the odd one out internationally. That is what written constitutions and bills of rights are undeniably about; they are nothing if not ways of enshrining rights that even a Parliament cannot override. The SNP has always argued for an independence constitution that would include both a written constitution and a bill of rights, in keeping with the international norm. I repeat that Westminster is the anomaly; this Parliament sits more neatly into normal parliamentary practice. My colleague Michael Matheson and I were in Ireland last week, so I was interested in David McLetchie's comments about Ireland. The Irish are noticeably relaxed about the possibility of incorporation. On several occasions, people there said that if they had any concerns about incorporating ECHR, it was that the convention was probably not as robust as the human rights principles that had been built into their constitution. I have to say that, in response, we murmured that perhaps they would like to study the Scottish experience before they became too complacent. Obviously, our experience in Scotland means that the mention of human rights causes a rather mixed reaction. Although I listened to Mr McLetchie's speech, the Conservatives have been uniformly hostile to the whole notion up to now. I note that even today's motion does not go so far as to welcome ECHR. There is a grudging acceptance that we have got it, so we have to get on with it, which is a bit like their attitude towards devolution.

I hear what Mr McLetchie is saying, but the Conservatives' tone is one of grudging acceptance of a situation which most of us have welcomed. I sometimes wish that the Conservatives would accept the truth that such incorporation is widely welcomed in most countries. We share, however, the Conservatives' concern about the preparations that have been made not just by this Executive, but by the Westminster Labour Administration from 1997 to 1999. Once the decision was taken to go ahead with incorporation, it was their responsibility to minimise its likely impact. ECHR was incorporated into Scots law by way of the Scotland Act 1998. During the various stages of the debate on the Human Rights Bill in Westminster in 1998, the implications of that were discussed. From what I remember, those discussions tended to centre around very specific cases that were put to us theoretically by  concerned organisations. We then tried to discover whether their fears were justified. One such debate focused on an issue related to the Church of Scotland in particular. I do not think that members really need to know the details of the debate; however, they might be interested in the comments of the then Secretary of State for Scotland, Donald Dewar, who is of course now our First Minister. On 20 May 1998, he said: "The European convention on human rights has been available for use since 1953. I understand that it may be a little easier to get to the courts once the convention has been imported into the ambit of the domestic courts, but human rights cases are often contentious and difficult cases. The fact that, in the past 45 years, no one has gone to the European Court of Human Rights and tried to challenge my interpretation and understanding of the situation"— relating to the Church of Scotland— "is of some significance . . . It is a little bit . . . the case of the dog that did not bark, but, if we are going to have these problems, I think that we would have at least a few yaps in those 45 years, and they have been conspicuous by their absence. "I am not terribly impressed . . . with the idea that suddenly the floodgates will open, when no one can point me to any single change other than the forum in which the cases may be heard that will result from the Bill."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 20 May 1998; Vol 312, c 1067-68.] Of course, hindsight is great. If nothing else, perhaps Donald Dewar's relaxed attitude to the effect of a change in forum will have undergone a radical rethink. No one could argue that the assumptions on which incorporation were presumably based were rather wide of the mark. However, there were voices even then, and in the run-up to the elections in 1999, that cautioned a more constructive approach to human rights and the challenges posed by the new dispensation. There were also warnings about potentially adverse decisions. Those warnings came quite early and included warnings about the ruling on temporary sheriffs, which was one of the most controversial rulings. The decision was widely expected and widely predicted to go against the Lord Advocate. Yet, when the inevitable happened, it seemed that absolutely no contingency plans were ready to be implemented. That was the real failure and it has had a direct impact on the workings of the Scottish courts. The Executive has said that rulings under ECHR have not caused chaos in our courts, but that depends on how chaos is defined. The result of the ruling on temporary sheriffs has been that, in many jurisdictions, chaos can be avoided only by rescheduling civil cases, as criminal cases work to a much stricter timetable. To argue that those who seek civil redress in the courts should get a poorer service is not good enough.  In some of our courts, the situation is little short of scandalous. David McLetchie referred to the waiting times for civil cases in some parts of Scotland. In Stirling, Fort William and Banff, waiting times have more than doubled. In other places, such as Perth and Kirkcaldy, waiting times have gone up markedly. I remind members that civil cases include cases involving custody and access and debt and reparation. The situation is unacceptable. The Executive may not call it chaos, but I wonder how bad things will be allowed to get. I am contacted regularly by solicitors in various parts of the country who advise me that things are getting worse, not better. An ounce of preparation might have avoided some of the problems.

I do not doubt that sheriffs principal are doing their very best, but it is clear from the figures that, in many jurisdictions, they are doing a juggling act. In some parts of Scotland, the situation is causing real problems. I know that some organisations and agencies have started to look at the problem. I know that the Association of Chief Police Officers (Scotland) has set up a working group to consider the likely implications of ECHR on police practices and procedures. I do not know how far it has got, or what specifically is being examined—I know no more about that than I do about any of the detail of what the Executive is or is not doing. Frankly, bland reassurances are no longer adequate. People are beginning to lose trust. There are concerns about confidence that must be addressed. When I hear the phrase "compliant with ECHR", I no longer have confidence that it will turn out to be compliant. We know that more than 300 challenges have been made under the ECHR in the past nine months. I had understood only eight to have been upheld. Perhaps Pauline McNeill, my colleague on the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, knows more than I do and the figure has gone up. We can be certain that the figures for challenges and successes will increase markedly over the coming months and years. I am alarmed at the First Minister's view. Two weeks ago, he made it clear in the debate on the Lord Advocate's resignation that the Executive's attitude is to sit back and wait for challenges and to wait for the outcome. It should come as no great surprise that such a laid-back attitude is not getting a great deal of admiration from those who think that responsibility in this area should be  about avoiding challenges, and particularly about avoiding ending up in court. Some challenges are inevitable and some will inevitably be successful. I have said repeatedly—and say again—that the age of criminal responsibility in Scotland, set, as it is, at eight years old, is almost certain to be challenged sooner or later and will have to be changed. Is a change being considered? If not, why not? It is not good enough to wait for a challenge, which we can be sure will come at a point of maximum controversy, so that, instead of being able to take a decision calmly, we will end up in one of those great tabloid brouhahas.

It is inevitable that Gordon Jackson would ask that question. The truth is that once we decide that eight years old is not acceptable, we need to start the process of consulting to work out what is acceptable. I am not going to pull a figure out of thin air any more than I would expect anyone else to do so. At this stage, I want some reassurance that it is at least recognised that eight years of age will not stand as the threshold. I do not believe that it will. I do not think that any lawyer I have ever spoken to believes that eight will stand as far as a challenge under ECHR is concerned. When it comes to considering the setting up of a human rights commission, the Conservative motion really means no more than that the Tories are adopting the same stance as the Executive—and I hope that we get a stronger stance from the Executive. I accept that the Executive's position may have been understandable a year or two ago, but I do not think that it is acceptable now. A human rights commission is not some strange exotic beast. Many such commissions are already in existence. The United Nations strongly endorses them, recognising that the protection of human rights is fundamentally a national responsibility. The SNP wants a commission which would fulfil a wide range of functions. It should promote good practice, and public authorities and private bodies would be covered by human rights legislation. It should be seen not only as a provider of advice to the Executive, Parliament and other public bodies, but as fostering a wider awareness of human rights principles among the public. Frankly, however, if my recent surgeries are anything to go by, Scots are already waking up to the possibilities of ECHR. During my most recent  surgery, three people came in, individually, clutching newspapers that had covered the subject and asking whether ECHR would apply to their specific problems. I am advised that a Crown Office human rights working group was set up in 1998, but it is difficult to find out details of the work that it undertook, what conclusions it came to or what changes were made as a result of its findings. I have read, however, that it is greatly satisfied that ECHR puts it in a better position than the defence. We are entitled to be concerned about how equitable this is: public money spent on only one side of the equation. The human rights commission should also provide a scrutinising function for draft legislation and policy. It is most frustrating for MSPs to be routinely refused any information and detail about the advice that the Executive has received. I do not understand why that should continue to be the case. I know that the Executive, in the person of the Minister for Justice, has not ruled out setting up a Scottish human rights commission. The problem is that neither has he committed himself to the principle. I wish he would do so, and I hope that he does so today. I know that he is waiting to hear from the Scottish human rights forum, which hopes to have prepared some sort of consultation document for mid-April. Surely, however, we can be in a position to commit not to the detail, but at least to the principle, and to proceed on that basis. The ECHR is important for Scotland, for the people of Scotland—not just for public bodies such as the Parliament and local authorities, but for individuals as well. I respectfully hope that we will get answers to some of the specific questions posed today. I move amendment S1M-610.2, to delete from "consider" to end and insert: "establish a Human Rights Commission which would advise both the Parliament and the Executive, issue guidance and promote good practice in public authorities, promote greater access to justice and advise on wider international human rights obligations."

It was as a reparations assistant.

I have been called many things in my time, but Conservative is not one of them. I got the first pager message about Lord Hardie's resignation at 7.10 pm last night. It seemed an odd time for such an announcement to be made, but I understand that that was precipitated because the news was supposed to have been managed somewhat better, and placed as an exclusive with one particular newspaper. Somehow, it got away from the Executive, which was panicked into releasing the news more generally last night. I ask the First Minister to comment on that information. Presumably he knows about it for sure, as he has stated that he is a close personal friend of the Lord Advocate.

I am sure that the individual who advised me of the news will be interested to hear the First Minister's comments. One newspaper understood that it had the exclusive, and was not happy that that turned out not to be the case. I said that the First Minister would know, because he described himself as a close personal friend of the outgoing Lord Advocate. I wonder at that remark at a time when the whole issue of judicial appointments is under question generally, never mind specifically. Judicial appointments are not just under question. If we are to believe the assurances of the Minister for Justice in the past month, they will be under review. The promised consultation on judicial appointments keeps receding. At the risk of adding to my own work load in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee—and I see other committee members groaning already—I hope that the First Minister will take the opportunity in his closing remarks to tell us once and for all when the consultation will start, how long it is intended to last and when we might see concrete change. Whether the First Minister likes it or not—and with respect to my committee colleague Pauline McNeill—this is only a watershed if it is the last time that this secretive method of promotion is  ever used. Will the First Minister please make the commitment to the Parliament that this will be the last time? I note that however much contributors try to qualify their remarks, the fact is that they agree with what I have said on judicial appointments. I frequently welcome the incorporation of the European Convention on Human Rights into Scots law, and will not accept any criticism on that count, but I and many others have been continually asking questions about our preparedness for the change and about the Lord Advocate's role in getting the country ready for it, in my case to the extent of calling for a human rights commission. The Executive, of which the Lord Advocate is a member, is still havering and dithering on that important question. At 5 minutes past 5 tonight, will the First Minister instruct Colin Boyd—because he will be the new Lord Advocate—along with the Minister for Justice, to get on to the issue of a human rights commission as a matter of urgency? If not, does that mean that the shambles of the past nine months will continue? I believe that the Scottish people deserve a great deal better than that, just as they deserve better over Lockerbie. It is not good enough for the First Minister to pretend that this move is just bad timing. Of course, it is extremely bad timing; it is also bewildering, not just for us and for Scotland. It will no doubt cause real consternation internationally; it has already done so among the families of the victims. Unlike my colleague Kenny MacAskill, I have not been calling for the Lord Advocate's resignation for the past nine months. No doubt Kenny thinks that I should have been. I have, however, been calling for the Lord Advocate and the rest of the Executive to do their jobs. It is my view that they simply have not done so. The First Minister's complacent approach this afternoon suggests that notwithstanding any change of personnel, nothing will change in the future. If that is the way that we are to go on, that should be a matter of great concern to everyone in this Parliament. The challenges will not go away. There is a crisis facing Scots law. The Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration is failing miserably in facing that challenge and the law officers are implicated in that failure. For goodness' sake—for Scotland's sake—will somebody get a grip.

No doubt in due course the current and future Lord Advocates will, unless there is a change to the judicial appointments system, find their own way on to the bench. The motion is about recommendations for appointments; the text is uncontroversial. What is controversial is the manner in which the vacancies have come about and the timing. The First Minister's contribution made for interesting listening—interesting more for what he did not say than for what he did say. The stark truth is that the development is extraordinary and quite unexpected. A member of the Cabinet has gone, in circumstances that can be described only as self-promotion, at a time when there is an unprecedented challenge to our whole system of criminal and civil justice. Worse than that, the individual in question has been one of the key people responsible for preparing for that challenge, a task that has led to him being severely criticised, in my view, rightly. The joint function that the Lord Advocate embodies, political by virtue of his membership of the Executive and independent by virtue of his legal role, has resulted in a great deal of adverse comment. It is nonsense for Labour back benchers to suggest that no one must "play politics" with this issue. The Lord Advocate is a member of the Cabinet—how much more political can anyone get? If people are not happy about that, I suggest that they remove his political function rather than complain when perfectly valid political points are made.  A number of serious issues are raised by the manner of the Lord Advocate's going and the consequential appointments, not least of which is the international consternation already caused. I listened with great interest to some of the relatives of Lockerbie victims interviewed this morning on the radio. For the record, I repeat the statement of one of those relatives, which the First Minister dismissed as an exaggeration: "When we met with Lord Hardie last summer, he told us that he was going to oversee the trial and he would be there, coming in and out, he would oversee things. I am appalled and amazed that at a moment like this when you have a major trial, a trial such as you've never had in your history that the Lord Advocate just decides to leave." It is extraordinary that an American woman none of us has met and who probably knows very little about the Scottish legal system appears to understand more about the relevance of the Lockerbie trial than does the First Minister. There were expressions of shock from those relatives because apparently the Lord Advocate had personally reassured them that he would be overseeing the Lockerbie trial right through to its end. So much for the personal assurances of the outgoing Lord Advocate. On the eve of the trial starting, a great many people—not least of them the bereaved families—will feel a strong sense of let-down that Lord Hardie has chosen to depart the field. Scotland should feel let down. Arguably the trial is one of the most important in the history of Scottish criminal justice. The eyes of the world will be on us. On the eve of the trial starting, the man who has been responsible for every one of the key decisions in the prosecution since 1997 has chosen to up sticks. What kind of message does that send out? It is an abdication of responsibility not worthy of Scotland's most senior law officer. The very least that Lord Hardie could have done, from a professional and personal perspective, was to see the trial through to a close. By not doing so, he leaves the door open to a great deal of speculation on whether he has confidence in the outcome. [Interruption.] There is no point the First Minister screwing up his face—he knows as well as I do that speculation about the strength of the evidence has been running now for over two years. This decision hardly bolsters confidence. [Interruption.]

The Lockerbie trial is not the only controversial aspect of what has occurred in the past 24 hours. For the Lord Advocate as senior law officer, it was one of his responsibilities to ensure that Scotland was well prepared for the incorporation of the ECHR into  Scots law. Lord Hardie has been Lord Advocate since 1997, well before the change was proposed and effected. We are entitled to assume that he had a hand in the decision to incorporate the ECHR—so it is even more remarkable that we are in this situation. Let me be clear. The Scottish National party welcomes that incorporation. What we are unhappy about is the fact that the Executive appears to have been totally unprepared for the reality of what it meant. We are entitled to ask whether the Lord Advocate's departure at this crucial stage means that there are more crises ahead. Perhaps he has felt like someone trapped on a train line with a runaway train heading at full speed towards him. It is handy, is it not, to be in a position to realise that, first of all, one's job is going belly up and that, secondly, one can get oneself promoted out of it. The new Lord Advocate cannot escape the blame because, as Solicitor General, he also dealt with day-to-day preparations for the incorporation of the ECHR. People can draw their own conclusions as to whether that performance merited promotion. Week after week, we have heard a saga of stories about temporary sheriffs, children's panels and the impact on road traffic law—and goodness knows what else is in the offing—all of which was, apparently, unforeseen. The outgoing Lord Advocate was where the buck stopped, and it is difficult not to come to the conclusion that the going got rough so he got going. The verdict across a wide spectrum of opinion is that he has singularly failed in his duty to the Scottish justice system—and for that he is rewarded, virtually by his own hand. That brings me to the next question that is raised by these announcements. Lord Hardie's departure shows that our current way of making judicial appointments is a complete and utter nonsense. Effectively, the going got rough for him so he got going, onwards and upwards in spite of the mess that was left behind. Surely reform of the process of judicial appointments through the creation of a judicial appointments board is now urgent. I know that the First Minister has pointed out that there might be a consultation on judicial appointments. The problem is that it keeps receding into the distance. The Executive does not appear to understand or accept the fact that the old system of patronage has long since ceased to appear reasonable in the eyes of the general public or indeed in the eyes of the legal profession. It is the year 2000. To use a phrase popular with new Labour, this is a new Scotland, and we are certainly sitting in a new Parliament. Surely we  should be finding new ways of doing things. We should remove once and for all the power of patronage from the Lord Advocate, who is, after all, a senior member of the Government. It is that very patronage that has already caused some of the problems with the ECHR, and we certainly cannot allow it to continue any longer. To paraphrase The Scotsman this morning, how independent will our judicial system seem when the chief prosecutor appoints the chief prosecutor to the bench? It is a nonsense. Neither should we tolerate the lack of transparency and accountability inherent in a system that has remained unchanged for centuries and which is no longer appropriate. We are grateful to Mike Rumbles and the Standards Committee for making time for the debate this afternoon. It seems extraordinary that the Executive did not plan for a timeous statement in the chamber and left the issue to the convener of the Standards Committee. That was unworthy of the Executive, and the entire exercise leaves a very bad taste. I hope that we will never see a repetition.

Will the First Minister give way?

The First Minister is at risk of having headlines that read, "Crisis? What crisis?" Does he not accept that the Lord Advocate has faced unprecedented criticism for the past nine months, and that to pretend otherwise is disingenuous in the extreme?

There are very good reasons for us to have some form of discussion this afternoon on the Lord Advocate's departure. Three main issues must be canvassed: Lockerbie, the European convention on human rights, and judicial appointments. I welcome the minister's comments and urge all parties to agree to deal with the matter this afternoon.

To ask the Scottish Executive when ministers last met representatives of the Scottish Prison Service trade union side and what matters they discussed. (S1O-1106)

Will the minister confirm that, with that sole exception and despite repeated requests, he has refused to meet representatives of the SPS trade union side? Is he aware that the trade union side wishes to discuss with him a wide range of concerns that go well beyond the issue of closures? Does he agree that such a refusal is an astonishing response from a  Labour-led Administration? Is such a refusal to meet union leaders now Executive policy?

Notwithstanding that answer, does the minister realise that the position of the leaders of the Scottish Prison Officers Association and other trade unions is that he has rebuffed consistently their requests for a meeting to talk not about the specific issue that he refers to, but about general issues? They have wide-ranging concerns beyond the closure issue and he has point-blank refused to meet them. He refers all requests to the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met Tayside Health Board and what issues were discussed. (S1O-1072)

The minister will, I am sure, be aware of my constituents' great concern about the impact of the acute services review on the Tayside Health Board area—in particular, the impact on the services delivered at present by Perth royal infirmary. On Monday, I met staff from the maternity unit at PRI. There are great fears about the future of maternity services there. Will the minister say whether he or his boss is prepared to come and listen directly to my constituents' concerns? I have now invited them to do so twice.

To ask the First Minister what proposals there are to deal with the release of convicted sex offenders back into the community. (S1F-58)

I thank the First Minister for his reply. In the light of John Cronin's release from supervision, does he share my concern that many female lawyers and MSPs appear to be reluctant to comment, on the record, on that and similar cases? Does he agree that the challenge that is posed to the criminal justice system by a very small number of individuals needs to be addressed urgently by reconsidering the options that are open to sheriffs and judges when they are confronted by such as Cronin?

We are all keen to make the most of this opportunity to debate what is a serious issue for the whole of Scotland. Drug legislation, specifically the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, is reserved to Westminster. Despite that, we have all recognised that in many of the devolved areas—health, education and justice, for example—there is the capacity for an enormous amount of work to be done and for effective change to take place. Scotland can still be an example to the rest of the United Kingdom if it chooses to be. We can be an example of best practice and achievement rather than a provider of depressing statistics, which appears to be our role at the moment. That means that this Parliament can play an important role in the debate. Are we doing so? Today's debate should be as constructive as possible. We might not all agree on every aspect  of the way forward, but we agree that a way forward must be found, for the good of all Scotland. The problem is enormously complex. If there were simple answers, we would have found them by now. Some of the things that are currently being done might not work; others that have not been tried might succeed. The complex nature of the problem becomes clear when we consider that there is not only one problem but a series of them. It follows that there cannot be one solution. That poses a policy challenge for us all. Different drugs are used in different ways, often by different groups of people. Cocaine is used across society and its use has increased exponentially in the past decade. Information has, in the past, suggested that most cocaine users are professionals and, because such individuals normally have the financial means to support their drug use, the authorities have remained unaware of the extent of the use of the drug. We usually receive only anecdotal information about it from our newspapers or from certain scenes on football fields. Recent information suggests that the pattern of the use of the drug might be changing. If that is true, it will be interesting to see whether the tone of media coverage of the problem changes. There are signs that that is happening. Not so long ago, heroin was cheaper than cannabis, a fact that helped fuel its widespread use. The European Union drugs monitoring survey suggests that 2 per cent of British 15 and 16-year-olds have tried heroin at least once. I would suggest that that puts Mo Mowlam's recent confession of past cannabis use into perspective. Heroin seems to be the UK's drug of choice—the same survey indicated that nearly half of all heroin seized in the European Union is seized in the UK. We all know the serious problems that Scotland has with heroin. Although the survey does not allow us to ascertain the Scottish figure, there is an apprehension that the figure would be higher than 2 per cent in that age group. We know that cannabis is used widely. The survey indicated that almost 40 per cent of 15 and 16-year-olds in England and Wales had tried cannabis; the figure is probably higher in Scotland. The debate surrounding the use of cannabis is familiar to most of us—some members might speak about that issue today—so it will be sufficient to say that most people do not put cannabis in the same category as drugs such as heroin. That fact is reflected in its classification in the legislation. On top of that, there is the problem posed by the so-called recreational drugs, principally ecstasy, and the additional difficulties that arise as a result of amphetamine and tranquilliser use and abuse. None of that addresses the problems that are posed in society by alcohol abuse. If there are  many offenders in our courts for whom one might reasonably say that the real reason for their appearance is their drug habit, the same can be said, perhaps even more emphatically, about alcohol. There has been much debate in the press recently about the shocking drug death statistic in Strathclyde, with 146 drug-related deaths in 1999, an increase of 50 per cent on the previous year. That is an appallingly high number. Equally appalling would be the number of directly alcohol-related deaths in the same one-year period: it would be four figures, not three. By raising the issue of alcohol abuse, it is not my intention to minimise the drug problem; instead, it is an attempt to widen the debate to deal with the issue of what might be better termed substance abuse and, separately, the question of addiction. In a sense, what we are doing when we seek answers to the various drug problems and set in place the appropriate rehabilitation resources is to deal with the very real medical question of addiction. I will leave a more detailed discussion of that to those who may be better qualified than myself on the medical side. The point that I wish to make, in raising the issue here, is that what is required is a strategy that deals across the board with the problem of addiction. As we all know, addiction is not confined to illegal drugs. Any national strategy in Scotland must, as the Executive motion recognises, operate on a multi-agency basis. That should include a realistic and pragmatic approach to reducing the demand, together with accessible education packages and an acceptance that harm limitation has a part to play. I confess that I am losing track a little of the number of units, task forces and groups that are being set up. I notice that more were announced today; it would be useful if at some point we could see a chart that clearly identifies all those that are in practice and how they work with each other. It should be part of the approach that there is regular research carried out that identifies both successes and failures. I hope that some of what the minister announced today will help that. We should not be shy about making clear assessments of what has not worked and why it has not worked. It is better to establish that one approach is not appropriate than to try no approach at all. In turn, failure should be seen not as a disaster, but as the elimination of one particular way of dealing with an issue. However, identifying successful ventures carries with it a heavy responsibility. We cannot be in the business of doing what happens frequently: money is put into pilot projects or schemes that provide options to the few individuals who are lucky enough to live in the catchment area but which, successful or not, never seem to be  followed up anywhere else. That leads to a patchy mishmash of provision, a form of postcode lottery. It is not just in this particular area that that can happen. I understand the need and the desire to roll out schemes on a pilot basis. Indeed, that is often the only way to start the process. The problem is how to turn the pilot into something that operates right across the country, which is where we begin to fail in Scotland. It is not something that is confined only to the past couple of years; it has been endemic for decades. Many members may wish to express concern about the lack of provision in their own areas—I know that such concern exists. Often, the lack of resources impacts on other aspects of dealing with the problem. One of the biggest difficulties we face in Scotland is that unevenness of provision. I hope that the minister will directly address that difficulty in his closing remarks. I turn to some aspects of the debate that fall more neatly into the justice remit, but which were not heavily canvassed in the minister's initial contribution. The Scottish National party is keen to learn about best practice in other countries. The minister has frequently, although not today, expressed his admiration for the work that the Irish have been doing in the area of criminal assets confiscation. I wish to raise some specific questions with him about his understanding of that experiment, which is very popular in Ireland. According to some sources in Ireland, the operation of the Criminal Assets Bureau has forced several major drug dealers to relocate their assets—and in some cases, their criminal activities—abroad, primarily to the UK, Netherlands and Spain. From the Irish point of view, that is a desirable outcome. However, it may be less desirable from the point of view of the countries on the receiving end of those displaced persons and activities. It might be argued that, by this means, every jurisdiction will be forced to adopt the same policy and, eventually, such activity will be displaced from the European Union altogether. That will take some considerable time. Does the minister have any comment to make about the likely effect on our near neighbours in Europe and the rest of the United Kingdom if Scotland chooses to go down the same road as Ireland?

I know that discussions take place at a European level about  several transnational problems, including drugs. I have some concerns about the lack of direct involvement of the Scottish ministers with the European debate. Perhaps we should come back to the matter in a different debate.

The member will recall that I prefaced my remarks by saying that I hoped that the debate would be constructive. Although I have questions for the Executive, I am trying to put them reasonably and sincerely, to elicit information. I do not think that comments such as those made by the member are in any way helpful to the debate. I would like to return to the question of the Criminal Assets Bureau. Try as I might, I can get no clear statistics—

No, I am not taking another intervention from the member. I can get no clear statistics to support the proposition that the work of the Criminal Assets Bureau has led to a perceptible reduction in the amount of drugs entering and sold in Ireland. As the onus of proof in cases involving the bureau is on the accused—which runs counter to every established precept of Scots law—only one individual whose assets have been seized has thus far been convicted of a recognisably criminal offence. I believe that the person was convicted of murder and not of dealing drugs. Does the minister have different information and, if so, will he take the opportunity to add that to the debate?  I hope that the minister agrees that it would be most unfortunate if we moved to a situation in which we taxed dealers punitively by this method, yet did not take them off the streets. That may be one reason why no model has yet been proposed for Scotland—perhaps, despite the initial interest, a closer inspection showed that the Irish Criminal Assets Bureau has not been the success in reality that it has been in terms of public relations. There are questions to be asked about the drugs enforcement agency, to which the minister referred. I have some concerns about what has been announced so far. The Executive seems to have launched the agency with no clearly set targets and despite the fact that other agencies that are involved in enforcement, such as Customs and Excise, have had to endure cuts over the years. To the concerns about the direction of the drugs enforcement agency must be added the furore over the clawback of £13 million from the Scottish Prison Service, a cut that will lead directly to job losses and prison closures. I have some quotations from the minister that directly contradict quotations from the person who is presumably his boss in the Cabinet. I refer the minister to today's report in The Scotsman about the number of deaths that occur in the weeks immediately following release from prison. That suggests that the problem of drugs in prison is not, as yet, being addressed properly. We are taking money out of the Prison Service—perhaps there should be a rethink on that.

It may be that the drugs enforcement agency will be a resounding success. However, there is a lack of any substantial information on anything but its immediate future. Without that information, it is difficult to come to any reasonable judgment. I hope that the minister will address some of those questions, and the ones that I suspect my colleagues will put later in the debate.

The information in The Scotsman today suggests that the rehabilitation services in prisons are not sufficient to deal with the problem.

Well, the ministers say that it is different, but no matter what Mr MacKay says, £13 million has been taken out of the Scottish Prison Service, money that may well have been better used within the service to do the kinds of things that are required.

No, I have a time limit, which—even if the Presiding Officer adds on time to allow for interventions—will cause me difficulties.

The drugs enforcement agency is an idea that originated in the United States of America, and the Criminal Assets Bureau is an Irish example for us to consider. Another example from international experience, which might be useful for us in Scotland to consider, is one that I have raised before: drugs courts. They are beginning to spring up in many countries, for example, in the USA, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and, as I understand it, in Ireland too, as of this month. The aim of those courts is to provide a treatment-led response to drugs and drugs-related crime, a response that builds on a partnership between law enforcement agencies and treatment services. The minister has mentioned that part of the drugs enforcement agency's work will be done in partnership with some of those agencies. That would be another way of building that into the justice system. The courts bridge the gap between punishment and treatment for the user, and not—it should be emphasised—for the dealer. The discipline that is imposed on the offender is very challenging, and failure to comply is likely to result in a return to the mainstream courts and a swift incarceration thereafter.

No, if the minister does not mind, I would like to continue, as I am  struggling for time. The individuals who are dealt with in drugs courts may be those who appear because of drugs-related offences. However, the courts may also target people who are there for apparently non-drugs-related offences, but for whom the real problem is their substance abuse. I note that the Scottish Drugs Forum has gone public in calling for the introduction of drugs courts in Scotland. In the past, ministers have not wanted to dismiss the idea completely; but this particular minister has apparently gone on record as saying that he believed that the American system could not be used in Scotland's current judicial set-up. I am not clear why he thinks that. Scotland's court structure provides opportunities for the development of such drugs courts; equally, the children's panel system offers a culture of non-adversarial proceedings that could be extended into adult courts. The point about the model of drugs courts that is beginning to appear in the countries that I listed earlier is that they are essentially methods by which we can divert from custody those for whom the drugs courts represent the next most likely disposal option for the judge. Entry into the programme occurs within days of arrest, and not when people appear before the court at a trial. The courts are fast working. They are not the whole answer, but they may be part of an answer. To work properly, they require investment in the infrastructure of rehabilitation and through care. As Scotland is not a model of provision, I concede that, at this stage, the only reasonable option is to develop a model that is appropriate for Scotland's justice system and pilot it in an area where the provision of back-up services is at least adequate. One positive suggestion is the introduction of drugs courts. As already mentioned, the Scottish Drugs Forum has endorsed the idea and I understand that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has been actively considering it for some time. It fits perfectly with the multi-agency approach that is vital if we are to make any headway with the overall problem. I commend it to the minister. I also ask the minister to give serious backing to the proposal for a committee of the Parliament, which we have suggested should be called the substance misuse strategy committee—although I will not go to the barricades about the committee's title. It is vital for the Parliament to take ownership of the growing problem of substance abuse in Scotland. Such a committee, the members of which could come from the various interested committees, would perfectly reflect the multi-agency commitment in the Executive's motion. At the moment, it is possible for all four of the  named committees—Justice and Home Affairs, Education, Culture and Sport, Health and Community Care and Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector—to address at any one time some aspect of the debate as part of their own agendas, but in isolation from each other. In a sense, the Parliament currently reflects the lack of co-ordination of approach and we need to take our own rhetoric on board. Doing so would send out a signal to all other parties in the debate that we are really serious about the multi-agency approach. I know that the minister is likely to counter that comment with reference to his task force; however, the important issue to address is that we in this chamber were elected by Scots voters to find Scottish answers to the very real problems in our society. If we do not respond with a more consistent approach than the occasional debate or the occasional inclusion of the subject in the busy agendas of already overworked committees, we might find ourselves being judged harshly by those very voters. For no other reason than that, I urge the chamber to support the SNP's amendment.

I move amendment S1M-437.2, to leave out from "acknowledges" to end and insert: "recognises that there is neither a single drug problem nor a single solution; is concerned that at present there are insufficient resources available to those who desire to address the problems of addiction; welcomes the contribution which can be made to the debate by reference to international experience and, accepting that a cross-cutting approach is required to deal with the challenge posed to society by substance abuse, agrees to reflect that in the Parliament itself by the establishment of a Substance Misuse Strategy Committee which would facilitate the multi-agency debate required."

I should preface my question by referring back to the minister's comments on my point of order. Despite those comments, The Scotsman 's report on today's statement extensively quotes the special adviser, Mr David Whitton, on some of the specific proposals. Furthermore, at least two other journalists yesterday had chapter and verse on the detail of this morning's announcement. Although the actual bits of paper that we have been handed this morning may not have been given to journalists, I can assure the minister that the detail was handed to journalists early yesterday, and I stand by my point of order. The SNP is in broad support of the proposals on the specific issues raised by the statement. The reduction of time limits for divorce is welcome and the extension of parental rights to unmarried fathers rights another inequality in the system. I am sure that family support organisations will welcome the provisions for funding that will be put in place. Nevertheless, I am concerned about the time scale for the proposals, especially for the introduction of the new domestic interdicts. I welcome the recognition that the work of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee is encouraging the Executive to move faster on some issues that might otherwise have been left behind. However, the issue of legal aid is not addressed anywhere in the paper. The provision of legal remedies on paper is one thing—it is particularly important in the case of domestic interdicts—but the ability to afford access to those remedies is another thing entirely. According to present information, many people, especially women, are denied access to legal remedies because they cannot afford to take them up; they must refuse the offers that the Scottish Legal Aid Board makes them. What does the minister intend to do to ensure that the new remedies are available not just on paper, but in fact, to the people who would most gain from them?

As a point of information, Presiding Officer, that information was not communicated to me—this is the first that I have heard of it.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I want to raise an issue—it has been raised before—about the notice that is given to the Parliament of the business that will be discussed in the chamber. In particular, this morning's statement—a copy of which was not vouchsafed to Opposition parties until 8.30 this morning—was heavily discussed and journalists were briefed on it yesterday. Yesterday afternoon, I was phoned by journalists, advised on what the statement was going to contain and asked for comment. I watched a lengthy item on the matter on one of last night's news programmes. This morning, when the statement was handed to Opposition parties, the minister was being interviewed on "Good Morning Scotland" about its contents. This is a matter of some concern to many members—this week, my colleague Nicola Sturgeon was put in the same position. Presiding Officer, I ask you to address the question of information being given in advance to those outside the Parliament and the inability of Opposition parties adequately to deal with the issues because of the actions of the Executive.

The absence of a Scottish National party amendment to the Executive motion can absolutely be taken as indicating the SNP's total support for the Executive's stance on this matter. [Applause.] However, as a matter of principle, the SNP does not want Westminster to continue to legislate in devolved areas, which unfortunately seems to be happening almost routinely, not just on this subject, but on others that concern us rather more. The Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 was a case in point. Although the main subject matter is reserved, Westminster has proceeded to propose amendments to Scottish legislation even in devolved areas. The SNP welcomes the comment in paragraph 6 of the Executive memorandum that accompanies the bill, which is worth restating. The memorandum says that "it would remain open to the Scottish Parliament if it so wished to amend or repeal in the future any Scottish provisions enacted by the passage of the Bill." The Executive may find that that comment will come to be applied to any number of other bills  that Westminster pushes through despite the fact that they deal with devolved areas. We will argue that the same principle should apply to all such bills from Westminster. Having said that, the SNP recognises that there is a distinct difficulty with the mechanics of getting this piece of legislation through Westminster and acknowledges the likely consequences if we dig our heels in here as we would be entitled to do if we so chose. The history of the bill is reasonably clearly outlined in the memorandum. The bill was passed by the House of Commons last year then knocked back by the House of Lords. The Government plans to reintroduce the bill into the House of Commons again. If the House of Lords inflicts another defeat, the Government will invoke the Parliament Acts to ensure that the bill becomes law. In order to do that, the provisions of the bill cannot be changed. Deleting the references to Scotland would constitute change. Therefore, to stand on our dignity would delay the passage of the bill for the rest of the United Kingdom and—as there is no immediate opportunity to deal with the issue in this Parliament—for Scotland too. I have had a number of conversations with relevant lobby groups in Scotland. Those conversations were characterised by good grace and humour—those asking the SNP for support well understood the sensitivities of the constitutional arguments and the difficulty that was posed for us. We had to reflect on the unequivocal policy position that the SNP adopted some 10 years ago and on the justified anxiety of the organisations arguing for change. For those reasons and for the sake of justice and equality, we will acquiesce in the Executive's proposal today. We are talking about justice and equality. The argument is straightforward, although it is made more complicated by the tortuous logic of the Conservatives, who choose to masquerade today behind a neo-nationalist façade. Unless they show signs of extending their newly found commitment to the powers of the Scottish Parliament, their stance will not fool the SNP. I only wonder whether we are going to be accused of entering into another unholy alliance—this time with the Executive. I will not be drawn into a debate on section 28. It is months before the Parliament will debate that and the arguments are best left until then. We should be clear about what this bill does. It makes equal something that is currently unequal between male and female—the age of consent. It provides—again to establish equality—that an under-age person engaging in homosexual acts will not be guilty of a crime, albeit that the older person might be. That is the same as the situation  for heterosexual acts. I can see no good reason for maintaining the legal difference. The bill introduces a new offence to deal with abuse of trust for those between 16 and 18, a provision that will be widely welcomed. I note that the bill is said to comply with the European convention on human rights. It is clearly arguable that the status quo is not compliant. The European Human Rights Commission has already condemned our current law. There is plenty of opinion poll evidence that the majority of voters see this change as desirable. A year ago, Stonewall commissioned an opinion poll from the National Opinion Poll Research Group that established that 64 per cent of Scots thought that the age of consent should be equal for everyone. I should add that many thought that the common age should be 18 and not 16. It would have been interesting to hear members' contributions if the bill had centred around that proposal instead. I tried that argument out on a few folk and many of them had sympathy with the idea of raising the heterosexual age of consent instead of lowering the homosexual age of consent, although they all went on to say that that would be unenforceable. Unenforceability seems to me to be another reasonable argument in this debate and another reason why we should vote for equality. In comparison with other countries, equalising the age of consent at 16 would put us into a fairly average position. It would still be stricter than the law in many countries, including Austria, France, Finland, Denmark, Italy, Spain and Sweden.

No. There is a provision in Austria similar to the abuse of trust measure to which I hope we will agree today. Another aspect of the argument that has always puzzled me is that the welfare of 16 and 17-year-old boys is a major concern for people who express nothing like the same concern for the welfare of girls of that age. That smacks of the most appalling double standards, particularly since all the statistics indicate that young girls are most at risk and that they are at risk from adult heterosexual males. Why should girls be less protected? To put it another way, why are boys to be treated as being in a more vulnerable position than girls of the same age? Arguably, the present situation makes young gay men more vulnerable. For the reasons partially referred to by the minister, the bill will make it easier for young gay men to seek help. It will make it easier for them to go to the police and advice groups if they get into difficulty and it could make it considerably less likely that they will be  bullied—at present, bullies know that, if the individual complains, there is a danger that they, not the bully, will end up on the wrong side of the law. That traps young gay men into silence. That is not a reasonable situation for us to be putting some of our citizens in. It is difficult to escape the conclusion that behind much of the opposition to the bill is an antipathy to homosexuality per se. There appears to be an attitude that—regardless of the merit of the proposal—whatever is proposed that would in any way reduce the inequality that goes hand in hand with homosexuality, and whatever is suggested that would increase society's tolerance of gay men, is to be countered at all costs. I think that that is wrong. Many organisations recognise the need for the change that is proposed in the bill, including such radical organisations as the British Medical Association, the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the Family Planning Association, the British Youth Council, the National Association of Probation Officers, the Health Education Authority, Barnardo's, the Royal College of Nurses, the National Children's Bureau, the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children—I will not read out all the names.

Indeed, William Hague. That is hardly a roll-call of extremists bent on the destruction of civilisation. The list includes organisations that have to deal daily with the difficulties that gay teenagers face in our society. I suggest that their views are persuasive, no matter what the personal views of individuals might be. I urge members to ignore the nonsense that we have heard from the Conservatives today, to reject the Conservative amendment and to support the Executive motion whole-heartedly.

The member did not point out to the chamber that whatever my intervention might have been, it was agreed with by the vast majority of the 1,200 people at that meeting.

Does the member agree that the fact that thousands of people are signing petitions and turning up to public meetings—as they have done in my constituency—suggests that what we hear from the minister about accountability is nonsense and that the closed doors that we are being told used to exist are still as closed?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way on that point?

It is on that point.

On a point of order. I am not entirely sure whether this, strictly speaking, will qualify as a point of order. [Interruption.]  No doubt you will keep me right, Presiding Officer—and the members of the Conservative party ought to just listen because this will affect them as well. At 2.55 pm I received an e-mail about the new year information technology arrangements for the Parliament. I quote: "The Scottish Parliament network will close for the New Year as from 1700 hours on 30 th December and will re-open at 0900 hours on 5 January. This will mean that access is denied to all users, including Dial-In use."  The e-mail continues: "During this period, all e-mails received will be held and distributed to their recipients when they logon on 5 January." I do not suppose that for a day or two in that period any of us will be looking at our e-mails or trying to work, but—for those of us who rely entirely on the network for their work load—this is a ridiculously intrusive and disruptive length of time to shut the network down. As we are going into recess in a couple of hours, I ask that we make representations—through you, Presiding Officer—that that decision cannot be allowed to stand.

Further to the point of order.

Despite the fact that this is brand new technology, and despite the fact that all our laptops and computers have been dealt with over the past few weeks and months, presumably to make them millennium compliant, are we being told that they are not?

The minister appears to be accusing the SNP of internationalism—a novel criticism from the Labour party, which usually accuses us of the opposite. I had hoped that today's debate would not be one in which everyone felt the need to preface their remarks by outlining their religious background. Michael McMahon started that ball rolling, and once it started rolling, the debate followed that course, so I will declare my interest; my name is Roseanna and my confirmation name is Bernadette. Members will be relieved to hear that I have no intention of marrying into the royal family—I dare say that the royal family will be relieved to hear it as well. Yesterday, Parliament spent almost three hours debating the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill, which affects a law that is more than 300 years old; it is something like 800 years old. In effect, we have set about abolishing what is widely recognised to be an anachronism. However, it is only one of the anachronisms that remain enshrined in Scots law. This morning, we are debating another and some of the same arguments should, in principle, apply. We are, of course, empowered to sweep away one anachronism, but not the one that we are debating. I will say more about that later, but our lack of power to enact any repeal is not a reason why we cannot have an indicative vote on our wish to do to this legislation what we intend to do to feudal tenure. Let us be clear; we are talking about an anachronism that is couched in terms that are, in the words of Cardinal Winning, "nasty, outdated and embarrassing language which should have no place in modern Britain." This Parliament has a link with the past, but it is not about the past; its purpose is to take Scotland into the future. It would be a great pity if we had to trail this baggage into the future. Comments have been made about the SNP taking up parliamentary time in debating a reserved matter—both Tom McCabe and Michael McMahon referred to that in their speeches. That line of argument will not wash. There is nothing to prevent the Scottish Parliament from debating and voting on a motion in which it petitions Westminster to change UK law. It was always envisaged that that would happen from time to time. From the earliest days of the Parliament it has been clear that it can discuss anything it likes, regardless of whether it can legislate on the subject. Today's debate does not waste any of the Executive's parliamentary time—as was suggested by Michael McMahon—nor does it disrupt its legislative programme. The SNP is  using its time for the SNP's choice of debate. Previous SNP debates have been on the private finance initiative, education, pensioner poverty and agriculture; this is the first on a reserved matter. The fact that we are today seeking the widest possible consensus should be seen as a sign of generosity, not niggardliness. Both Mary Mulligan and Hugh Henry made remarks that were, perhaps, misplaced in the context of the debate. Michael McMahon's tone was also a little unfortunate. There was slight confusion in a number of speeches because members could not decide whether to attack the SNP for jumping on a populist bandwagon or for picking up on an irrelevant issue. They cannot have it both ways, but some members have tried to do so. The debate will draw attention to some of the many areas in which the Scottish Parliament is constrained by Westminster. Some of those issues, which are germane to this morning's debate, were touched on in the debate on equalities that was initiated by the Executive some weeks ago. As I said then, the SNP has always believed that a Scottish Parliament would present us with an opportunity to take radical steps forward in Scottish society; that it would take us into the 21 st century with laws that ensure that there is no discrimination on the basis of sex, age, religion, race or sexual orientation. In that debate I highlighted religious discrimination. I also highlighted some of the points that were raised in the debate today, because of their specifically Scottish dimension. Because of that dimension and Scotland's particular history and experience, today's debate is of considerably greater importance than might otherwise have been the case. For us, in Scotland, the issue is of more than passing academic interest. All members will have received the interesting letter from the Orange Lodge, which tells us that: "We have been following with interest the motion before the Scottish Parliament calling for a change in the 'Act of Settlement', supported by some members who perceive it to be discriminatory." I bet that it has been following the debate with interest. The Orange Lodge's intervention reminds us forcefully of how important debates such as this can be in Scotland. John McAllion spoke eloquently of the experiences that he had while growing up. Those of us in the Parliament who were raised in the same faith will have shared many of those experiences. I look forward to motions in John McAllion's name, in the terms that he suggested, coming before this Parliament. On this issue we can, in truth, either defend or  not defend the discrimination—we cannot pretend that it is not discrimination. That would be to fly in the face of reality. The Parliament's Equal Opportunities Committee has recognised that and, as I understand it, it considers that the act has a negative impact on the equality of Scotland's people and has commended the matter to Westminster for its attention. The Parliament as a whole is entitled to do the same. I tabled a parliamentary question in the House of Commons, asking the Prime Minister whether he would "make it his policy to seek to amend the law to (a) allow members of the Royal family to marry a Catholic without losing their right to inherit the throne and (b) allow Roman Catholics to inherit the throne". I will read his answer in full: "The Government have always stood firmly against discrimination in all its forms, including against Roman Catholics, and it will continue to do so. The Government have a heavy legislative programme aimed at delivering key manifesto commitments in areas such as health, education, crime and reform of the welfare system. To bring about change to the law on succession would be a complex undertaking involving amendment or repeal of a number of items of related legislation, as well as requiring the consent of the legislatures of member nations of the Commonwealth. It would raise other major constitutional issues. The Government have no plans to legislate in this area".—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 13 December 1999; Vol 341, c 57W.] That is a great pity. A number of speakers have commented on aspects of that approach, such as dealing with the likely attitudes of other Commonwealth countries and the extent to which a repeal here would impact on other legislation. My colleague, Mike Russell, mentioned information that we have received from Canada. Has anyone bothered to contact other Commonwealth countries to ask what their view of such a repeal would be? I suspect that many of those countries are simply unaware of the existence of this discriminatory legislation. It would be of some use if formal approaches could be made at this stage, to ascertain just how much of an obstacle those countries would be to repeal of the legislation. When there is political will and cross-party support, much supposed difficulty can be swept away. The idea of a royal commission has been floated in the ether, but I am not sure that I understand why such a commission would be necessary. We do not need guidance on the principle; we know that it is wrong. We need someone to examine the practicalities of making the change. At Westminster I took part in the introduction of a bill that was presented by Henry McLeish, who was then a Scottish Office minister with responsibility for justice. That bill took all of 30  minutes to go through all its stages in the House of Commons. I suggest to the Minister for Parliament—and to all other members who are concerned about the delay and difficulty involved—that he, and they, should accept that what I have just said is the case. With cross-party support, such legislation need not take the lengthy time to go through all its stages that has been talked about today. It can be dealt with quickly. All that SNP members ask is, "Why is that not being done?" All members, I believe, think that that omission is sad, and we can, at least, say so. The Parliament is the voice of Scotland. If the voice of Scotland wishes to make its position plain, it should not consider itself silenced merely by virtue of the fact that our vote cannot change the law. The debate might turn out to be simply the first step in the long grind referred to by my colleague, Colin Campbell. It sends out a clear message to the rest of the world: when we are confronted with the reality of discrimination, it is Parliament's duty to say, "We do not agree." I listened to the minister's closing speech. The SNP will accept the amendment and I ask all members to support the motion and send a clear message to the world that there is no place for discrimination in our Scotland.

Debate it.

It is with a distinct sense of déjà vu that I stand here. Some of my comments today will be similar to those that I made last week. The bill was the second major piece of legislation that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee was required to deal with in a limited period. Once again, I record my appreciation of the work of members of the committee, only a handful of whom came from the legal background that might have made them more comfortable dealing with the issues that the bill raises. Indeed, those of us with a legal background were not much better off. There were times when I felt as if I were back in first-year conveyancing lectures—an experience that I had hoped to have long left behind me. Nevertheless, the committee members took on the responsibility of becoming informed. I hope that the report exemplifies that work that they all put in. Needless to say, my thanks must also go again to the clerks who shared the burden with us. We were required to produce two substantial reports in only a few weeks, and without the clerks, that would have been well-nigh impossible. This bill is not as controversial as the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Bill, but that does not mean that the committee could deal with it less seriously. There were many issues of detail that required to be examined, which included points on which the Executive had not made up its mind. Issues concerning the effect of the time scale that was set for us are outlined in paragraphs 10 to 11 and 18 to 20 of the report. I do not propose to reiterate them, but the concerns that I expressed last week in the debate on adults with incapacity apply with the same force here. The committee comments on the interaction between this bill and other bills that are planned by the Executive, which could all be thought of as parts of a whole. We found it difficult to report on the principles of the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill alone, when it became clear during our proceedings that those principles could not stand apart from those of the title conditions bill and the law of the tenement bill. In a sense, this is not a stand-alone bill, but we were obliged to behave as if it were. That created some difficulty for us and led to a degree of cynicism about the real, as opposed to the stated, reason for delaying the implementation of the bill. Members who have read the committee's report will know that it highlights one big issue of principle on which there was controversy, and a number of other points of detail on which there was contradictory evidence. The committee has made it clear that the bill is  to be welcomed. We all agreed that sweeping away the anachronism of the feudal system was long overdue. It was difficult to see how else it could be brought about other than by outright abolition. It became clear, however, that although we were sweeping away one form of land ownership in Scotland, some organisations and commentators felt that a serious gap now existed. Evidence was submitted to us that there should continue to be a public interest in the new form of ownership. That submission was made on the basis of the argument that the Crown, apart from its position as paramount feudal superior, had been the guardian of the public interest until now. It is fair to say that, although many committee members had sympathy with the public interest argument, there was a degree of scepticism about accepting that the Crown had traditionally fulfilled that role. Even those who do not hold quite such robust views about the Crown's future role in our constitution as I do were nevertheless unsure whether that argument was valid. However, in the absence of any outright hostility to the bill, that was the major point of principle that we had to address. I hope that the way in which we have covered that point in paragraphs 12 to 17 of our report makes that argument clear, even to those coming new to the debate. At lunchtime, I saw for the first time a counsel's opinion on the generality of the argument. The document, which has today's date, is a brief preliminary outline opinion on the issue of paramount superiority. Had the committee had that information, it might have helped us to deal with the issue. The opinion is the work of Sir Crispin Agnew of Lochnaw QC. He states categorically: "In Scotland the legal theory of landownership has been that the Crown owns all land for the benefit of the community of the realm and that the Crown grants out rights in that land to subjects, who hold that land under the Crown's paramount superiority or dominium eminens ." He goes on to say that the first bill proposed by the Scottish Law Commission had a section saying that "the abolition of the feudal system of land tenure shall be without prejudice to any other rights, privileges, benefits of or derived from the Crown by virtue of the paramount superiority". He says that the present bill contains no such reservation and that, in his opinion, "the draft Clauses would appear to have the effect of severing all connection between the land and any other rights, privileges, benefits of or derived from the paramount superiority." I will not read the whole opinion. I have not had a chance to read it in detail myself, but those parts caught my eye. The opinion would have been  useful to the committee and might have encouraged us to couch some paragraphs of our report in a slightly different way. That is a caveat for those reading our report, and I shall circulate copies of the opinion to members as soon as possible.

The instruction was by Scottish Environment LINK. Other points of detail emerged that were more or less undecided—I was going to say controversial, but that would be the wrong word to use. Those included the question of payment of arrears of feuduty, the long lead time before the abolition of the feudal system, payment of compensation for the extinction of feuduty, and the limit on the length of commercial leases. Some of those points will no doubt be dealt with in more detail by other speakers this afternoon. I shall now speak in my other persona as the shadow Minister for Justice, and echo the remarks that I made last week. I said then that the abolition of feudal tenure was a key commitment of the Scottish National party's land reform policy in the run-up to the elections in May. It is a testament to the widely expressed need for such reform that three of the four major parties in the chamber were committed to a similar bill. That allows us to proceed with broad support. The bill is integral to any process of land reform and would always have been the first piece of legislation in any package of reform. It should be carefully considered in preparing the groundwork for future measures. In that spirit, the SNP shares some of the concerns about the total omission of any reference to the public interest in the bill. Effectively, the bill introduces a form of absolute ownership, with which many people might have problems. It runs counter to the belief that the people of Scotland have ultimate ownership of the land. That principle would give us the ability to run public interest arguments as and when necessary. Andy Wightman, who has a long track record and a great deal of credibility in that policy area, expressed his concern that, without some recognition of the public interest, we might find ourselves bound more tightly in the future, in what we can and cannot do, despite there being a demonstrable social or environmental need. Scotland should not become a series of parcels of land in the absolute ownership of individuals, organisations, offshore trusts and charities. The public interest should be explicitly enshrined somewhere as a principle, so that in future, recourse can be had to that principle in the courts  if need be. Whether the Crown's ultimate superiority did protect the public interest in the past, the fact is that landed interests believed that to be the case, at least in regard to planning law. Without that belief, the resistance to interference in their ownership would have been greater. By omitting to include a public interest provision in the current proposals for land reform, do we not run the danger that in future such resistance will not only be greater, but might be successful? I ask the minister to comment on the fears that the lack of a legally defined public interest provision might have an impact on future planning controls or compulsory purchases which, by their nature, are based on public interest. Frankly, the matter can easily be dealt with by the inclusion of a res publica clause, which would acknowledge the public interest through the recognition of the ultimate ownership of Scottish land by the people of Scotland. I refer back to some of the comments in counsel's opinion in respect of the Scottish Law Commission's draft section in its original bill. This argument may sound academic, but I remind members of the heated debate over the extent to which the multilateral agreement on investment would cause difficulty in otherwise domestic decision-making processes. In addition, the World Trade Organisation talks in Seattle similarly reminded us of the need to ensure that our legal concepts are clear cut. I will now refer to other matters. The minister will be aware that a number of parliamentary questions have been lodged in my name, which seek more detailed information on who, and how many, will have to pay compensation and backdated feuduties under the legislation. The questions also attempt to establish who will benefit from the compensation. We are concerned that the legislation will leave the way open for clever operators to exploit aspects of feudality that have lapsed, the financial potential of which has escaped their owners and the general population. Anyone who has had to deal with the fall-out from Brian Hamilton's activities will be well aware of the distress that can be caused. It would be unfortunate if we opened the door to individuals to act for groups of clients who have neglected, forgotten or are ignorant of their rights. The last thing that we need is a raider of the lost feus appearing on the scene. As a result, we wonder whether it would be more appropriate to cap the compensation that is payable. Equally, we should stipulate that payments will not be made unless there is proof that the income from the vassal has been a significant portion of the superior's income. Those changes would target people such as the Duke of Buccleuch, or large corporations, who would be able to claim compensation only if they gave a full  statement of their income, and proved that the loss of feu income would cause them financial hardship. At the same time, the measures would protect groups such as the Church of Scotland which, as I understand it, relies heavily on feu income. They would keep out those who have not claimed feuduties in recent years, but who plan to use the legislation to catch up on payments. Indeed, I would go further. Compensation could be made dependent on the provision of information, which brings me to the third area that I wish to address, a land information system. Tying the payment of compensation to registering land interests in Scotland would provide additional information for public consumption. That information could be extended if we used the opportunity afforded by the bill to review the availability of information relating to ownership of, use of, development of and access to land in Scotland. Eventually, we could have a fully comprehensive land information system for Scotland. Before anyone asks where the money will come from, I suggest that the compensation payments owed to Government departments be paid directly into the Scottish consolidated fund as a contribution to land development projects such as the land information system. As I said at the outset, the bill is broadly similar to that which the SNP would have wanted in its land reform package. However, there are ways in which it could be made even better and, indeed, in which it could be—even more—part of the Executive's overall reform. I know that the Executive has left some matters open to further consultation and debate, and has not closed its ears to other changes. We are grateful for the Executive's input at various points during the committee's taking of evidence and we note that the Executive has responded positively to some of the concerns of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. I hope, therefore, that the Executive will be able to respond as positively to some of the proposals that I have raised today and, for that reason, I look forward to hearing the minister's closing speech.

I do not know whether this will cheer up Mr Gallie and the other members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee who are still in the chamber, but I should advise them that I am in discussions about the possibility of the committee having a regular twice-weekly slot between January and Easter.

It is only right that, as convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, I take a few minutes in the chamber to comment on the committee's experience of dealing with the bill. I hope that I will be allowed a little latitude to do that. It is fair to say that all members of the committee feel as if they have come out of a long, dark tunnel only to be faced with another long, dark tunnel at stage 2 of consideration of the bill. I would first, and most importantly, like to express my appreciation of the work that was put in by every member of the committee in a difficult period, when the committee worked extremely hard. We have been dealing not only with this bill, but with the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill, which will be debated next week. The committee has also had a member's bill referred to it and has continued to progress two items of specific committee interest—prisons and domestic violence—which we began to examine in September. On top of that, the committee has dealt with a variety of petitions and items that have been referred to it by the Subordinate Legislation Committee and the European Committee. Our work load has been colossal, so it is lucky that all members of the committee managed to retain their sense of humour and—more important—the sense that we were working as a committee, not just as a collection of more or less party political individuals. In the past two months, when we dealt with stage 1 of this bill and the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill, there were times when we felt like guinea pigs. If we occasionally plaintively asked one another what a stage 1 report looked like, it can now be judged whether we got it right. That we managed to get this far is in no small measure due to the excellent work of  the committee clerk and his team; they worked flat out and we owe them a great debt. We are very lucky to have them and I hope they, too, felt part of a real team. The approach that we adopted to the report reflects our belief that it is important to represent in it all shades of opinion in the committee. Not all opinions were held unanimously but, in my view, to refuse to record views because they were not held by all members of the committee would be to misrepresent the range of views on aspects of this and, no doubt, other bills. If we say that a view was held by the committee as a whole, it was; anything less than a unanimous view has been recorded with the appropriate qualification. On this bill, it was important that we did that, because far more of it was controversial than might have been anticipated. We were aware of the extensive consultation undertaken by the Scottish Law Commission, which did the initial drafting. The committee took its own informal briefings during the summer recess, so that we would be better prepared to deal with the bill. We heard oral evidence from seven organisations and from one individual, Professor Sheila McLean, over three meetings. We could easily have heard a good deal more evidence from organisations and individuals. Even now, I am getting letters from organisations and individuals confidently expecting to be able to continue giving evidence at stage 2. That would have a serious impact on the timetable; we might have to discuss that. The areas of particular concern are highlighted in our report and arise principally from a handful of sections on the medical aspects of the bill. I will return to them later. Returning to my shadow justice persona, I emphasise that if the Scottish National party had won on 6 May, we would all still have been here today debating essentially the same bill. We had a manifesto commitment to the introduction of an adults with incapacity bill and had also set our faces against including living wills in it. On SNP benches, therefore, there is support for the legislation, which I suspect extends to all parties. That is because of the clear need for reform. In the welter of coverage of the controversial parts of the bill, the very real difficulties that people face right now have been overlooked. I hope that members have read the evidence highlighting some of those problems, by organisations such as ENABLE and the alliance for the promotion of the incapable adults bill. The large and increasing number of people who have had to deal with a member of their family who can be described as incapable—and I am in that position—will know that there is little choice between the existing power of attorney, which was not designed for  those with incapacity, and the nuclear option of appointing a curator bonis. I say nuclear option because the curator takes over the management of the whole estate, although the level of incapacity might mean that some money matters could be understood and handled by the individual. Nor does that system work when the incapacity is over the short term rather than the longer term. There are problems even when people think that they have sorted out their affairs through a joint account. A bank or a building society can, and often does, freeze the whole account when one of a couple becomes incapable. Just as bad is the situation that can occur when one person goes into hospital and the hospital takes over the management of their finances, effectively excluding their perhaps very long-term partner from further involvement. Those are all actual examples of what can happen currently, and they make the need for the bill very apparent. The bill would allow a new form of welfare power of attorney, which would mean that medical and financial decisions could be delegated without having to do so on the once-and-for-all basis that is the case now. It would allow most of those functions to be carried out without the time-consuming and expensive process of going to court. At present the position regarding who can decide what, when it comes to medical treatment of an incapable adult, is highly uncertain. Doctors can feel legally unprotected, even when they are making relatively minor and routine decisions about treatment. Alternatively, they have to delay necessary treatment until some kind of authority can be sought. The bill clarifies the legal justification for administering medical treatments that might otherwise be regarded as common assaults. We should not run away from the problem that doctors and nurses occasionally feel that they have to do something for which they could be prosecuted. The fact that they are not is a measure of the common sense of most people involved. However, that does not solve the problem that doctors and nurses are leaving themselves open, potentially, to prosecution in a situation in which most of us recognise that that should not happen. For all the good that the bill does, we would be foolish not to recognise that it has other, more controversial aspects that have not been dealt with by the decision to remove the sections recognising advance directives or living wills that were contained in the Scottish Law Commission's original draft. When the bill was first announced, many people were relieved by the indication that those sections would not be included, because they felt that that meant that we would not become bogged down in the long-drawn-out arguments to  which the recognition of advance directives or living wills would have given rise. However, lo and behold, we are having those arguments all the same. The exclusion of the sections that I mentioned was widely welcomed—as I indicated at the beginning of my speech, had the SNP been in government, we would also have excluded them—but there are still strongly expressed concerns that have not been alleviated. There is no doubt that much of the debate today and at stage 2 will centre on those concerns. I cannot list them, but later speakers will no doubt pick on some of the issues that they feel need further clarification. Some of what the minister has said today and some of the concessions that he has already indicated will be made might help to address those concerns. However, we will have to await the response of the various organisations and individuals involved to see whether they feel that the amendments that are being trailed today go far enough. One overarching concern has been what is meant precisely by the word "intervention" in section 1 of the bill. Witness after witness, including the bill team from the Scottish Executive, has assured Parliament, through the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, that intervention is meant to describe something that has happened—what might be termed an act of commission. However, others have equally strongly pointed out that, unless defined, an intervention could also be held to be an act of omission. That is what is giving rise to a great deal of the concern. Perhaps it would be useful to provide a clear definition of the word "intervention" in the legislation. That would go a considerable way towards relieving the anxieties of those who feel that the end result of passing the bill will be decisions not to treat, rather than what it is being presented as—legal justification to treat. The ability to treat is important—I have already referred to the fact that, strictly speaking, doctors and nurses might at the moment be doing things that could technically be described as assault. The dangers inherent in not treating are currently hugely controversial, as recent newspaper articles—not about the bill, but about practices that it is alleged take place throughout the national health service—highlight. Concern is being stoked up by that external controversy, which does not relate directly to the bill. If it is not the Executive's intention to permit the refusal of treatment, perhaps that should be more clearly spelled out than has been the case until now. It might be said that it is not necessary to do that when that is not what is meant, but one could equally argue that there is no reason not to do so, because it can do no harm to the overall intent of the bill.  Another issue that arises out evidence taken at stage 1 is the question of advance directives or living wills. The Executive took a decision to exclude them from the legislation, despite the fact that they were included in the Scottish Law Commission's original draft bill. I have already indicated that that would also have been the SNP's view, had we been in government. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee recognises the reasoning behind the decision and supports it. The decision to exclude advance directives was widely welcomed as sensible, given that to include them would have risked the whole bill over that argument. The difficulty that I and, perhaps, some members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee have is that, having heard the evidence of the British Medical Association, which was that the existence of an advance directive will have enormous weight when a decision about treatment is made, we began to wonder whether advance directives would be imported into the scenario in any case. If one accepts that section 1(4)(a), to which the minister referred, is correct and that account has to be taken of "the present and past wishes and feelings of the adult so far as they can be ascertained", it is difficult to imagine any clearer expression of those wishes than an advance directive—basically, that is what the BMA told us. As a result of that recognition, the Royal College of Nursing has expressed concern that the bill will in practice result in enormous weight being attached to entirely unregulated living wills. That issue needs consideration. Perhaps the decision to exclude advance directives was taken in the clear knowledge that, in practice, they could not be excluded, and that there was no point in having a row about something that was inevitable. However, the concern of the RCN should at least be recognised. I do not have any specific suggestion as to how that could be done. I think that most of us do not want living wills to become part of statutory law, although perhaps they will become part of our law, willy-nilly. We have to think carefully about how we deal with that issue.

A great deal of concern has also been expressed about the definition of "medical treatment" in the bill. In large part, that is linked to the definition of "intervention". The inclusion of "ventilation, nutrition and hydration by artificial means" in the definition of "medical treatment" has caused alarm, because the thought of proxy decision makers being empowered to refuse that aspect of treatment, thereby causing death, fuels concerns  about passive euthanasia. No matter what attempts are made to reassure those who are alarmed by that section of the bill, they have remained firmly of the view that it could well result in proxy decision makers being able to make decisions that will inevitably lead to death, with all that that implies. The requirement that an intervention be of benefit to the patient is interpreted by the critics as having no application to a refusal or failure to act. It seems to me that the absolute assurances that that will not be a result of the legislation have counted for so little thus far that we are in danger that that aspect of the debate will overshadow everything else. I do not know whether the minister's announcements today will change that. If the intention of the drafters of the bill is that it does not authorise withdrawal of treatment, and that any such decision will still require resort to the courts, it may be that consideration should be given to spelling that out more explicitly in the legislation.

The clock shows that I have 50 seconds left, Presiding Officer.

We should recognise that many organisations feel that, whether it intends to or not, the bill will introduce euthanasia by the back door. Much of the evidence that was heard at stage 1 was directed at that problem. I admit that there are areas of that debate in which I am, as yet, undecided as to whether the alarm that is being expressed is justified. Most of those issues will ultimately be addressed as matters of conscience. Certainly, when the specifics of the issues are debated, SNP members will have a free vote. Given the strength of feeling that exists, and assuming that there will be a free vote across the parties, I do not want the whole bill to be put at risk unnecessarily. I hope that the minister will go as far as he can to make the changes that would pacify the critics. The indications—I refer, obviously, to the proposals to amend sections 44 and 47—are that that is in his mind. We all agree that the bill is necessary. I hope that we can get it through with a minimum of fuss—that will be a victory for us all.

I sometimes think that I have strayed into a management seminar. All that is missing are the flow charts to go with the buzzwords. It may come as a shock to the minister that we all support equality of opportunity. Nobody has a monopoly on this area. The statement on equality strategy from Wendy Alexander, who I believe will be talking to us—I hope not at us—at the end of the debate, is a reaffirmation of the document produced by the Executive on 9 September. In her statement, she "encourages everyone with an interest in equality to send in comments on the statement in writing to the Equality Unit by 18 February." I was not sure whether that was meant to indicate a formal consultation or not. I hope that there will be a guarantee that there will be a response to the comments received and that they will be acted upon, especially as some of the organisations will be campaigning for legislative changes, which she is unable to initiate. The motion today is very general and, as such, will be disappointing to the many groups that are looking for real change, especially those groups concerned with issues of race and sexual orientation. The SNP regards equality as, first and foremost, an issue of justice. It has always been the SNP's belief that a Scottish Parliament would present us with an opportunity to take radical steps forward in Scottish society and take us into the 21 st century with laws that ensure non-discrimination on the basis of sex, age, religion, race or sexual orientation. Unfortunately, we are not being given that opportunity. That should be a matter of regret for all members in this chamber.  I accept that, even without legislative competence, there is a great deal that can be done. I recall speaking at a number of conferences and meetings in the year previous to the May elections and it was always possible to compile an impressive list of initiatives that could be undertaken and which met many of the demands made by organisations lobbying in this policy area. For example, the commitment to repeal section 2A, better known as section 28, has been SNP policy for many years. It was always clear that, notwithstanding the reservation of equal opportunities, repeal would be perfectly competent within the devolution settlement. Indeed, we welcome the announcement that that will happen. I do not take away from the possibilities that are currently available; other SNP speakers will make more specific references to those possibilities. Initiatives are always likely to be supported by the SNP, because of our long commitment to equal opportunities. The Executive need have no fear about that. However, there is no point in running away from the reality of the restrictions that are imposed on the Scottish Parliament by the reservation contained within the Scotland Act 1998. That reservation is fairly wide-ranging and includes the Equal Pay Act 1970, the Sex Discrimination Act 1975, the Race Relations Act 1976 and the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. It covers all matters relating to the bodies set up under the existing legislation: the Equal Opportunities Commission, the Commission for Racial Equality and the National Disability Council. Many organisations feel that the current situation is inefficient and unfair, so Labour members cannot sweep the issue aside with one of those "They would say that" sneers that seem to be their standard response to anything that they find a bit challenging. The director of Disability Scotland has said that "the new Disability Rights Commission should have an autonomous policy making ability at this stage, albeit within the UK framework. If we cannot get these powers then there needs to be a review and consideration to having more devolved powers." Tim Hopkins of Equality Network, an admirable organisation with which many members will be familiar, has reiterated comments that he made in January 1998: "Equal opportunities regulations are in need of updating and we feel that the power to do this in Scotland should be available to the Scottish Parliament." How has Westminster dealt with race relations? Since 1976, the Commission for Racial Equality has submitted three reviews of the Race Relations Act 1976 with proposals for substantial reform. The first submission received no response whatever and the second was rejected outright. The third, which was submitted to the present  Home Secretary in April 1998, received a mixed response. Eight of the recommendations received no response, two were clearly accepted and a substantial number were either accepted conditionally or received no clear decision. However, two Queen's speeches later, little progress is promised. The Deputy Minister for Communities, in opening the debate, referred to the experience of black Scots. Perhaps the Minister for Communities, in closing, will include some indication of her response to the CRE's recent document "Racial Equality Matters—an Agenda for the Scottish Parliament". I ask that now, as I understand that the minister is unlikely to allow any interventions later. The CRE is still waiting to hear her views and, if she is serious about the concerns expressed here, no doubt she will want to do the CRE that courtesy. Those were a few observations from some of the organisations that are active in the field. I have not referred to all of them, but it is fair to say that most have concerns about the current position. They also have the rather more specific concern that they were totally unaware of today's debate, and are unhappy that they did not know about it far enough in advance to give us the benefit of their views. Many aspects of the equality debate have a distinctly Scottish perspective. That difference will simply not be taken on board by Westminster, whether or not it gets around to legislating on those matters. For example, it is an undeniable fact that the composition of ethnic minorities in Scotland is very different from that in England and is complicated by the fact that we cannot exclude anti-English discrimination as an area of concern. A debate on equalities must, of necessity, be wide-ranging, but I want to highlight one area in which the inability to legislate can be felt already. It has been a puzzle to me for many years that, despite all the rhetoric about religious discrimination, the issue has simply been swept under the carpet. That may be understandable—perhaps religious discrimination has not been a factor in English public life and is therefore not at the forefront of people's minds as an equality issue. Who can tell? However, that is absolutely not the case for Scotland, not now and certainly not when the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and the Race Relations Act 1976 were being passed. I will not talk about the Act of Settlement today; I am talking about addressing a problem that may be getting better, but, as we all know, still exists in Scotland. Addressing that problem will be a matter for Westminster. So, what is happening with regard to religious discrimination? I am happy to report that the Home Office has decided that it had better consider the situation. I am not clear about  precisely what motivated that concern. There is, of course, pressure from various religious groups in England to have the issue addressed, since much racial discrimination masquerades as religious discrimination and, presumably, hopes to evade the law by doing so. Quite rightly, the Home Office has commissioned some research into the extent of religious discrimination, but only in England and Wales. Frankly, this is a ridiculous situation. The power to legislate to deal with religious discrimination is reserved, which means that this Parliament cannot legislate on it. The Home Office, whose responsibility it is, is interested only in the situation in England and Wales and the situation in Scotland disappears into a black hole. More accurately, we are in a Catch-22 situation: we cannot do what is necessary and those who can will not. Even if they chose to legislate, legislation would be on the basis of work that is not applicable to Scotland's particular concerns. That situation cannot be right. It cannot be right that this Parliament, which has to deal with the fall-out from the discrimination that remains, cannot take the necessary steps to address the problem. Most people accept that although problems of discrimination are the same for people throughout the world, particular circumstances in different countries make the needs of legislation different. The SNP always envisaged a Parliament that would be more ground-breaking on the issue than Westminster has been. I only wish that more people shared that vision. I note that the Liberal Democrats were eloquent on the subject at the time of the debates on the Scotland bill. I recall Donald Gorrie saying that the Liberal Democrats believed that the Scottish Parliament should have the right to legislate on the matter. He and his colleagues supported SNP amendments at the time and were vocal in their view that this matter should have been devolved. I wonder what their position will be today. The Government did not think that Scotland should have that power, but the truth is that no adequate reason was given for the decision to reserve equal opportunities. The suspicion lingers that, somehow, it was felt that we could not be trusted, which is ironic, given the shared commitment to equal opportunities that members of this Parliament express with such frequency. Further, while this Parliament has an Equal Opportunities Committee, Westminster does not. The assumption must be that Westminster does not need one. It is a pity that the Scotland Act 1998 does not allow us to co-opt people on to Scottish parliamentary committees as that means that the Equal Opportunities Committee is unable to have  representation from the ethnic minority community, which is the one area in which this Parliament has been a signal failure. The sad fact is that although we can do a great deal, our hands are tied until Westminster gets round to legislating, and even then, we cannot be sure that the legislation will take into account the circumstances that exist in Scotland. If we are to judge from the Home Office approach, we can be certain that Scotland's specific problems will not be addressed. What a ridiculous position to be in and what a ridiculous position the Executive is in having to defend it. I move amendment S1M-334.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "recognises the fundamental importance of equality of opportunity in Scotland both now and for the future and therefore regrets that legislative competence in this area remains reserved to Westminster."

I shall preface my remarks by saying something with my convener's hat on. It occurs to me that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee will probably now have to meet on both Christmas day and new year's day to cope with the work load that is coming our way. [Laughter.]  In general, I welcome the move towards a freedom of information act in Scotland. I very much welcome the presumption of access and the inclusion of the public interest element of disclosure, which I believe is very important. I also welcome the Scottish information commissioner's right to order disclosure, although I would like the minister to define what he means by "a rare event" when he talks about the possibility of the Cabinet deciding collectively to override that order. A number of us have experience of how frequently a rare event can take place in practice and I would like some reassurance about that. The minister will be aware that not one but two freedom of information regimes will apply in Scotland because of the difference between the one that we will have here and the UK one. Does the Minister for Justice agree that there may be serious future difficulties, given Westminster's insistence on continuing to legislate on devolved areas? Will he indicate which regime will apply in situations such as the Home Office Asylum and Immigration Bill, which is a controversial example of mixed legislation?

The source of the money is not the issue; the control of the money is the problem.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way? Or is he afraid to?

Thank you. I want to put a simple question to Alex Johnstone; I have asked him before, and I will ask him again. Despite all the negativity we are getting, I think that we would all like to hear what Tory land reform proposals sound like. Will the member tell us?

I, too, welcome the opportunity to debate this matter in the Scottish Parliament. I recall debates at Westminster, after I was elected in 1995, which were almost always on an adjournment motion. Certainly, in my recollection, they were always at the instigation of the SNP. Over 25 years, the SNP has consistently campaigned on land reform. Its overriding principles have always been crystal clear: to maximise access for all the people of Scotland; to accept that the land of Scotland is a major resource; to commit ourselves to removing the medieval feudal tenure system; and to give communities throughout Scotland direct involvement in decisions that affect land. It is clear that there is a broad area of consensus within which the debate has taken place, although I was somewhat dispirited when I read the Tory amendment, which is entirely negative and offers nothing at all constructive to the debate. I shall listen with interest—and, no doubt, incredulity—to what a Tory policy of land reform might include. I understand that Alex Johnstone has been on the airwaves this lunch time, announcing with due solemnity that there is no demand for land reform in Scotland. Frankly, that is an unbelievable statement for him to have made. It suggests that the Tories have lost touch not only with Scotland but with reality. When the SNP set up its land commission, in 1995, it spent two years taking evidence from around Scotland, north and south, in city and in country. The commission had only to advertise a session for it to be inundated with people and  organisations who were clamouring to be heard on the subject, the vast majority of whom were perfectly sure that reform was necessary. There may be some differences between the approaches of the SNP, Labour and the Liberal Democrats, but at least on the issue of land reform we share an awareness of the demands of ordinary people throughout Scotland. That is more than can be said for the Conservative party. Tories aside, there is a broad consensus on issues such as recreational access, even if the SNP's view is that it might have been preferable to have dealt with that in a separate piece of legislation. However, it is better that it is dealt with in the land reform bill than not at all. Similarly, the three parties—perhaps I should say the five parties—in this Parliament that are committed to reform have much in common on the future expansion and development of crofting, short-term farming tenancies, more readily accessible information and a nationwide land information system. We share the desire to end the outdated controls inherent in the feudal system. The sweeping away of the nonsense of superiors and vassals is a fitting way in which to greet the 21 st century.

If Mr McLetchie is talking about the current Perth and Kinross Council, he will know that it is the Tories who are involved in that coalition, with Labour, Liberal Democrat and independent members, not with the SNP. Perhaps he needs to speak to his own party. The Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill, at present before the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, will get a fair wind from the SNP, as will the other proposed law reform bills. Equally, the forthcoming land reform bill, when it finally appears, including its provisions for access, will be welcomed and supported, although perhaps not totally uncritically, by the SNP. However, our amendment sums up our position on the central proposals in Mr Wallace's motion: we support them as far as they go, but think that they do not go far enough. The community right to buy, the tightening-up of compulsory purchases and voluntary codes of conduct do not a reform package make. Despite the Conservative party's scaremongering, I think that the bill will fail to achieve real, deep change in the nature of land  management, or land ownership. Short of community buy-outs, the only real nod in the direction of community involvement is in the voluntary codes of practice for rural land use and land ownership. In the land reform white paper, there was no mention of community involvement, except in the context of the purchase proposals. Where I do find some scant, suggested reference to community involvement is in the progress reports. By the way, I find those reports very helpful. They are very welcome, and I commend that approach to consultation prior to legislation, even if I am not entirely sure that a motion for debate is justified. I notice from the most recent of those progress reports that the code of good practice for rural land ownership will not be published until September 2000, and a draft is currently with the land ownership consultative panel, while the separate—if I may be permitted to use that word—code of good practice on rural land use will eventually emerge at the end of 2000. Whatever appears, it is unlikely to deal with many of the problems facing communities in Scotland. Voluntary codes can be ignored—and are very likely to be ignored—by corporate owners and landowners who are not signed up to organisations such as the Scottish Landowners Federation, of which, we should remember, there are more than a few. If voluntary codes are ignored, what then? The bill will offer community purchase but little else. I remind the Minister for Justice that even that ability to purchase will be triggered only when the estate comes on to the market; that does not deal with the existing abuses. One prominent critic, Andy Wightman, has pointed out that most privately owned land in Scotland has never come up for sale in the past 100 years. Equally, the narrow definition of community that is contained in the proposals means that many deserving communities will not benefit. Despite the rhetoric, the truth is that many other communities will not wish to buy the local estate. In areas where there is no demand to purchase, what does the community do? I can give a specific example. Some people will have heard me talking about this; the minister has heard me mention this before. I call it the Blackford test. In the past, I have been highly critical of the Blackford estate, which is in my constituency. It has not signed up to the SLF and, despite the concerns frequently expressed by the local community, there is no detectable desire on the part of that community to own the estate. I would like to be able to say to those constituents that the promised bill will make some difference, and that, when they next come to me  with complaints, I will be able to point them in the direction of a potential solution. On the existing evidence, that will not be the case. It may be that the Executive has further, as yet unrevealed, plans to bring in more reform measures that will do the job. If that is the case, I would like to hear them. In reality, a reliance on voluntary codes fails to bite the bullet and, to paraphrase, the spirit is willing but the will is weak. What we should be doing, at an absolute minimum, is making adherence to such codes the bottom line for the delivery of any public assistance. Preferably, the codes should be moved on to a firmer footing. The SNP has already proposed community contracts in which landowners, the state and local residents co-operate to promote sustainable development in Scotland's rural communities. That way, the rights and responsibilities of all parties would be clear. Where an estate is in receipt of public money, a community contract could clearly set out the conditions linked to the receipt of those funds. Where an estate changes hands, new owners would be required, as a condition of purchase, to negotiate a clear contract that states, amongst other things, their short-term development plans, the rights of tenants and the involvement of the community in the development of the estate. We all remember the wild promises made to the islanders of Eigg by Maruma. We should find a way to hold owners like Maruma to such promises. As I said, not all communities will want to purchase the estate. The SNP has also proposed mechanisms to facilitate the setting up of locality land councils, where there is demand. That would allow communities that have a central role in the development of local land use strategies and that work in liaison with the department for rural affairs to draw up local land plans as the basis for sustainable development. The introduction of those bodies would be linked to an overhaul of the structure of agencies and grants in Scotland, so that the available money can be spent more effectively and targeted at community-supported, sustainable projects. At the heart of that is a desire to involve communities in the land and in the areas in which they live. Before I move on to more specific issues relating to finance—

With respect—

I wonder whether the minister would comment on a more general  issue—which is nevertheless important: the need to review the current structure of quangos in Scotland. At present, farmers and landowners seeking financial assistance or wanting to develop their land can be forced to deal with more than 20 public bodies or agencies. We need some way of reducing that kind of inefficiency. That would allow resources to be redirected, which would assist the land purchase proposals that the Government wants to promote. It would also fulfil one of the Government's other promises: the widely heralded bonfire of the quangos. The extra money would certainly be useful. I note with some amusement that the white paper glides over the issue of financing, as does the progress report. The Executive must not be allowed to avoid addressing the nonsense that the land fund from which the money will come will be held by the Minister for Culture, Media and Sport, not by the Executive in Scotland. The Scottish Government could issue guidelines, but the allocation of moneys to individual programmes would be decided by the operators of the new opportunities fund. Land reform should not be a lottery—that is not acceptable for Scotland. The SNP has always supported community ownership as an option. However, it cannot be the only weapon in the armoury. The SNP's proposals would add to that lone weapon several others, which could only help to further community involvement. Communities would have a variety of options and be able to exercise the real choice that they have been so long denied, and which they would continue to be denied should the Tories ever return to power. I move amendment S1M-313.2, to leave out from "commends" to end and insert: "notes the progress of the Scottish Executive's consultation on the Land Reform White Paper; welcomes the commitment to a community right to purchase contained within the proposals; nevertheless is concerned that these proposals remain too narrowly focused and therefore agrees that they should be widened to include proposals which would increase community involvement in local land management throughout Scotland."

Does Mr McNulty agree that men have been the beneficiaries of positive discrimination for centuries, if not millennia, and that those who argue against positive discrimination selectively choose to forget that small fact?

I doubt that the minister will find much disagreement this afternoon about this order, although, given this morning's ruling on the temporary sheriffs and the effect that that will have throughout the system, it may be that rather more than five judges will need to be added to the existing complement. We may have another order before us at some time in the future. I note that the Scottish Parliament information centre's research note flagged up that potential problem. The minister may wish to indicate whether he has considered the possibility that he may have to come back with another order asking for yet more judges. We are all aware that Scotland's justice system has been under considerable strain. Many members will have received letters about the lengthy delays that occur, particularly in the civil courts, and which have attracted widespread critical comment from judges as well as others. To add to the existing strain on the system, we know that we are facing further pressure from the requirements imposed by the Lockerbie trial and from the appointment of Lord Cullen to head up the Paddington rail inquiry. However, we should welcome those extra impositions. The Lockerbie trial promises to showcase Scottish criminal justice internationally, in a way that has seldom, if ever, happened before. In Scotland, we know that our criminal justice system is second to none, whatever its faults. Being a small jurisdiction, we are aware that few outside Scotland and outside the narrow professional interest are familiar with the strengths of our system. We should be glad that, as a result of the international news coverage that the Lockerbie trial will achieve, the world will have an opportunity to see at first hand what we have known for a very long time. The choice—once again—of Lord Cullen to head a major public inquiry is another feather in the cap of the Scottish judiciary. I am sure that the whole Parliament will join me in congratulating him on that appointment.  While today's order is a response to a potential crisis, it should not be seen in a negative light. Indeed, when the appointments are made, it will be the first time that the provisions of section 95 of the Scotland Act 1998 have been implemented. We sometimes forget that this Parliament is so new that we are still chalking up firsts. This will be another one. That opens up the general debate about judicial appointments and raises the question whether the methods by which they are made are the best we can devise. As I recall—my colleague Michael Russell also mentioned this—the partnership agreement between the Labour party and the Liberal Democrats stated that judicial appointments should be examined. The SNP's view, certainly, is that the process should be radically revised. That means that there is likely to be widespread agreement in the chamber that reform is appropriate. I will not go out of order by debating the issue in detail today; however, I welcome the minister's comments on the subject. I hope that, as a result of this debate and of the statement and questions that preceded it, the business managers will consider setting aside time in the near future for a specific and full debate on the subject of judicial appointments. For today, and for the SNP, I simply record our agreement with the order.

The decision clearly has enormous practical implications for Scottish justice, some of which the minister has dealt with in his statement. He mentioned temporary judges, but already it has been suggested to me that there may be a challenge to the children's panel system on the same basis. Will the minister give a commitment to Parliament that an audit of Scotland's justice system will be carried out to identify other potential problem areas? There is another, more far-reaching implication about which I have great concern: the perceived impact of the European convention on human rights. Why was this likely application of the convention not foreseen? What does that say about the advice that the Executive receives regarding the general impact of the European convention on human rights? Will the minister reflect on the necessity of getting accurate advice on the effect of the European convention on human rights? Will he consider setting up a human rights commission for Scotland in order to achieve that?

rose—

I am grateful to the minister for advising us that all the ministers in the Executive have European responsibilities with regard to their respective interests. Can he provide the Parliament with the details of his attendance at the informal justice ministers meeting at Tampere on 16 September, or was he not there? What about the justice and home affairs meeting of the Council of Ministers on 4 October in Luxembourg or the European summit at Tampere, or was he not there either? Is not the truth that the ministers of this Executive are not attending any of the relevant meetings?

rose—

Like everyone here, I welcome today's debate. I hope that what I have to say will show that the amendment is not simply rhetoric, as the minister fears. I welcome the funding announcement: it is an  important step forward, because we should all be aware of the extent of the problem. Anyone who is uncertain need only have listened to evidence given to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on 22 September. That evidence, particularly from the police, excited a great deal of media comment, perhaps because it was the police talking about the "ingrained" problem in Scottish society and referring to the "hugely under-reported" extent of this area of criminal activity. At that committee meeting, Chief Superintendent Stewart Davidson pointed out that of the incidents reported to the police, an estimated 73 per cent involved physical violence. That figure is extraordinarily high, especially when we know that there is so much under-reporting. In society, a major problem surrounds the treatment of men who are guilty of this crime—I mean not just in terms of the way in which the legal system deals with it. Society still seems to find it difficult to judge impartially men who are known to be guilty of this crime. When it is confronted by men who vent their anger on women in this way, frequently society still sees them as lax—that concerns me. The noise generated by a violent assault taking place can still fall on deaf ears, even in the poshest of hotels. I know about that from the incident at Gleneagles involving a prominent footballer. As a society, confronted by the visible evidence of black eyes and broken limbs—the harsh reality of such an assault—we still seem to find it possible to accord a place to the men who carry out such abuse. I find that difficult to deal with. We wish it were not so, but the view is still expressed—although not by the police—that such matters are private. It is a long time since the police expressed that view, but—regrettably—there are still areas of our society where the matter is treated in that way. It is still thought that the knowledge of those activities should not affect the man's employment, his job prospects, his prominent position and his status in the community, and that he can go on being a media darling, if that is the case. That sends out an appalling message to people, particularly young people, in our society. While we now recognise more widely the crime for what it is, there is still a reluctance to intervene. There is little point in simply blaming the police, if the rest of us affect deafness and blindness when we are confronted with the evidence. Of course, when I say us, I am not saying that people in this chamber would choose to act in that way. I talk about us as a society. However, we would be kidding ourselves if we did not recognise the complexities of dealing with domestic violence. It strikes right at the heart of one of the institutions that we have all been raised to think of as  synonymous with safety. The echoes can be heard down the generations—I am talking about the family. Last year in the press, and again this year before the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, details of research on the residents of Cornton Vale prison were a matter of public comment. They are worth reiterating. I was utterly astonished at the figures showing the extent to which the women in that prison were themselves victims of crime; survivors might be a better way of describing it. Seventy per cent of those incarcerated in Cornton Vale have suffered emotional abuse. Sixty per cent have suffered physical abuse. Fifty per cent have suffered sexual abuse. The abuse usually started when the women were young and continued into their adulthood, even if the identity of the perpetrator changed. Having been the victims of crime, they were now committing crime themselves. It is a disgrace that we have people in our society who live in a world where that is the cycle of their lives. The Scottish National party recognises that what is required is a combined approach that tackles the problem on a number of fronts. In each of the areas, there are clearly identified problems. The first area is education, which should be looked at in terms of society in general and—equally—in terms of the professionals. The Deputy Minister for Communities has already referred to something to which I was going to refer, which is the worrying suggestion—shown by the Zero Tolerance Trust's research—that we seem to be making very little headway with the next generation on the issue. It is incomprehensible to me that we have not made any progress in that area. We need to work within the education system to try to redress quickly that worrying trend. The series of television advertisements that ran some years ago—and more recent ones—were an excellent way to help that process. However, I cannot help feeling that brief campaigns might work only briefly and that what we need is a long-term, co-ordinated campaign. That brings me to the issue of resourcing, which is part and parcel of today's announcement by the Executive. Anyone who has had dealings with people who are active in the field will know that there has been a serious problem of funding, especially as a result of restraints imposed by the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968. We all recognise the difficulties in respect of that. I know that in information that it provided, Scottish Women's Aid said that it wanted there to be a national funding strategy to resource local groups, as well as its national office. That should be an important component of any revised funding strategy. However, we should at least recognise the problem of the refuges that are unconnected  with Scottish Women's Aid. Not all women's refuges are so connected. I will admit to having not appreciated that until a year or two ago; like most people, I made the assumption that, if it is a refuge, it must be part of Scottish Women's Aid. That is not necessarily the case. I am aware of a number of refuges in the south-west of Scotland and in Aberdeen that are in that position. Shakti, the organisation that seeks to give assistance to women from ethnic minorities, is also in that position. It is worth making a special mention of Shakti in the context of the debate, because it deals with particular problems—the same problems that are manifested elsewhere in society, but writ slightly larger. The briefing from Shakti states clearly that there is a problem of toleration of domestic abuse in many ethnic minority communities, because to challenge it would threaten family honour and the social standing of male members of the family. Over the past two years, Shakti has struggled to maintain a basic level of funding. The problems that Shakti is referring to are not confined to ethnic minorities, although they may be exacerbated in some of those communities. I seek the minister's assurance that refuges that are not affiliated to Scottish Women's Aid—for whatever reason—will be included and not excluded. Perhaps she could indicate where they will stand in the funding initiative. I hope that the title of the fund indicates a non-prescriptive approach. I have already discussed campaigns. The problem, as always, is how to resource longer-term campaigns—whether or not they be police campaigns. It is rare now to get a truly national campaign, except in the media. Without that, we are left with the vagaries of more local funding and more local decision making. Alternatively, we end up with a number of pilot projects dotted here and there, none of which is followed through, and with access to the service dependent entirely on where people live. A good example is a project that I will talk about a little later—the probation project, which is currently available only in Edinburgh. National funding has long been necessary. I do not want to attack decentralisation, but in some policy areas it simply will not work. We have talked about rape crisis centres being funded in some areas but not others, and about women's refuges being kept open in some areas but starved of funds in others. It is now arguable that responsibility for maintaining and building on existing resources should be gathered into one pair of hands, so that we get consistency of provision across the board. I have long thought that that is one way in which the Parliament could make a difference. If I have one small concern about today's  announcement, it is about the reference to matched funding. I worry that that will mean that, over the next few years, the patchy provision that I mentioned will be replicated. Will the minister comment on that in her reply? Finally, I wish briefly to refer to legal initiatives. As the minister knows, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee is considering carefully a possible legal change in a particular area. I hope that that will show the Parliament's committee structure in a very good light. My colleague on the committee, Maureen Macmillan, no doubt hopes to speak later in the debate, because she is the reporter on that aspect of the committee's deliberations. I will leave a longer explanation to her. I want to commend to Parliament's attention the domestic violence probation project to which I referred earlier, which is currently operational only in Edinburgh. That has been set up specifically to deal with the issue of men's attitudes towards domestic violence after their prosecution and conviction, and to challenge them directly. Such projects should be available throughout Scotland, and I would appreciate a response from the minister on that. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee has considered the partnership's work, and our concern about it relates to the time scale. I note that in the final work plan most of the implementation dates are in the first half of 2001. Today's funding announcement is welcome, but I hope that, as a result of the announcement and the debate, Parliament can do even more for women over the next 18 months, rather than make them wait another 18 months until the work plan is implemented. I hope that the minister will respond to those points. I move amendment S1M-221.1, to insert at end, "while at the same time recognising that a national strategy which includes public education and prevention programmes, shelter and support services and law enforcement initiatives remains an essential part of the campaign."

It is rather unfortunate to have to follow such a bizarre speech. I am tempted to suggest that we should treat such contributions as little more than entertainment. Frankly, there is very little practical value to be gained from that sort of rambling. The SNP recognises that there is little to object to in the Executive's motion and my comments are predicated on a basis of general support for community initiatives. Anything that helps to bolster communities is to be welcomed. In truth, it could—and probably will—be argued that it is the very destruction of communities that, over the years, has led to the near breakdown of civil society in some parts of Scotland's urban areas. The previous Government deliberately brought about much of that destruction. Its ideological obsessions led it to disregard totally the enormous benefits to be gained from thriving local communities. I note with interest that the Tory amendment removes all mention of community from the Executive's motion—that seems rather apt, given the Conservative party's history in respect of community. A number of specific crime prevention ideas have already been canvassed and no doubt more will be raised today. However, we should not lose sight of the fact that the most effective crime prevention methods involve providing jobs and futures for people who may feel that they are no longer part of society. It has become fashionable to call them the socially excluded. The more old-fashioned of us may prefer to use the simple term poverty—economic poverty and social poverty. In my view, until we tackle poverty we will fail to achieve the real success that, presumably, we all want. This is not the first debate on this subject in which I have been involved. I was involved in a similar debate in the Scottish Grand Committee on 16 June 1998, which dealt with the prevention of crime and—fascinatingly—the then justice minister, Henry McLeish, used the opportunity to announce the publication of "a strategy for action on community safety".  The strategy was "designed to improve community safety in Scotland through partnerships between public, private and voluntary bodies." It was to encourage "local authorities to take the lead in forming local partnerships, involving the police and other bodies who can influence community safety." During the debate, Mr McLeish said that the strategy did not "say exactly what should be done. That must be decided locally, in the light of local needs and opportunities, and as part of other local policies." It is fair to say that the subject that we are discussing today does not involve anything startlingly new. It does, however, give rise to some pertinent questions, particularly in the light of another comment made by the then justice minister. He expected "to see results from these partnerships we want real action, not planning documents."—[ Official Report, House of Commons, Scottish Grand Committee , 16 June 1998; c 3-4.] In fairness, I suppose that a guidance document is not a planning document. However, in the spirit of the assertions made by the then justice minister, I want to make a few inquiries of the Deputy Minister for Justice—in particular about the community safety partnerships that are mentioned in his motion. He may be able to answer some of my questions today—I will be happy for him to write to me separately if he does not have all the information to hand. Can the minister give members an idea of the extent of uptake by various local bodies in response to the strategy, which is now more than a year old? Is there variation from area to area? If there is, are there any patterns to that variation? It would be reasonable to infer from the earlier safer Scotland document and this more recent publication that more emphasis has been placed on the perceived problems of urban communities, as opposed to rural communities, regarding access to resources and facilities for partnership projects. Is the emphasis a direct result of a variation in response from the start? If it is not, is there not a danger that rural communities will miss out? Will the minister ensure that uptake of the strategy is monitored? On the basis of initial feedback which, I presume, has been undertaken in the past year, can an estimate be made of the likely long-term effectiveness of the scheme? How is it intended that that effectiveness will be monitored? What proposals are there to ensure that we receive regular updates on a number of factors, so that we are told how effective the strategy is? I, too, have questions on policing. I hope that I  will put my questions more constructively than have some others. Will the success or failure of individual community safety partnerships have an effect on the level of policing in a given area? On a point of more general concern to those of us who have to deal with rural communities in our constituencies, will the minister—today or in the future—make a statement on rural police provision? That was a concern at last year's Scottish Grand Committee debate. I suspect that it is still a concern, even among the minister's back-bench members who represent rural communities. We all agree that public confidence is vital. There is little doubt that the public wants more bobbies on the beat. Manned police stations and regular patrols, by foot or car—although most people prefer police to be on foot—give a feeling that help is close at hand and that the police are acting as a deterrent to crime. Fear of crime is debilitating and often leads to people being trapped in their homes after dark, afraid to live normal lives. Visible policing helps to reduce that fear considerably. One of the most unfortunate trends in policing, which many members will recognise, is the reduction in visible policing and the reduction in manned police stations in rural areas. Most people accept that there is an incongruity between public perception and what the police claim is the reality of how they have to operate in the modern day. Public confidence is paramount in such matters, and if that means playing a little to perception, I would say, so be it. The reduction in manned rural police stations has caused great concern in my constituency and, I suspect, throughout other rural areas, and in the commuter villages of the central belt. Few issues cause more concern, or bring people to constituency surgeries faster, than a threat to a local police station. In last year's debate, I mentioned that Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary had used mobile police stations to ensure a regular presence in many smaller villages and hamlets. I understand that the initiative proved immensely popular. The mobile stations apparently made about 80 visits each month to smaller communities. Tayside Police now has a limited ability to do something similar, which it has tried in some of the housing estates in Perth. It would be useful if the minister could address that sort of flexibility for the police as it is well worth considering implementing the initiative throughout Scotland. It would encourage public confidence and remove some of the fears felt by communities left without a permanent police presence. Although I have focused more closely on the challenge of rural policing, I know that most of what I say could apply fairly well to urban communities. I expect that other members may wish to pick on this point.  Closed-circuit television is another important factor in crime prevention and community safety. Applications for CCTV are increasing. I do not know the current total of applications, but I dare say that it is considerable and that many have been submitted at the instigation of communities. My argument is that the increase in demand for CCTV has been fuelled partly by the public's desire for what they regard as a second-best option to the bobby on the beat. I feel sure that if there were a more widespread police presence, the demand for CCTV would not be so great. Much of the increase in CCTV in smaller towns and villages has come about because of the reduced police presence. In most cases, CCTV has been a success—I think we all agree on that. Crime rates are generally lower, although there are occasional signs of criticism, and public confidence is higher. Yet again, however, I very gently push for a consideration of the regulation of the spread and use of CCTV. The rapid growth in use is taking place in a legislation-free zone and the undoubted effectiveness of the technology should not relieve us of our responsibility to ensure that there is minimal abuse and misuse of CCTV. There are no real safeguards, and there is no real monitoring of the extent of its use. Although local authorities and the police may make applications, it is clear that, in private areas, CCTV is going in almost unmonitored. The police and local authorities are unlikely to object to regulatory measures. They might broadly welcome them, because they would deal with some of the cowboys who are moving into the market. Community safety and crime prevention must cover security in the home as well as on the streets. People have the right to feel safe in their own homes. Unfortunately, for women in particular, that right can be nothing other than a fond hope. I do not want to trespass on the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's current work, but I want to welcome initiatives such as those pioneered by Fife Council, to establish specific domestic violence units which combine the expertise of the police and social work departments and deal exclusively with domestic violence. The most recent figures show a higher number of prosecutions for domestic violence in the region and help to create a fuller picture of its frequency and extent. Much domestic violence is unreported and sometimes hospital admissions are the only real measure of its incidence.

I am grateful for the minister's remarks. I will ask him for more detail on how the Executive plans to monitor the partnerships. I do not disagree with what he says about CCTV, but the issue is that whereas the police see it as an operational tool, the public often sees it as a second-best option. We must remember that it is possible for our perceptions of an appropriate way to proceed to run ahead of the public's—not just in this area, but in many others too. We run into that all the time and we need to learn how to take the public with us to ensure that people's confidence is not dented. Many of the demands for CCTV—particularly in smaller communities—arise because people feel that they have insufficient policing. They may be right or wrong in feeling that, but that is how the demands come about. I will return to my remarks on domestic violence in Fife. The subject is important, because it is about crime in the home. Effective police and social work intervention undoubtedly has a deterrent effect and it is essential that such successful programmes are enabled across Scotland and not confined to one or two areas. There is significant cross-party consensus on this matter. We agree about the need for emergency residential accommodation, safe homes, crisis  telephone lines and for all the other things that have been flagged up as absolutely necessary to tackle this particular crime. I hope that practical measures such as those will be introduced as part of the community safety initiative. The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 introduced anti-social behaviour orders, which it was hoped would be an effective tool in the community armoury. I hope that the minister will be able to indicate the extent to which they have been used by local authorities in Scotland since their inception. I ask, because at a recent meeting with officials from Perthshire Housing Association, it was suggested that local authorities' resource difficulties mean that the orders are not being used. If that is true, it is a great pity. Can community safety partnerships increase the number of anti-social behaviour orders and the number of individuals willing to come forward as witnesses? No matter what has been done so far to deal with anti-social neighbours, getting people to come forward remains one of the major stumbling blocks. The new mechanisms were meant to offer more flexibility than the alternative of eviction, but that does not seem to be happening in practice. We still have the cumbersome procedures that were meant—in part—to be replaced. I hope that there is some monitoring of the use and effectiveness of anti-social behaviour orders and some reconsideration of the difficulties that local authorities may be experiencing obtaining them. If there are difficulties, will the minister commit himself to ensuring that the problems are addressed? The minister referred to drugs. There is cross-party agreement about the significant problems of drugs on our streets. I would distinguish—as I think would the minister—between the dealers and the users. The approach ought to be tough on dealers, and tough on the causes of users, but more constructive about the users themselves. The SNP has talked about drugs courts as a way of tackling the drug-related crime that users indulge in to finance their habits. I hope that whatever proposals are made will distinguish between dealers and users so that some of the measures that were referred to earlier can be introduced—even in prison. I certainly wish to associate myself with the remarks made by Mr Raffan, who obviously wants to speak again.

I wholeheartedly agree. The drugs courts idea is to remove offenders from the direct road to prison at the point where a prison sentence is likely to be the next one to be handed down. Many drug users appear in courts and are not charged specifically with drug crime. They appear for shoplifting, theft and other offences. The offenders for whom the real problem is drugs need to be identified and fast-tracked out of prison. For those who end up with sentences of four, six or nine months, prison is the least effective place in which to be treated. There are problems to be overcome in the treatment of drug users and the management of the rehabilitation process. The minister wishes to respond.

We are all trying to find the best solution for what we recognise is a serious problem. It will help if we are as constructive as possible about projected solutions. Community safety is about tying together the various strands of public concern. It is about building confidence in the systems that we put in place for protection and punishment. It is as much about local initiatives to tackle vandalism through education as it is about grand strategies—such as the zero tolerance campaign—that affect the quality of life of most citizens. I have highlighted some local initiatives that have been successful on a small scale, but which could be extended nationwide. They show the effectiveness of co-ordination of effort and the importance of dialogue. Today's debate and the community safety initiative that is being pursued by the Executive are only small parts of that larger dialogue. As I said at the start of my speech, the larger dialogue is about giving people back their hope and belief in their futures. Only an end to deprivation and poverty can bring that.

No. I just want you to wind up.

This has been an arduous, although not very long, procedure. I hope that we will not have to do this too often.  It needs to be said again that it is a matter of regret that we found ourselves in this position. The tone of the letters on the legislation that we have received from the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland, and from Bruce Millan, is also a matter for regret. It is obvious that they are grievously concerned about aspects of the legislation. Notwithstanding their concerns, we all feel that we must push ahead.  We are not here as lawyers or medical professionals. Although we may take the advice of such people, we are here to express our concerns about public safety-that has been paramount. The concern that we on the SNP seats-I was going to say benches-have had throughout these proceedings has focused principally on compliance with the European convention on human rights. We have been assured, both earlier and again today, that compliance has been achieved. I would have wished to receive greater specification, but I accept the assurances that have been given. I serve notice that we will hold the minister to all the assurances that have been given in all the debates, both last Thursday and this afternoon. Nevertheless, we accept those assurances in the spirit in which I sincerely hope they were given.  None of us can be happy about the procedure being forced through. In the interests of public safety, however, it has been necessary to legislate. We can only hope and pray that the assurances that have been made throughout the debates, last Thursday and today, will be adhered to, and that none of what we now pass into legislation will come back to haunt us.

I rise to speak to amendment 34, which I think is straightforward. It deals with the disjunction involved in bringing in parts of the act. I raised this issue last Thursday, and listened carefully to the reply of the Deputy Minister for Community Care. He referred to the disjunction being necessary to allow the Court of Session procedures to be put in place. While that might be an argument for delay, it is not an argument for disjunction. If this Parliament can move speedily-and, after all, we could have moved and dealt with this emergency legislation in one day-we should also demand that the Court of Session move immediately. That is why the amendment is being proposed. I hope that the minister accepts that it is not unreasonable to demand of the Court of Session what we demand of ourselves.

rose-

I wish to make one or two brief comments. As Mr Gallie said, this amendment emanates from the Law Society in recognition of the serious steps that we are taking, which will affect the liberties of a certain category of individuals. We are doing so rightly but we should nevertheless recognise that what we are doing is extremely important and that we must ensure safeguards where possible.  This amendment is one possible safeguard. In effect, by building in a prearranged time scale for hearing the appeals, we will guard against people continuing to be detained over what may become an almost indefinite period pending an appeal hearing. Such a hearing may take a very long time to arrange, or-heaven forfend-proceedings may be deliberately stalled at the convenience of ministers, who would rather that matters did not come to a conclusion too quickly. This amendment seeks to build in a time scale for the appeals to be heard within an expedited period.

To help this part of the debate, will the minister consider setting aside the issue of Noel Ruddle? Is the minister saying that he can envisage no circumstances in which someone who was deemed to be untreatable by one institution might be treatable elsewhere?

With respect, I think that Mr Wallace's criticism might apply to Mr McLetchie's amendment but it does not apply to mine. It is because of the point that Mr Wallace raises that my amendment suggests what the sheriff might do if there are concerns about the suitability of the facility.

I move amendment 7.

Does Dr Simpson accept that a great deal of alarm-this is not on my behalf or on the SNP's behalf-is expressed by the Law Society of Scotland and by the Scottish Association of Mental Health? They feel that a real problem has been shown by the Ruddle case and are concerned that it could arise again. In order to safeguard against that, does he not accept that, although from his point of view incorporating my amendment would be, at worst, irrelevant, at best it might fix a problem that might recur?

rose-

My amendment contains a specific reference to the delivery of treatment, not to the treatment itself. It addresses the possibility that there will be cases in which treatments might be available but cannot be delivered at that time. It is the delivery of treatment that is the concern. We all accept, I believe, that it is entirely possible-otherwise, we would not be debating the bill-that there will be occasions when people are genuinely untreatable. The amendment gets round the concern that we might be defining treatability as including occasions when it is not convenient to provide treatment, for whatever reason. We should not do that.

Does not the minister consider that, if the bill is not more explicit, precisely the same set of circumstances that led to Ruddle's release might recur? If we put something specific in the bill along the lines that I suggested, we will ensure that such a recurrence is, if not impossible, at least guarded against. Currently, there is no safeguard.

The SNP amendments are designed to focus on those areas over which we consider there to be question marks and to which we consider significant improvements can be made while retaining the core point of the legislation.  In that spirit, amendment 7, which stands in my name and in the name of my colleague, Michael Matheson, has been designed to deal with a situation that arose in the Ruddle case. It relates not to the question of his release, but to the debate about his treatment while he was in Carstairs. We have dubbed this question the "treatability question". I will not refer at length to Bruce Millan's letter, but I note that he refers to his concern about the bill's involvement in "matters of treatment and appropriate care".  The amendment was lodged in that context.  Last week, I argued that, rather than being untreatable, Noel Ruddle was, in fact, treatable but that the state hospital at Carstairs did not have the means by which to treat him. To support that comment, I refer to the sheriff's judgment in the Ruddle case. Under the general heading "Progress in the State Hospital", the sheriff makes a number of findings. I make no apology for quoting him at some length, as what he says is extremely important in the context of our discussion.  Paragraph 7.4 of the sheriff's judgment says:  "The applicant was referred for psychological treatment interventions or therapy packages in October 1994 and April 1995 but, apart from being assessed for psychological treatment, none was made available to the applicant and, in January 1997, his Responsible Medical Officer was informed that the psychology department in the hospital had no-one then providing a service to patients with addiction problems."  Paragraph 7.15 says:  "By the time the Medical Sub-Committee came to review the applicant's case in 1998, it was known that none of the psychological treatment planned since 1994, and expected at the State Hospital up to 1997, had taken place".  We should not be hugely surprised that, after that catalogue of non-treatment, Mr Ruddle was reclassified as "untreatable". That is to use the word untreatable in a rather different context from the one in which most people in this debate apprehend it. The suspicion looms large that "untreatable" in the context of the above meant "untreatable at Carstairs", given the resources that were available at the time. Nothing that was said  in last Thursday's debate or anywhere else removes that suspicion.  The suspicion that such circumstances could arise again could be removed if we built into the legislation what is proposed in this amendment. The sheriff could make an order on the delivery of treatment to an individual-not on the treatment itself, which is not the sheriff's responsibility-and ensure that the authorities complied with it within a reasonable time scale. The provision would be discretionary. I heard what Mr McLetchie said, but we are not for making it mandatory. If Mr McLetchie reads the amendment carefully, he will realise that the order would be made only if the sheriff considered it appropriate in all the circumstances that he has heard in a case.  I do not think that that is an outrageous imposition. In any civilised society, if people are detained in such circumstances the utmost must be done to ensure that treatment is made available to them. The bill's total lack of any such assurance is causing much of the concern that is being expressed by many external commentators, including some who have already been mentioned.  The Scottish Association for Mental Health has flagged up the failure to treat Ruddle over a period of five years as a major issue in the provision of mental health services. Things should never have come to that. If the treatment that was deemed appropriate had been delivered to Mr Ruddle, we would not be here now. However, there is no mention in the bill of any measures that would ensure that patients will have the right to access treatment where that treatment exists. Without this amendment, we are in danger of defining a small category of individuals who can be dumped, apparently with impunity. We should not do that and we should not allow the suspicion that we are doing it to arise.  This is not the place for a full-scale debate on the provision of mental health services, although I hope that such a debate will have been triggered as a result of our deliberations over the past few weeks. We can at least ensure that this bill, which covers only a small number of people, contains a safeguard that no one will be left, as Noel Ruddle was for years, without the treatment that his doctors at the time thought appropriate.

I have already stated my concern that we are in the highly unsatisfactory position of having to legislate in an emergency manner for an area of law that has serious implications for human rights. The SNP is supporting this bill, as public safety must be at the heart of all justice legislation. However, as we are legislating in an area that involves the liberty, or otherwise, of individuals, despite the emergency procedures it is the duty of everyone in this chamber to be vigilant.  I want to go back a little way in this saga, to 1994, and to references, which are contained in the sheriff's judgment on the Ruddle case, to the treatment that was available or unavailable to Mr  Ruddle in Carstairs. Pages 6 and 7 of that judgment make it clear that Mr Ruddle and his doctors were seeking treatment for what they considered to be his problems. In their view, treatment was out there somewhere; the problem was that it was not available in Carstairs. That issue was raised over a period of years by the medical officer who was responsible for Mr Ruddle. At one point, the possibility was raised of a transfer to Broadmoor, where it was considered that there was an appropriate unit for Mr Ruddle's treatment. That again emphasises the fact that treatment was available, and that the problem was one of access for Mr Ruddle.  Carstairs hospital did not have the means to treat Mr Ruddle. Nevertheless, he could have been treated even if that treatment had to be elsewhere or bought in. It was the lack of available treatment that led to Mr Ruddle's release, not the fact that he was untreatable. It is from that perspective, bearing in mind the need for compliance with the European convention on human rights, that I view the legislation before us.  Section 1 proposes to amend the powers that are available to sheriffs and ministers under section 64 of the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984. It includes a new test of public safety that must be satisfied when deliberating on the release or continued detention of restricted patients.  The SNP has no problem with that and I am sure that there is widespread agreement and relief across the chamber that the bill addresses that point. My concerns, however, are whether the bill actually tackles the key issue of availability of treatment, because it seems to be absent, and whether therefore it is compliant with the European convention on human rights. There is no mention in the bill of any measures that would ensure that patients have access or the right to access treatment where that treatment exists. Indeed, there is no real health input into the bill, which is curious, since in the Ruddle case it seems that it was a failure in the provision of mental health services rather than the actual law that led to the appeal and, subsequently, to today's legislation.  The responsible medical officer assigned to Ruddle had sought for five years to arrange suitable treatment and only failed to do so because of a lack of resources. The bill is silent on what mental health resources, if any, will be made available to patients detained under the new legislation. Will the minister now give an absolute assurance that where medical treatment is requested and is available, the mental health authorities will accede to that request?  Section 1 also raises serious human rights questions. Article 7 of the European convention on human rights specifically guards against  retrospective criminal legislation. Yet the bill is changing the goalposts for those who were convicted before 1 September this year. The rules governing appeals and discharge will be much tighter following the new legislation than they would have been at the time of such a person's conviction. I seek the reassurance of the minister that that aspect of section 1 does not amount to a breach of article 7.  Section 1 may further open the bill to challenge in that it effectively authorises preventive detention. Let us say that a person suffering from a mental disorder commits an offence and is dealt with by way of a hospital order; he is then cured of that disorder and would normally expect to be discharged. The bill means that if the same person suffers from a second but different mental disorder, he can be detained if it is deemed that he presents a danger to the public, even though he had not committed a second offence. The key phrase is "presenting a danger to the public". That may be considered to be an appropriate way to proceed when someone has already shown a propensity for violence. We would probably all agree on that. Again, I seek an assurance from the minister and an explanation of the advice given on whether that situation, where someone is detained even though he has effectively served his time and committed no new offence, is in contravention of article 5 of the ECHR, which states that everyone has the right to liberty and security of person.  Section 2 amends the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 by introducing a new right of appeal to the Court of Session against the decision of a sheriff. I question why that part of the legislation is to be enacted at some point in the future at the discretion of the minister and not at the same time as the other sections of the bill. Perhaps a further explanation could be given.  I am also concerned that section 3, in extending the definition of mental disorder to include personality disorder, makes it too wide. As has been said, a lot of personality disorders do not exhibit themselves in aggressive or violent behaviour. Would it not be appropriate to qualify personality disorder with that kind of phrase in order to ensure that we do not end up in a situation where people suffering from any personality disorder feel threatened or vulnerable? We would not want to cause fear and alarm when it was unnecessary.  I welcome the eagerness of the Executive to tackle the loophole in the law in order to provide protection for public safety. I regret, however, that the first bill is emergency legislation. I hope that the extensive advice on the human rights implications has been taken and I trust that the minister will be able to provide the specific reassurances that I have asked for.

On a point of order, Mr Presiding Officer. I would like to point out that the Lord Advocate-presumably an independent law officer-appears to be making a highly politically partisan speech. [Applause.] I appreciate the difficult position that the Lord Advocate is in, but is it entirely correct for someone who is a law officer, and therefore presumably independent, to make such a speech?

The emergency legislation that is before us today is undoubtedly an example of what can be achieved by this Parliament and of the speed with which we can achieve it in comparison with Westminster. It is also an example, however, of what happens when a Government does not do its job.  It is a tragedy that the first piece of legislation before this Parliament has to be passed under the emergency provisions contained in the standing orders. I understand that the process has uncovered one or two deficiencies in the standing orders as they pertain to emergency legislation-happily, that will be a matter for the Procedures Committee and not for me.  More than the standing orders are deficient, however. The verdict of many people, not just in this chamber but throughout the country, is that the Executive has been found seriously wanting in its handling of the matter.  We should remember that, on Monday 2 August, Noel Ruddle's release from Carstairs did not come as a bolt out of the blue, either to the Minister for Justice or to the First Minister. Apparently, they had a conversation on the Sunday about the forthcoming release. Astonishingly, they did not consider public confidence to be an issue that they had to address; they cannot have done so, otherwise the matter would not have been handled in such a cack-handed way during the days and weeks since then.  During that period, their handling of the situation seems to have got worse and worse. They gave the impression of two lawyers having a cosy chat on the phone-

The clear impression was of two lawyers having a cosy chat on the phone about the legal niceties of the case, while  entirely forgetting their responsibilities as politicians and as members of the Executive.  The minister seemed totally unprepared for the storm that broke over his head. Why was that? The question remains unanswered by him. Based on the evidence of that first week following Ruddle's release, the answer is probably that he would not recognise a real political issue if it got up and bit him on the nose.  At the Justice and Home Affairs Committee meeting on Tuesday afternoon, the minister said that he was not told of the problem that was likely to be posed by the Ruddle case until 14 July-almost two months after he took office. That raises questions about the quality of the advice to ministers. Receiving that information on 14 July would, however, still have given him two weeks to get to work on the problem before the outrage hit the fan. What happened between 14 July and 2 August? We should be told.  On the evidence of the publicity at the time, the First Minister seems to have packed his bags to head off on a wee holiday. I do not begrudge him that holiday, although I notice that he is not in the chamber today, which is a pity. I wonder, however, whether the timing of that holiday was entirely apt in the light of the advance warning that had been given.  The Minister for Justice must also have cleared off somewhere, because a junior minister initially handled the furore and was left blinking like a bewildered rabbit in the studio lights, haplessly and hopelessly defending the indefensible until the Minister for Justice rode to the rescue some days later. Meanwhile, Ruddle had been doing some bag packing of his own.  When the minister reappeared, it was to a hastily arranged meeting with me and the leader of the Conservative party. No doubt, he hoped that that meeting would stop the uproar. It is a pity that, when he was pressed on whether there were any cases in the pipeline similar to Ruddle's, he answered with an unequivocal no. Lo and behold, that was not strictly true. The minister now tells us that the facts of one of the cases about which he did not advise us were not intimated to him until some hours after the meeting on 4 August-we must accept his word on that. However, I still do not accept the explanation that was given for withholding information about the other case that was due to come up-the Tonner case.

The minister knows that the explanation that was subsequently given on 27 August was not accepted either by me or by Mr McLetchie.  It transpired that the appeal was made on precisely the same point but that, at an early stage, a view was taken of the quality of the evidence. The minister was therefore going to advise us that the cases were not the same. However, to say that a different view was taken of the quality of the evidence is by no means the same as saying that the Tonner case was not similar to the Ruddle case.  It was disingenuous in the extreme for the minister to have taken that position on the Tonner case, and I think that he knows it. The matter has damaged his credibility. His credibility was not helped any further by his saying before the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on Tuesday that he was not there in 1997 and 1998 during the events that led up to the case.

The minister may say that it is true that he was not there, but that does not help his case.  The phrase that he used at the committee meeting seemed vaguely familiar to me, and then I remembered why. There are three well-known defences in Scots law. The first I had better not repeat for fear of incurring the Presiding Officer's wrath, but I will let him in on the secret afterwards. The second is that a big boy did it and ran away-that is clear enough, I suppose. The third is, "It wisnae me; I wisnae there," and that is what the minister is saying about his position.  Obviously, the minister remembers that defence well from his years at the Scottish bar-so well that he thought that he would try it out for himself when he got into a corner. As a plea in this case, it is a total non-starter. Whether Mr Wallace likes it or not, he took the job, he took the money and now he has to take the responsibility. That leaves him swinging gently in the breeze-no doubt that is where his coalition partners would like to leave him.

No, I am taking no more interventions; I have limited time.  We should not ignore the figure skulking in the long grass. It is the First Minister-who is not here-hoping that no one will spot him or his involvement in the whole affair leading up to 1999. I do not think that he should be let off quite so easily. He certainly cannot pretend that he was not well warned of the effect that the release would have on public opinion and confidence. A previous high-profile case-mentioned by the Minister for Justice and similar in its facts-had generated major publicity. The Reid case was covered extensively by the press after the sheriff court decision in 1997 and again in 1998. Indeed, it led to a front page  Daily Record  headline on 23 August 1997: "Madness". Madness indeed.  Let us consider the Reid case, which both ministers have regularly cited in their own defence.

On Tuesday, the Minister for Justice stated categorically that "the MacLean committee was set up as our response to the Reid judgment." [ Official Report , Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 31 August 1999; c 31.]  The MacLean committee was set up after a successful intervention in the House of Lords. Apparently, the success in the sheriff court appeal a year earlier had not set the alarm bells ringing, but the success in the House of Lords had. I would like to know why, in the middle of 1998, given that Ruddle had then come into the queue, the then Secretary of State for Scotland did not hear the alarm bells ringing loudly enough to have done something about it. We have lost a great deal of time in dealing with the issue.  The problems posed by the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 had been growing for some time. There are other issues to do with treatability, which take us back to 1994, but other members will deal with that. The unpalatable truth is that the current Minister for Justice is responsible for the debacle-he is on the hook, but he is not the only one. The previous Secretary of State for Scotland, now the First Minister, must take some share of the blame. The fact that he is not in the Parliament today and is pretending that this matter has nothing to do with him simply will not do.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has within the Scottish criminal justice system to address the issue of domestic violence. (S1O-98)

I am sure that everybody here will applaud any attempt to reduce this particular scourge on our society. I would like Mr Wallace to consider the available penalties. As part of the discussion, will he consider enhanced penalties for breaches of the peace where there is evidence of harassment or where there are overtones of domestic violence, and enhanced penalties for what are effectively domestic violence assaults, so that-without necessarily creating a specific crime-we nevertheless get the action that we require in the courts?

Thank you, Mr Presiding Officer. I listened with interest to  what the minister said, but I have some concerns, not least of which are those that relate to the unnecessary delay. Can he be more open about his time scale for the introduction of legislation? I fear that we are missing a great opportunity.  Can the minister elaborate on the precise strength of the code of conduct, because it does not appear to usher in any change at all? He said that the code will "preserve existing rights of access".  That phraseology suggests that the code will make no real change, which will be a matter of great concern. Will the minister clarify that aspect of the code? It appears not to contain any legal rights or responsibilities-unless I have missed something fundamental.  Will the minister expand on the time scale involved and explain why he feels it necessary effectively to wait until Westminster's deliberations are over? That is a rather unfortunate precedent to set. Will he clarify precisely what strength the code of conduct will have when it comes to implementation? What remedies will people have if the code is breached? I fear that the minister's statement is sending out a signal that not much will change.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to discuss with the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs the administration of the trial of those accused in the Lockerbie air disaster. (S1O-63)

The minister will recall that, when the issue was raised in the other place, we were frequently assured that the matter of a third-country trial was not just a devolved issue but one that concerned the Foreign Office. Has he considered approaching the Foreign Office for a contribution towards the enormous cost of the trial-which I am sure he would not want to be funded entirely from the public purse-if indeed the Foreign Office has responsibility in the matter?

I will confine my remarks to the remit of the Minister for Justice which, in this Parliament, includes justice, equality and land reform. Specifically, I will address the proposals in the Government's legislative programme, which was set out this morning, and suggest some omissions. That may be a novel approach to a debate on the legislative programme but, nevertheless, I shall try it.  In his statement this morning, the First Minister made it quite clear that land reform is perceived as a major plank of the Government's first-year programme. I do not think that three, four or five parties, or the independent member in this chamber, would object to that. I am never certain quite where the Conservatives sit on land reform; there is always the suspicion that they are opposed to any suggestion of reform. I would be interested to hear whether they welcome any of what was suggested this morning.

That is interesting.  I would have liked to see a few of our proposals being announced this morning but, regrettably, they were not. There can be no objection to the principles in the two proposed bills. There will be a widespread, but not universal, welcome to an end to feudal tenure. We must all agree that that is long overdue. I recall that, during an adjournment debate in what we are now calling another place, Alex Salmond led us through what can only be described as a dismal catalogue of outrages perpetrated by the so-called raider of the lost titles.  I look forward to seeing the draft bill, just as I look forward to seeing the other draft bill-the land reform bill as opposed to the bill for the abolition of feudal tenure. It might be a slight overstatement to say, as the First Minister did this morning, that there is enthusiasm for the land reform policy group's proposals. It would be fairer to say that there is resignation to the fact that, although there will be some movement, the more wide-ranging reforms are not going to take place.  I am concerned that we are not approaching land reform in the way that might once have been expected. Land reform is not just a legal reform; it is also a social reform. I appreciate that issues of social reform and social justice often tend to be seen as purely urban matters, but they are not; they have a strong rural element.  The proposed measures are certainly useful. No  doubt a community right to buy is important. I absolutely support that, as I have supported the communities in Eigg and in Assynt, but-and this is a big but-how often will communities actually want to exercise that right? When thinking about land reform, I like to set my own test, which I call the Blackford test. It may be a little parochial, as the Blackford estate is in my constituency, but it is one of the largest estates in Scotland and perhaps one of the worst perpetrators of some of the unfortunate practices that are possible under the present system of land ownership.  When I hear proposals for land reform, I always think of the Blackford estate and ask myself what those proposals would do to change the situation there. It is only 30 to 45 minutes up the road; we do not have to go right up north to the western Highlands to see some pretty atrocious examples of land management. Will the proposed legislation do anything to help? It might have prevented the period of speculation as to where and with whom the ownership of Blackford was based. Beyond that, I do not see how the legislation would make any difference. People in the community in Blackford and the surrounding area do not want to own the estate. The ability to buy the estate is neither here nor there as far as they are concerned. They have spent years watching perfectly habitable farmhouses being allowed to fall into dereliction. They are totally frustrated by that, and all they want is some input and some say in what is happening on the estate. Although I welcome what is proposed, none of it will make the slightest difference to that estate.  Land reform is about more than the issues that are being addressed. The Executive may intend to tackle other aspects later in the legislative programme or in the years to come. If that is the intention, I hope to hear a word or two about it in the closing speech, which I understand will be delivered by Mr Wallace.  When he replies, I would like Mr Wallace to clarify a minor point about the section of the proposal that relates to national parks where there is a reference to legislating for access. Is it the Executive's intention that the access legislation will be a stand-alone bill, or will it be subsumed by the legislation on national parks? That is an important clarification. Until now, we have always assumed that access legislation will be dealt with quite separately.  In my role as shadow justice minister, I welcome the announcement of the incapable adults bill. Shorn of its most controversial clauses, it will be regarded as a long-overdue reform that is likely to gain widespread support from members. Perhaps it will even gain unanimous support-that would be a first. In the entire policy area, embracing justice, equality and land reform, there are some  huge gaps and I would like them to be addressed.  It is unfortunate that, as well as omitting more extensive land reform legislation, the Executive has missed the opportunity to introduce a Scottish freedom of information bill. I know that there is to be a statement on it next week, which I anticipate with interest, but how much more of a signal could we have sent out to Scotland if, as one of our first major pieces of legislation, we had done a freedom of information bill? That would have shown that this Parliament really is going to be different-particularly if the bill was more generous than its Westminster equivalent. It would have been a big legislative set piece that would have made people sit up and notice. Sadly, that is not going to happen.  There are other missed areas and opportunities. There is no mainstream justice legislation. There are two areas where, I feel certain, there would have been cross-party support and therefore a speedy passage through Parliament. That must be taken into account: not all these bills will take the same amount of time to go through Parliament. Some smaller bills that would have been given speedy approval could have been introduced, so their absence is all the more puzzling. Why are there no proposals for changing both civil and criminal law to enable domestic violence to be dealt with in a speedier, more effective and more sensitive way? Why are we not addressing the problem of Scots-born but overseas-raised individuals who are convicted of serious crimes and then dumped back on Scotland without warning? There have been back-bench calls from all parties on those matters. I see the First Minister screwing his face up, but some of his own Westminster back benchers have called for action on that latter point.

I will not take an intervention. I am sorry; the Presiding Officer has already indicated that I must wind up.  My final comment is triggered by the First Minister's reference to Westminster legislation. Among the many things that have bedevilled Scotland's justice system is the fact that important changes are made in civil or criminal law by tacking on odd clauses from what is essentially English and Welsh legislation, or by stuffing a series of unrelated measures higgledy-piggledy into a so-called law reform (miscellaneous provisions) (Scotland) bill. I hope that we will see the end of the latter practice, but I am concerned about the continuation of the former one. It is happening even now, and I seek an assurance that it will be well and truly seen off.

rose-

That is the most extraordinary performance that I have ever heard, from someone whose party clearly knows the price of everything and the value of nothing. To use the word democracy in that context is an absolute disgrace. Some of the members who make speeches today should go away and carefully reflect on the principles that they are advocating for this new Parliament. What negotiations does Allan Wilson suggest took place on Short money and allowances? Absolutely none, and he was too afraid to allow an intervention that he knew would expose that fact. Contributions such as Allan Wilson's do no favours to the future of democracy in Scotland.  I want to speak about one of the other issues raised by the minister, but which members have not concentrated on because they have been diverted-quite rightly-by allowances and Short money. Article 5 of the Scotland Act 1998  (Modifications of Schedules 4 and 5) Order 1999 seeks to insert a new section into part II of schedule 5 to the Scotland Act. That will affect access to information, which is an important issue that is in danger of being overlooked-although given some of the earlier speeches, we can see why the governing coalition might prefer not to have to talk too much about access to information.  The order is an attempt to add another reservation to an already long list of reservations in the Scotland Act, and to do so at Westminster as sneakily as possible. I find it instructive that the ink is hardly dry on the Scotland Act and already Westminster is clawing back powers. I wonder whether that will be a regular occurrence.  Schedule 5 in its present form has already been debated and passed at Westminster, and it is a bit rich that it is being revisited even before the transfer of powers has taken place on 1 July. I notice how it is being revisited and which way the powers are going. One wonders whether Westminster would be quite as sanguine if we presented it with a similar fait accompli.  I learn from the media that we are to have a statement on freedom of information from our new Minister for Justice. Last week he promised a freedom of information regime, whatever that means. So we are to have a statement, a regime-no word of a bill. I notice with some dismay that the entire Liberal Democrat front bench appears to have absented itself from this debate, so clearly we will get no clarification from the Minister for Justice, although we need it.  It seems extraordinary to me that the Scottish Parliament does not want to take the opportunity that has been afforded it of forging ahead in this area. This order would help to close down sources of information in Scotland. The Government has already produced a neutered bill at Westminster-a bill that might better have been titled the not very much freedom of information bill. In the debate on that bill, in what we are coming to term the other place, the Liberal Democrat spokesman raised questions about what was proposed, in the hope that further concessions would be made. Are we to believe that in Scotland the same Liberal Democrats not only are without questions, but have no intention of changing the current scenario, and that the governing coalition is not only happy with that, but is content to allow it to be taken even further? That is what is happening here today.  If he is lucky enough to catch your eye, Mr Deputy Presiding Officer, my colleague Kenny MacAskill will highlight some of the important areas in which our freedom to know will be curtailed, and how that will effectively gag Scots on matters that are vital to Scotland. Undoubtedly there will be many more such areas, courtesy of both Labour and Liberal Democrat members-or,  should I say, of their Millbank masters. That does not bode well for Scotland's new Government.

I object specifically to the inclusion of Jim Wallace's name in the list of ministers as Minister for Justice, but I cannot help but comment on the farrago of nonsense that we have just heard from one of the Liberal Democrat members. Mr Lyon showed in his speech that the Liberal Democrat manifesto contained virtually nothing that we can take as a promise.  Being the first Minister for Justice in our nation is a hugely responsible task. I must ask whether Jim Wallace has shown any real responsibility in recent weeks. I, too, have read the consultative steering group report; it makes somewhat nostalgic reading already. Jim Wallace was an assiduous member of that group. Its report talked in terms of open, accessible and participative government, yet he has connived at creating a situation where this debate is the only forum in which we can raise issues about the so-called partnership agreement between the Liberal Democrats and new Labour-so much for the new politics.  Members have, in effect, been presented with a fait accompli. On a number of matters-tuition fees is perhaps the most contentious, but it is not the only one, as we have heard-the majority in Parliament will be overridden or side-stepped. That is not democracy and it is not what the people expected. It is neither open nor just. We are in danger of engendering disappointment and alienation among voters.  We are being asked to approve someone who claimed that a key manifesto promise was nothing more than election rhetoric. I wonder just what the word promise means in these circumstances. Perhaps Jim Wallace will take the opportunity later today to outline how much of the Liberal Democrat manifesto was nothing more than election rhetoric.  Many Liberal Democrat members-including some who are in the chamber today-and a vast number of their voters must be considering the nature of trust. Liberal Democrats made promises that were not going to be kept. Mr Wallace has shown that he and his party are not to be trusted. Either he conducted the campaign in bad faith or he is now open to the accusation that he is a naive dupe. Either way, it does not look good on his CV.  Jim Wallace claims to be a Liberal Democrat. I see little liberalism or democracy in his behaviour, and precious little justice, so I support the amendment to have his name struck from the list of ministers.

I assert that my primary loyalty is to the people of Scotland.  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Roseanna Cunningham (Perth) (SNP)  The following members took the oath:  Colin Campbell (West of Scotland) (SNP) Ms Margaret Curran (Glasgow Baillieston) (Lab) Cathie Craigie (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (Lab) Ms Patricia Ferguson (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab) Lord James Douglas-Hamilton (Lothians) (Con) Mr David Davidson (North-East Scotland) (Con) Alex Fergusson (South of Scotland) (Con) Karen Gillon (Clydesdale) (Lab) Helen Eadie (Dunfermline East) (Lab) Phil Gallie (South of Scotland) (Con) Miss Annabel Goldie (West of Scotland) (Con) Fergus Ewing (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP) Ross Finnie (West of Scotland) (LD) Donald Gorrie (Central Scotland) (LD) Rhoda Grant (Highlands and Islands) (Lab) Iain Gray (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Lab) Mr Duncan Hamilton (Highlands and Islands) (SNP) Mr Keith Harding (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con) Mr Sam Galbraith (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab) Mr John Home Robertson (East Lothian) (Lab) Janis Hughes (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab) Gordon Jackson (Glasgow Govan) (Lab) Fiona Hyslop (Lothians) (SNP) Dr Sylvia Jackson (Stirling) (Lab) Dr Richard Simpson (Ochil) (Lab) Adam Ingram (South of Scotland) (SNP) Alex Johnstone (North-East Scotland) (Con)   The following members made a solemn affirmation:   Malcolm Chisholm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab) Bruce Crawford (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP) Susan Deacon (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (Lab) Linda Fabiani (Central Scotland) (SNP) Mr Kenneth Gibson (Glasgow) (SNP) Mrs Margaret Ewing (Moray) (SNP) Trish Godman (West Renfrewshire) (Lab) Hugh Henry (Paisley South) (Lab) Cathy Jamieson (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab)