Curriculum for excellence is built on local flexibility, ensuring that schools meet the best educational needs of their learners and provide access to courses across the curriculum. Decisions on the number of subjects that pupils take should be based on maximising achievement. Learners may study for fewer qualifications at a particular point but leave school with a greater overall level of achievement. It is not surprising that there will be changes in patterns of presentation for qualifications. Indeed, it is extremely difficult to make meaningful comparisons with the statistics, given that we are talking about two completely different qualification systems. The curriculum is designed to support and recognise a wider range of skills, achievements and qualifications than ever before. That approach allows greater depth of learning and will best prepare Scotland’s young people for life and work in the 21st century.

As I have mentioned, the member is comparing not only two different qualification systems but two different structures of courses. The number of subjects that are studied in S4 is a decision for individual schools and local authorities, but it should be said that the number of subjects that are studied in S4 does not determine the number of qualifications that a pupil will leave school with. For instance, as I have mentioned in the chamber before, there is a huge variety of language courses on offer now—not just national 4s and 5s but qualifications in languages for life and work. It is also worth saying that the figures are provisional and that the final totals will not be presented until the end of March.

First, as I am sure the member is aware, Scotland does not have a national curriculum as he suggests. Despite the name, curriculum for excellence is a change in the methodology of teaching and examining. It should be said that standards are absolutely being maintained; indeed, there is every evidence to suggest that the new exams will be very challenging. Changes have been made to the appeals system. However, there will still be the opportunity for anyone who has exceptional circumstances to have those considered and for a check of exam papers, should any questions arise around that. The changes that have been made are based on the understanding that the appeals system is there to cope with errors in the process or unusual circumstances. That is why the appeals system was established in the first place.

An unprecedented level and range of support is being provided. Since 2012, more than £5 million of additional funding has been provided, including two extra in-service days. Perhaps even more important than that has been the involvement of teachers throughout the construction, design and implementation of curriculum for excellence and the new exams and, I hope, a responsiveness to teachers’ points, such as the fast-tracking of material in response to teacher requests on nationals 4 and 5 and their assessments.

We welcome and receive comment from young people and people who are sitting exams around the country. As I understand it, the person who is concerned and who has written the letter feels that the exams in the coming diet will be too easy. However, I certainly do not think that the SQA or any experts who are responsible for setting our exams would agree with that stance. The SQA has a gold standard when it comes to maintaining standards in our exam system, and I have complete confidence in it.

The Scottish Government is providing a wide range of support and funding to help education authorities, including East Ayrshire Council, to enhance learning and teaching. As Scotland’s improvement agency for education, Education Scotland has a key role in supporting practitioners and authorities, such as East Ayrshire Council, to improve learning and teaching across all areas of their work.

It is certainly a substantial commitment. The schools for the future programme is committing £80 million to the project that Willie Coffey describes and it is fair to say that Grange academy is doing great and innovative things with Scottish studies, which looks set to become a very valuable addition to the array of qualifications with which people will come out of Scottish schools in the future.

The Scottish Government, the Scottish Qualifications Authority, Education Scotland and other partners have put in place unprecedented levels of support to help teachers to deliver the new qualifications, and that support will continue and will be enhanced over this year. Further support to address some of the areas that have been identified by EIS members was already being planned, including early feedback to schools on assessment standards, additional SQA subject experts to provide continuous professional development for teachers in priority subjects, and curriculum for excellence leadership events in February and March for all secondary headteachers. We continue to listen to teachers to provide any help they need.

I can be almost equally brief. The Government does not intend to delay CFE. The timetable for its implementation was agreed several years ago, and there is cross-party agreement on it. However, we will be open to providing all the support that is necessary to ensure that CFE is the success that we all know it will be.

The Scottish Government continues to encourage young people to learn Mandarin and Cantonese, as well as to learn about Chinese culture and history. Over the past five years, we have launched 13 Confucius classrooms serving 17 local authorities across Scotland and we have new national qualifications in Chinese languages at higher and advanced higher levels. In December, our Confucius classroom at St Ninian’s high school in East Renfrewshire won the accolade of best Confucius classroom in the world at the world Confucius Institute conference in Beijing.

I recognise the member’s involvement in the issue through the cross-party group on China. Similarly, I am of the view that we should be working to increase the numbers. Indeed, we have managed to increase them, as the number of presentations for Mandarin is up from 298 to 334 this year. We have set ourselves a target to double the number of Mandarin teachers between 2011 and 2017, and we have an aspiration to double the number of presentations in the same period.

My impression is that local authorities are very much engaged. As I indicated, 17 local authorities are already working directly with the Confucius classrooms. Also, we work through the one-plus-two programme, for instance, which is an on-going programme of engagement with local authorities, to make sure that both national Government and local government are signed up to the idea that, over the next few years, we want all our children to come out of primary school with exposure to two languages, one of which, in many cases, will be Cantonese or Mandarin.

The number of classroom assistants employed in schools in each of the last five years was 5,505 in 2013; 5,666 in 2012; 5,623 in 2011; 5,430 in 2010; and 5,532 in 2009.

I agree with Neil Findlay that classroom assistants play a vital role in our school system. Last year saw a peak number in classroom assistants in recent years and the numbers have been relatively stable throughout the past five years, as I indicated. At the end of the day, local authorities have to make decisions about how they employ classroom assistants and in what numbers. The Government makes clear our view of the importance of classroom assistants and their central role in the education system.

The Scottish Government continues to encourage young people to learn Mandarin and Cantonese, as well as learn about Chinese culture and history. To add to the answer that I provided to Mr Pearson for question 2, we are supporting 22 Chinese teachers from Tianjin schools to live in Scotland and work in their partner schools and we provide annual funding for young people and headteachers from Scottish schools to visit China to establish and foster links.

Across all languages, we have managed to stabilise and slightly increase the number of foreign language assistants over the past three years from 59 to 70 to 73. The Government works with various agencies, including the British Council and others, to make sure that that number goes up. We recognise that foreign language assistants can be a very cost-effective means of introducing native speakers to support the class teacher. One specific example is the early learning of Chinese project, which was launched in 2013 and involves more than 30 Chinese-speaking students.

Through close collaboration with stakeholders, the Scottish Government has ensured that a wide range of guidance documents on supporting those with additional support needs is accessible to practitioners, families, children and young people. For example, the supporting children’s learning code of practice provides guidance on the provisions of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 as well as on the supporting framework of secondary legislation.

The GIRFEC approach puts each child at the centre of service delivery. Provisions in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, with on-going support from the national GIRFEC implementation team, will help to ensure consistency of implementation throughout Scotland. In addition, the Government places specific duties on local authorities under the 2004 act. The Scottish Qualifications Authority is careful to ensure that all assessment approaches are flexible and do not create barriers for learners who require additional support. That would certainly include those learners with communication difficulties.

The standards that apply in respect of inclusion and educational standards would apply there, too. The Government has the needs of young people, whether they are in mainstream, residential or other forms of education, close to its heart. On mainstreaming versus residential education and the wider issues around that, it is worth saying that, although the Standards in Scotland’s Schools etc Act 2000 provides a duty to mainstream as the norm, it makes it clear that where residential or other specialist education is more suitable—for reasons of proportionality, cost or, most important, the needs of the individual child—that remains an option.

The responsibility for providing education for children and young people who cannot attend school because of ill health rests with education authorities. To support education authorities in delivering that duty, the Scottish Government published guidance for them in 2001. That guidance is being revised to ensure that it takes account of the current policy and legislative landscape and is firmly focused on the collaborative working that is required to meet the needs of each child and young person.

The issue is of key importance. As I said, the Government is working to ensure that the guidance is adequate to cope with such situations. The refresh process that I mentioned has involved Action for Sick Children, the National Parent Forum of Scotland and others to ensure that we address the issues. The member asked what the issues are. A number of matters have been raised, which include co-operation levels between education authorities and the varying costs of provision. I am sure that the group that is working on the subject will find a way forward that updates the rules.

The Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 was put in place to support our commitment to all children and young people with additional support needs receiving the education and support that they require to achieve their maximum potential in life. The act places strict duties on local authorities to meet the additional support needs of all children whose school education they are responsible for, and to tailor provision according to the children’s individual needs. The supporting children’s learning code of practice explains those duties and provides guidance on the act’s provisions as well as on the supporting framework of legislation.

Although I certainly do not underestimate the work and commitment that are involved for teachers who deal with children with additional needs, I do not recognise the comment that somehow teachers are not fulfilling their statutory duties in that respect. There has been an increase in the number of children recorded with additional needs—while the Government is working to make provision for that increase, it should be recognised that a large proportion of that increase is, of course, because the definition of additional needs now captures many more needs than it previously did.

Will the member give way?

The 2012 PISA results show that Scotland has continued to perform above the OECD average in science and at least as well as other United Kingdom countries. For the first time, there has been a welcome reduction in the performance gap between disadvantaged and less disadvantaged pupils in reading, maths and science. The on-going implementation of curriculum for excellence will ensure that the learning our young people experience continues to improve, including in science, with a sustained focus on raising the attainment of learners.

I am glad that Ken Macintosh referred to the attainment gap. It is right to say that some European countries are performing exceptionally well in closing that gap, including a number of small independent countries around us. However, it is particularly relevant that this is the first time that PISA has pointed to a measurable closing in the attainment gap; the 2012 results show that happening in a very positive way compared with 2009. However, we are not complacent about that. I have said on a number of occasions that we must close not only the gender gap but the attainment gap and we must make it clear that the opportunities that education provides are for everyone in Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

The implementation of curriculum for excellence, including the new national qualifications, is on track. Our schools have made excellent progress and all partners are committed to ensuring that the new qualifications are delivered successfully and benefit pupils across Scotland. The new highers, available from next session, are designed to prepare and support our young people for the changing world that lies ahead of them. They provide smooth progression from the new national 5 qualification and we have made it clear that we consider them the natural option for young people in Scotland next session. We also recognise that there needs to be some scope for local flexibility based on professional judgment, where teachers can work closely with their senior management, local authority and parent body to make a decision in the best interests of their learners. Education Scotland, the Scottish Qualifications Authority, the Scottish Government and local authorities are delivering a wide range of support to help teachers introduce the new highers. We will continue to listen and respond wherever we need.

The member has to get it clear in his head whether he and the Opposition are criticising the Government for pressing ahead too fast, as has been suggested, or for not pressing ahead fast enough. There is no doubt in my mind that the Government has been listening; indeed, we have been listening for some weeks now to the calls from the teaching community and schools for exceptional circumstances to be recognised. As for the expectations and the letter that Mr Bibby has mentioned, it remains the natural expectation and option that young people will be sitting the new highers in the coming session. Criticising the Government for recognising exceptional circumstances and the need to work with teachers is really a criticism that I find difficult to follow.

No—and it is also worth saying that, as far as the flexibility that has been discussed is concerned, it will not be enough for a single teacher to make such a decision. Any such decision would have to be made in consultation with the school, the local authority and, crucially, the parent body in that school. In any case, I am more than happy to be in the company of people such as Larry Flanagan of the Educational Institute of Scotland, who described this decision as “a sensible approach ... in the best interests of ... pupils”, and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, whose representative Douglas Chapman called it “a pragmatic solution to exceptional circumstances”. The Government has been listening and has acted, and I am more than pleased that it is ensuring that curriculum for excellence continues to be the success that we all know it is going to be.

I do not want to misquote the member, but he said that states primarily fund research within their own borders. How does he square that with the UK’s recent arrangement for a large amount of co-operation with Switzerland over social science research?

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing the debate, which has provided us with a timely opportunity to celebrate Scotland’s long-standing contribution to the world of medical research. The commitment of all who carry out that research in Scotland has, of course, immeasurably improved the health of people in Scotland and internationally. Mr Fraser mentioned distinguished recipients of research funding, including Sir Alexander Fleming. The MRC supported him as it has, over the years, supported many others at some point during their careers. I am sure that we would all wish to join in not only celebrating the MRC’s centenary but recognising its continuing significant investment in Scotland. In addition to the many remarkable examples of research that have been cited in the course of this evening, I would like to mention a few more that I feel merit recognition. In doing so, I recognise that Mr Campbell mentioned the Farr institute and highlighted that research transcends all boundaries, whether those boundaries are those of Scotland or the UK, as was noted by Bob Doris and others. It is invidious to pick out only a few examples of successful research in Scotland, but the Scottish Government’s chief scientist office enjoys an enduring and productive partnership with the MRC. The two organisations have for many years co-funded two research units—one in the area of hearing and the other in social and public health sciences—and, in 2008, jointly established the Scottish collaboration for public health research and policy. Of course, the current MRC chief executive officer, Professor Sir John Savill, was also the Scottish Government’s health directorate’s chief scientist in recent years. Beyond those close collaborations, we also recognise the success of the nine additional MRC-funded centres and institutes across Scotland, including the protein phosphorylation unit in Dundee, the centre for virus research in Glasgow and the centre for regenerative medicine in Edinburgh, mentioned already, which hosts an impressive seven MRC-funded centres. The MRC also takes the lead on a number of funding initiatives involving many key partners in health research funding, covering areas such as prevention research, lifelong health and wellbeing, infection research and, more recently, health informatics. Its ability to pull together funding organisations into effective partnerships is to be commended, and, of course, it is important to remember the contribution of the NHS and charitable funders. My colleague the Minister for Public Health recently announced the successful applicants for partnership funding with Alzheimer’s Research UK and Prostate Cancer UK, and made a call for applications in collaboration with muscular dystrophy charities. Leading on from the success of those, the chief scientist office is now working with a number of other funders, including the Stroke Association, to develop similar partnerships that allow Scottish researchers to access more significant funds than each funder alone would be able to provide. The debate has reflected the broad consensus on much that is in the motion. That said, the felicitous timing of the debate has meant that, inevitably, we have occasionally strayed into more contentious waters. I hope that it is not too uncharitable of me to wonder whether that was at least partly in Mr Fraser’s mind from the outset of the debate, even if he did not know when he lodged his motion on what date the debate would take place. However, even when we come to discuss the broader issues of research funding in the context of something as contentious as independence, there is more common ground than some speakers cared to acknowledge. It is worth stressing that the funding that the MRC has invested in Scotland historically and at present is a clear recognition of the quality of our research in the sector. The fact that Scotland secures more than her population-based share of funding is a source of pride because, as Mr Fraser said, that funding is awarded on the basis of the excellence of the institutions and individuals concerned, regardless of where they are located. The grants are not acts of charity; they are recognitions of excellence. Mr Malik asked where the money will come from to fund research councils in the future, given that it currently comes via the UK Government. I can answer that directly only by saying that the moneys will come from the same place as they ultimately come from now, which is in good share from Scottish taxpayers. With Scotland’s whole budget—as opposed to the share that is currently devolved—in Scotland’s hands, there will be nothing to stop Scotland paying into shared research councils.

The relevant section of the white paper is pretty unambiguous. It says that, with independence, the Government will ensure that levels of investment in university research are maintained at current levels at least. I cannot say what funding levels future UK Governments would allocate, but I can say that, if such decisions were made in this place rather than another place, they would be in our hands rather than somebody else’s hands. It is important to add that none of that precludes the existence of shared research councils. The white paper, which was launched today at Glasgow science centre, outlines our vision of an independent Scotland that works closely with our neighbours. Given our competitive strengths and the many cross-border research collaborations and partnerships that exist, there are clear benefits—not just for us but for the wider medical research community—of maintaining a common research area with the rest of the UK. I thank Mr Fraser again for this helpful debate. I add my congratulations to the MRC on 100 years of funding valuable research that has dramatically improved the lives of individuals not just in Scotland or the UK but across the world. Meeting closed at 17:43.

In Scotland, the health and wellbeing of children and young people is a core focus of key national policies such as curriculum for excellence and getting it right for every child. Health and wellbeing is one of the eight curricular areas that all children and young people will experience as part of their broad general education, and is one of the three aspects that all staff share a responsibility for developing—literacy and numeracy are the other two. That helps to ensure that children and young people will develop the knowledge, understanding and skills that they need for mental, emotional, social and physical health and wellbeing, now and in future.

As the member will be aware, health is at the centre of what is provided from the very early pre-school years. The member mentioned an important report. NHS Health Scotland published another important report, in 2013, on the causes of health inequalities, which made clear that Government must tackle not just the symptoms of health inequality, however important those are, but the socioeconomic causes of those symptoms. However much the member and I disagree on this, my view is that it would be better if we had the powers to tackle social inequalities here.

I share the deep-end GPs’ concern that the United Kingdom Government’s welfare reforms will impact on some of the most vulnerable people in our society. That can only widen health inequality, which in turn will blight all sorts of other opportunities that people have in their lives, such as education opportunities. For that reason, this Government will continue to press the UK Government on the need to protect the most vulnerable people in our society from many of its misguided changes.

The Scottish Government takes teachers’ concerns very seriously and has listened closely to those who deliver in our classrooms. We established a short-life working group to tackle concerns about unnecessary bureaucracy arising from the implementation of the curriculum for excellence. The group’s report, which was agreed by all stakeholders in Scottish education, is released today and will directly benefit all those involved in implementing the curriculum for excellence. Education Scotland, the Scottish Qualifications Authority and the Scottish Government have already delivered a wide range of support to help teachers to introduce the new qualifications, including over £5 million of additional funding and full course materials for all 95 national 4 and national 5 courses. We will continue to listen and respond wherever that is needed. Our schools have made excellent progress in delivering the curriculum for excellence, and I have every confidence that next year’s qualifications will be delivered successfully and will benefit pupils across Scotland.

As I have indicated, I am certainly more than willing to listen to teachers. It is notable that the Scottish Secondary Teachers Association commented that the Government was listening to teachers in areas around that subject today. As I have mentioned, a lot of effort has already gone into providing support and materials, but if any areas of concern are outstanding, the Government and Education Scotland are more than happy to speak to people. It is, of course, worth saying that one of the concerns that was expressed was about unnecessary bureaucracy. Some people felt that some local authorities were imposing unnecessary bureaucracy around the implementation of the curriculum for excellence. I am pleased that a wide group of stakeholders has agreed on a statement and an action plan to ensure that we minimise the unnecessary monitoring of teachers and allow them to do what they want to do, which is teach.

I am more than happy to emphasise what I have just indicated. We should all seek to eliminate unnecessary paperwork in the system. The group that was established to tackle bureaucracy reported today and has given key messages to ensure that that happens. Education Scotland will challenge any such practices that it finds in schools.

If the member has outstanding concerns about somewhere, I will more than happily chase them up. Substantial investments have been made only this year. Another £1 million has gone into providing textbooks. As I have already indicated, I constantly speak to teachers and representatives of the teaching profession. If the member has somewhere in mind where she feels that provision is not happening, I am more than happy to intervene.

The Scottish Qualifications Authority is on track to deliver full support for all the new national qualifications, including mathematics, following an unprecedented level of engagement and partnership working with practitioners, national agencies, schools and local authorities. Assessment in the new qualifications is designed to sample learners’ skills, knowledge and understanding, and provide opportunities for deeper learning. The SQA is providing a comprehensive range of support for teachers to ensure successful delivery.

As I have indicated, the Government is very willing to listen to any concerns from individual teachers. However, I should say that I have confidence in the system of unit assessment for maths and the SQA’s unit assessments for all its subjects. As I said, they were developed following very extensive consultation with teachers and others. The first round of quality assurance for each national subject, including maths, is happening right now across the country. I intend fully that it will continue to build teacher confidence. We are, as I said, always willing to listen to any individual who wishes to raise any concerns, but I have confidence that the system that we are operating for unit assessment is sound.

Obviously, the thinking behind curriculum for excellence and the new qualifications goes back a long way, but it also goes back to a recognition across the Parliament that people’s lives in the 21st century will be very different from people’s lives in the 20th century in terms of the number of jobs that they will have, and their need to be flexible and adaptable in the workplace and to have lifelong learning. Gaining such skills is at the heart of what is done in schools, and skills are at the heart of the new national examinations and the curriculum for excellence.

Throughout religious and moral education, and throughout religious, moral and philosophical studies, the understanding that the world’s religions have of creation will be explored, examined and critically reflected upon, not promoted. Similar objectivity is expected of teachers if contentious issues such as creationism are raised. Within the sciences curriculum, the concept of evolution is introduced through the experiences and outcomes at second, third and fourth levels. The concepts of natural selection and evolution are also widely explored from a scientific perspective in the national qualifications in biology. In addition, the big bang theory and the origins and expansion of the universe feature in the new physics higher.

I am not sure whether the member listened to what I just said. I indicated strongly that the content of biology and physics courses, for example, promotes none of the ideas that he listed. I therefore have complete confidence in our teachers to deal objectively with contentious issues as they arise. I make it clear that the science curriculum in Scotland is not dictated by any of the agendas that the member suggested influence it.

The Scottish Government is in frequent discussion with the Scottish Qualifications Authority on the implementation of the curriculum for excellence and the new national qualifications. SQA is also a member of the curriculum for excellence management board and the curriculum for excellence implementation group.

I do not think that there is any dubiety that the Government and teaching profession expect the norm to be that people will do the new higher when it becomes available. As the Government has already indicated today, professional judgment will obviously have to be exercised in some circumstances, but it will have to be exercised in the context of working with local authorities and parents.

To help all teachers address the needs of pupils with dyslexia, I launched the enhanced dyslexia toolkit at the Scottish learning festival in September 2012. The toolkit includes materials on effectively identifying and supporting pupils, increased accessibility for teachers and information for education authorities on implementation of the toolkit. Education Scotland, through its inspection programme, looks at the ways that schools and other establishments meet the needs of all learners, including those with dyslexia. In addition, education authorities have a duty to identify, meet and keep under review the additional support needs of all their pupils and to tailor provision to their individual circumstances.

The member raises important issues about dyslexia. Although the Government does not lay down the detail of what universities do in initial teacher education, it is fair to say that the Government very much sees career-long development at the heart of on-going teacher training. Not everything can be fitted into initial teacher training, but it is important to note that the requirement for full registration as a teacher includes the need to identify the barriers to learning and respond appropriately. The Government and Education Scotland work closely with the teaching profession to ensure that, in the course of their careers, teachers understand the issues of dyslexia better than teachers in the past did, because dyslexia, if unrecognised, can blight people’s opportunities.

Educational psychology services are provided by education authorities in Scotland as a statutory requirement under the Education (Scotland) Act 1980, and educational psychologists are employed directly by authorities to fulfil those duties. We are working in partnership with the national Scottish steering group for educational psychologists to look at appropriate workforce planning at a national level.

I am more than happy to correspond with the member on individual constituents. I point out that the costs of tuition for these courses must be seen in the context that they are postgraduate courses. Were we to follow the practice elsewhere of charging tuition fees for first degrees, things would obviously be different, but we do not: we provide first degrees for free. With regard to the postgraduate course in question, a loan is provided to cover the costs of tuition. I do not underestimate the task faced by any student in taking on postgraduate study but it is important to point out that 38 students are currently training as educational psychologists and that that meets the demand that has been set out. However, as I have said, I am more than happy to correspond with the member on any individual.

The educational benefits of learning a second language are well documented and include personal, cognitive, economic and societal benefits. Young people develop increased confidence and better skills in, for example, talking and listening and a greater understanding of how language works. The Scottish Government recognises those benefits, which is why we have a manifesto commitment to create the conditions in which all young people can learn two languages in addition to their mother tongue—in other words, the one-plus-two model—by 2020. We are taking that forward in many ways, including through additional funding and support for local authorities.

The member makes the good point that the benefits of learning languages extend to other subjects. For that reason, we are working with local authorities to increase the provision of that learning to ensure that by 2020 pupils start their second language in primary 1 rather than primary 6, which is what generally happens at the minute, and that we make steady progress towards that aim. We also plan to introduce a third language in primary 5 in all schools by 2020. In taking that forward, local authorities have been requested to audit their current language provision and we have committed £4 million in 2013-14 to help them to do that. This provision will not simply appear overnight in 2020; instead, it will require a change in attitude and practice in schools across Scotland. Schools and local authorities are enthusiastic about making that change.

I understand that the number has gone up to 74 this year from the 59 that Mary Scanlon mentioned. We would like to see more assistants, which is why we work with and support the British Council and others. However, it is open to local authorities to decide how to use the additional funding that is being provided for languages. If they use some of that for foreign language assistants, that is a cost-effective way of doing things. I am satisfied that we are doing a lot and that the numbers have stabilised and are going up.

At a cost of £2.1 million in 2013-14, the Scottish Government funds interconnect 2.0, a high-speed broadband network that provides an internet connection to all 32 Scottish local authorities, which is intended for use by education establishments. Although interconnect delivers broadband to the local authority, connectivity to the individual education establishments remains the responsibility of the authority. Over £410 million of public and private sector funding is being invested in two of the largest and most complex next generation broadband infrastructure projects anywhere in Europe. Within that, investment in the Highlands and Islands amounts to £146 million, with £264 million invested in the rest of Scotland.

As an island member, I have an interest in that as well. I am never done with being in touch with Highlands and Islands Enterprise and other agencies about some of the issues around rural broadband in the Highlands and Islands. I should say that, from a national point of view, after this year, the Scotland-wide area network for schools—SWAN—will replace much of what is currently in place through interconnect. It is worth stressing that a truly enormous sum of public money is going into broadband in the Highlands and Islands. As I said, £146 million will be invested to bring fibre optic cable to many parts of Scotland that do not have it. I entirely agree with the sentiment that every school in Scotland deserves that right to connectivity.

It is important that children and young people who will be affected by a school closure proposal, or other significant change, understand what is being proposed and have the opportunity to express their views. That is why the legislation in this area already requires that children and young people be consulted. The statutory guidance for those consultations explains how local authorities should go about consulting children and young people. It also makes reference to best practice, as set out by Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People. Local authorities are not compelled to follow the commissioner’s best-practice guidance, but I certainly encourage them to do so.

I am certainly aware that East Dunbartonshire Council has been looking at options for making changes to the school estate, and how it does that is a matter for the council. Obviously, I expect it to do so sensitively. Fiona McLeod will appreciate that I cannot comment on the specific concerns to which she referred or on specific schools, because ministers might be involved at a later stage in the statutory process. For that reason, it is not appropriate for me to comment on individual schools.

The Scottish Government has not considered issuing maximum travel times for journeys to school in rural and island areas, because that is a matter for local authorities.

As I have said, that is a matter for local authorities. As an island member—to which fact Mr Scott alluded—I can obviously understand some of the issues that he wants to raise. However, at the risk of repeating myself, I reiterate that I do not want to put him or me in a position in which the process in respect of individual schools would be prejudiced by my commenting further. However, regarding correspondence from Tavish Scott to me on some of the matters involved, I understand that the reply is in the post.

Educational benefit was obviously a key issue in the rural education commission’s report. The Government accepted the overwhelming majority of the commission’s recommendations—indeed, it accepted all the recommendations except recommendation 20, which deals with this subject. The reason why we did not accept recommendation 20 was that we want to ensure that a local authority that proposes closure of a rural school can show that the closure would be of educational benefit to the children concerned.

Education authorities have a statutory duty to provide a psychology service, as specified in section 4 of the Education (Scotland Act) 1980. Provision beyond the statutory requirement is a matter for local authorities and will be determined by local and national priorities.

Regarding the importance of identifying children with dyslexia, Margaret Mitchell will be aware that the Government has provided material in the form of the dyslexia toolkit. On dyslexia in prisons, the Government has certainly been paying close attention—indeed, I have visited Perth prison on that very issue. On provision of educational psychologists, notwithstanding what Margaret Mitchell has said, I understand that the educational psychology courses at the University of Dundee and the University of Strathclyde are near capacity. The Government is aware of the issue of supply and is sensitive to it.

Support staff have a valuable contribution to make in supporting children and young people to achieve positive learning outcomes, and they have a key role in helping young people, especially some of our most vulnerable children, to remain included, engaged and involved throughout their school careers.

The Scottish Government does not employ teachers or classroom assistants directly and, therefore, it cannot guarantee levels of employment in Stirling or any other local authority area. However, other Scottish local authorities have been able to avoid making cuts to such important jobs, so there is no obvious good reason why Stirling Council could not drop the potentially harmful plans and provide the same level of service as is provided elsewhere.

My understanding from the previous survey of teachers is that the number of classroom assistants in Scotland has fallen by seven in the past year, so I am not sure that the picture that the member paints of a decline in classroom assistants across Scotland bears much examination.

The Scottish Government is committed to supporting all levels of Gaelic education. We understand the value that the further and higher education sectors bring to Gaelic. We are working closely with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and those sectors to deliver high-quality courses, including in areas such as teacher training and research, which benefit the whole of Scotland.

I agree with the member whole-heartedly. I agree not just about Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, but about the recent development there; I recognise the value of that development at Kilbeg. The Government also recognises the role that the European regional development fund, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, the funding council and Highland Council have had in ensuring that that success has come to pass.

An additional 20 places are hoped for for session 2013-14. The number of Gaelic-medium-qualified teachers who have been coming through this year has been higher than in previous years. I will get the figures to Liz Smith in writing.

The Scottish Prison Service has already committed substantial resources to supporting the young people in HMYOI Polmont. In partnership with Education Scotland, the SPS is now working to ensure that those resources are being invested appropriately to support the changes that are needed to create the skills development and learning environment that is envisaged in the recent report by HM inspectorate of prisons for Scotland. However, further funding has also been made available for additional posts in Polmont, including a project manager to work with both Polmont and Education Scotland to manage delivery of that ground-breaking work.

As Anne McTaggart mentioned, on 8 May Education Scotland held a workshop on the issues. On tangible benefits, Carnegie College continues to review and expand its on-going contract with Polmont. I hope that the current review of the curriculum that is on offer in the prison will ensure that we pick up issues around numeracy and literacy early, which are crucial to ensuring the life chances of prisoners when they come out of prison.

There are provisions within the range of experiences and outcomes that take account of and actively promote the study of changing society at a range of macro and micro levels nationally and internationally. That is one of the ways in which the new curriculum is responsive to change.

Teachers already have an obligation to deal with such sensitive issues in a way that entirely respects an equalities agenda and uses age-appropriate material. I have no doubt that the profession will continue to act with that good sense.

Responsibility for the development of the new qualifications, including the implementation of a specific element on Scottish texts in the English courses, lies with the Scottish Qualifications Authority. In determining the list of set Scottish texts, the SQA took account of the extensive feedback that had been received through engagement with teachers and lecturers, as well as other stakeholder groups. A central consideration was the suitability of texts for assessment purposes. Further consideration was given to ensuring that Scotland’s rich culture and heritage, a range of geographical locations and time periods, and a breadth of themes were represented.

I should perhaps first say that, despite some press speculation, I did not set the exam questions personally. The SQA does that, for good reasons. Kenneth Gibson mentioned Robert Louis Stevenson, who is, in fact, on the list of set texts, albeit not with “The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde”. It is important to say that we are talking about one question in the new exams. The option exists for people to answer any of the other questions—for the critical essay, for instance, or for internal assessment—on any text, be it a Scottish text or a text from anywhere around the world. There is certainly the opportunity, if teachers are willing, to teach and examine the texts to which Kenneth Gibson refers.

The specified text is being introduced in the exam papers first because the Scottish studies working group thought that it was rather unusual that any country would think it normal for its national literature not to feature, as a matter of course, in a literature exam—as it does in Wales, in Ireland, in America and, by default, because it does not need to be specified, in England. With advice from people such as the national makar—our national poet—and many others, that was felt to be an uncontroversial thing to do, except in some paranoid circles.

Education Scotland worked closely with directors of education and others to develop a strong, comprehensive package of course materials for all 95 national 4 and national 5 courses. More than 15,000 practitioners have accessed the materials to date. Thus far, the total number of teachers who have expressed any concerns over the content to Education Scotland is two. The course materials are exemplars. The flexibility of curriculum for excellence means that there is no one set course. Teachers are free to use the materials, draw from them and adapt them for their local contexts or to develop their own courses.

The Government takes seriously the need to engage with teachers and we recognise the need for teachers to be satisfied with the materials that they have. Overall, the Educational Institute of Scotland welcomed the issuing of materials and in particular the distribution of final assessment support papers on 30 April. The Scottish Qualifications Authority has produced sample exam papers in addition to Education Scotland’s professional focus papers. There have been 150 events around the country at which Education Scotland and other agencies have sought teachers’ views, and the Government and Education Scotland always stand ready to ensure that teachers are satisfied with the new exams. I stress that the materials that are being provided are exemplars. One purpose of curriculum for excellence is to allow teachers the freedom to teach in the way that they believe is best fitted to achieving the aims that we all share.

I certainly welcome those comments and the fact that there is international interest in curriculum for excellence and in what is happening in Scotland’s schools. I feel that curriculum for excellence is now becoming what happens in Scotland’s schools; it is no longer merely a theory, and we can all do a great deal to work together to ensure that further positive interest is taken—both nationally and internationally—in what we are doing.

The School Premises (General Requirements and Standards) (Scotland) Regulations 1967 prescribe a minimum area of playing fields that local authorities must provide at a secondary school, which depends on the number of pupils. Although I understand the benefits that all-weather surfaces can provide, it is for local authorities to decide whether to provide all-weather surfaces as part of playing fields.

Bill Kidd will appreciate that I cannot speak for the local authority, and I am unaware of the precise condition of the provision of all-weather surfaces at those schools. Having said that, the Government and sportscotland have been active nationally in those areas. Sportscotland is providing local authorities that have committed to delivering the physical education target with a share of an additional £3.4 million over 2012-13 and 2013-14 to invest in physical education more generally.

Science, engineering and technology are shaping the world in ways that we would not have recognised just 10 or 15 years ago. The debate is timely, giving us an opportunity to celebrate the work of the organisations that help the wider public to make sense of the science in their everyday lives and, therefore, contribute to the positioning of Scotland as a science nation. What do we mean by a science nation? I think that we all want to see a Scotland that continues to embrace science; a Scotland that recognises and celebrates our rich tradition of science, discovery and innovation; a Scotland where our young people build on that legacy and see their future in science and engineering, in research and in turning that research into economic benefit; a Scotland where new scientific developments can be debated and discussed by the wider public without prejudice; and a Scotland where there are opportunities for people to explore science and find out something new, whatever their age or ability. Admittedly, much of that will always rely on the strength of our education system and research base, as well as the economic development levers that nurture business, innovation and industry. However, there is a wider issue at the heart of the debate. How do we ignite that initial spark of interest in science? How do we encourage adults, who may have been let down by science at school, to re-engage with science issues that affect them, which can be as diverse as climate change, healthy eating and vaccinations? How can we encourage debate and discussion of new and often contentious science developments that will shape Scotland in the future, from stem cells to energy use? That is where science engagement comes in. From science centres and science festivals to outreach tours taking Scottish research to schools and communities across the country, Scotland has an impressive network of organisations that take a more informal approach to science learning. By making science accessible to a wide public audience of all ages, the science engagement sector is making a valuable contribution to Scotland. Let me explain in more detail what science engagement means, as it is separate from the formal education system. Science engagement involves scientists and science communicators meeting and interacting with the public in informal settings to explore and discuss science and its importance and relevance to everyday life. It can take place in cafes, pubs, theatres, cinemas and museums. It can include debates, hands-on activities and workshops, shows and films. Scotland’s four science centres and almost 20 science festivals provide a strong focus for making science, technology, engineering and maths—STEM—accessible to families, young people and adults. It is, therefore, relevant to focus on the role of the science engagement sector in highlighting Scotland’s science strengths; in encouraging debate and discussion of topical or ethical science issues; in supporting science learning for all ages; and in promoting STEM careers. Of course, there will always be overlap with the formal education system. Indeed, many initiatives complement the curriculum and support science learning and teaching in schools. However, the focus of the debate should be the opportunities for people to engage more informally with STEM. It should be said that, in that context, there has been a sea change over the past decade or so. There has been a move away from the “public understanding of science”, which implies that people just need to know a bit more about science, towards more active engagement and dialogue between the public and the scientist. That two-way encounter has the potential for reflective learning on both sides—by the science community as well as the public. Why do we want the public to engage—to use that overused word—with science anyway? What benefits are there for society in a thriving science engagement sector? The benefits include encouraging science careers and science skills development, both of which are essential for our future economic growth. Members of all parties have raised that in the context of encouraging women into the world of science. Another useful activity is the demystifying of science through researchers opening up their work.

To be fair to myself, I have only just mentioned the issue, so in saying that I have mentioned it only briefly the member does not take account of what I will say later in my speech. However, he makes an important point about the need to ensure that we redress the imbalance that exists in areas such as physics. It is certainly fair to say that, across the science sector, there is a greater opportunity for women to engage in careers, but I accept that, particularly in physics and engineering, a great deal more work needs to be—and is being—done. We also need to demystify science. That is particularly important given that much science research is publicly funded. People have a democratic right to know what they are paying for. Science engagement activities can also highlight Scottish science strengths. We should all feel proud of areas in which we lead the world—for example, through our contribution in surprising areas such as space science, as well as in plant and animal science. All that work can encourage debate and discussion on current and ethical issues, such as energy use and climate change, or health-related issues. I hope that such debate can lead to positive behaviour change on travel choices, recycling and diet and exercise, as well as having a democratic function if public dialogue is linked to public policy development processes. I also believe that it is good for scientists to be reminded that their work does not exist in a vacuum—although I suddenly realise that the work of some scientists probably does exist in a vacuum; I was speaking figuratively. Public reaction to and interaction with emerging scientific developments is part of the research process, and the science community must remember that, too. What is the Scottish Government doing to support science engagement? First and foremost, we have a comprehensive package of annual funding, which we believe is unique in the United Kingdom. I am pleased to announce that, in 2013-14, we will continue to support the four science centres in Scotland with funding that is worth a total of £2.53 million. Our Dynamic Earth across the road in Edinburgh, Glasgow Science Centre, Dundee Science Centre and the Satrosphere science centre in Aberdeen are major hubs for science engagement.

I will be honest and say that I do not have that figure before me. I understand that there is an entry charge, but I should say that, although the Government funds the science centres, we do not run them—they are run by independent trusts. There are comparative organisations and museums that are free, but it is not the case that the science centres are run directly by the Government. I accept that it is necessary to ensure the maximum level of access. That is why we encourage—indeed, we do more than that; we promote—access to the science centres through the schools.

I have already taken two interventions. If the member will allow me to make some progress, I may take one from him in a moment. [Interruption.] I beg your pardon?

I think that I heard a sedentary intervention, but I am prepared to take an intervention if the member has one.

Okay. The science centres attract around 650,000 visitors every year with a mix of exhibitions, shows and workshops for families, young people, school and nursery groups, students and adults. Although the science centres reach a significant proportion of the Scottish population, they are not easily accessed by everyone. That is one of the reasons why we are continuing to support science festivals in towns, cities and islands across Scotland. From Orkney to Edinburgh and from the Western Isles to Fife, Caithness and Dumfries and Galloway, the events provide a more localised, grassroots focus to science engagement, attracting a combined audience of around 200,000 every year. Many festivals are organised by volunteers and charities and could not survive without input from local scientists. I am delighted to confirm that in 2013-14 we will support 19 festivals with £251,000 and that individual festivals will see no decrease in the funding offered for their events compared with that received in previous years. Indeed, the success of the Scottish science festivals and of our wider science base and science engagement sector was instrumental in the British Science Association choosing to hold its annual British science festival in Aberdeen last year, attracting 43,000 visitors. We recognise that there are still significant parts of Scotland that are less well served by festivals and science centres. Audiences in rural areas can feel remote from the nearest hub for science engagement. Even in our cities and towns there are many people who would never consider visiting a science centre, a festival, a museum or other venue where science engagement activities take place. With that in mind, in the past year we have pioneered a new approach to encourage science communicators to think more widely about their audiences. The new talking science grant scheme is an annual competition that challenges the sector to take science directly into communities in rural or deprived areas. In 2013-14, £250,000 will support 14 new projects that are expected to reach 78,000 people, as well as 16 projects continuing from last year. This year’s new projects include the Clipperton project’s floating lab, which is a converted boat that will tour Scotland’s canals this summer with activities that bring engineering and nature to life; and the University of Edinburgh’s hope beyond hype project that sees stem cell researchers working with patient groups and the wider public in rural areas, but especially young people, to explain the potential opportunities presented by that area of science. I said earlier that the focus of the debate is not on science in schools. However, I want to spend a moment to acknowledge that in 2013-14 we will continue to support a number of initiatives that provide schools with a way to help bring science learning and teaching to life in the classroom. For example, Edinburgh International Science Festival’s generation science tour takes workshops and shows to more than 50,000 primary pupils every year; the Institute of Physics lab in a lorry takes physics activities to 10,000 secondary pupils every year; and there are STEM clubs in schools, through the Scottish Council for Development and Industry’s young engineers and science clubs, and STEMNET’s advice service, both of which help teachers set up and run a science club. In addition, the big bang Scotland event that will be held in Glasgow next month will give young people a unique opportunity to explore STEM subjects in a fun and inspiring environment. It is coupled with the Scottish finals of a number of Scottish and UK STEM competitions. In 2013-14, we will provide more than £200,000 to support those and similar initiatives. Supporting the science engagement community is not just about funding. As well as our work with the organisations already mentioned, the Scottish Government works with a number of other science engagement providers by making connections and helping to drive partnerships and collaborations. That includes work with STEMNET—the UK-wide charity that promotes STEM in schools—and the Edinburgh Beltane at the University of Edinburgh, and regular liaison with our universities and research institutes to ensure that they are aligned with other initiatives. For example, partnerships in the science engagement community are embracing the 2013 year of natural Scotland, with a number of themed events and activities taking place across the country to highlight some science aspects of our natural landscapes and habitats. There is a great deal to celebrate about our science engagement community, but there will always be challenges, particularly in funding and how to increase audiences. That is especially the case in relation to communities that are less able or willing to engage with science. There is clearly a role for science communicators, industry and academia to play their part, and I know that there are many initiatives that involve collaborations between these three main areas. There is also a role for colleagues in the Scottish Parliament. We can help to raise awareness of the opportunities available, many of which are free of charge, for our local schools and communities to find out more about science. Colleagues in Inverness, Glasgow and the Borders may be interested in attending science festivals in those areas over the coming few weeks, and I am sure that many members will want to encourage schools in their constituencies to attend the big bang Scotland event in Glasgow on 14 June, to compete for prizes or just have a great day out, immersed in science. The science engagement sector in Scotland is clearly thriving and playing an important role in helping scientists and the public come together. By making science more accessible and exploring the opportunities and challenges posed by current research and new developments, we can help ensure that the wider public has the tools that they need to make informed decisions on issues that affect their everyday lives. That is an important aspect of building a science nation, and I look forward to continuing to support our diverse science engagement sector in achieving that. I move, That the Parliament values Scotland’s science centres and science festivals; notes the efforts made by them and other organisations to make science accessible to a public audience of all ages, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s continuing support for a range of public science engagement initiatives through annual funding.

Given the figures that he has just given, does the member acknowledge that science research funding is awarded on the basis of excellence? Scotland outperforms on excellence, which is why we get more money.

I will do my best. I realise that Mr Findlay could not be pleased to take part in the debate. I realise that he feels that, somehow, the fact that I am speaking about science today means, in his words—I hope that I do not misquote him—that I drew science out of the “unlucky bag”. I do not know what he means by that, but he had the opportunity to amend the motion, which I am sure would not have caused his face to crack. Despite the criticisms that have been made of the debate, I—and most of the members who have participated—feel that it has been useful and a good opportunity to highlight not just the work that the Government is doing but the work that the science community is doing to engage with the people of Scotland. Whether we are talking—as we have been—about science centres, museums, universities, colleges or community groups all organising their own events, a wealth of activity is taking place to make science more accessible to a wide public audience of all ages.

I did not arrange that as some sort of Christmas lecture experiment, but I welcome the fact that the sun is shining. The science engagement sector will continue to play an important role in helping us to make sense of the world around us, the latest developments and the impacts—both good and bad—of new technology. Members made a number of useful speeches, to which I will try to refer in the short time that I have left. Liz Smith and Nanette Milne talked about geology qualifications. I appreciate the points that were made and the spirit in which they were put. The SQA makes independent assessments about the provision of qualifications, although it has to take some account of the use that is made of those qualifications. I understand that 44 people made use of such a qualification at all levels in the past year, and the SQA must take some account of that. However, the SQA has made efforts to address the concerns that have been raised about earth sciences by ensuring that aspects of geology feature in or are subsumed by other qualifications, such as those in geography and biology.

In the continuous professional development of teachers, the science centres—particularly Our Dynamic Earth—have a beneficial role in ensuring that teachers have the confidence to talk about earth sciences. I hear the points that the member makes. I hope that she accepts in good faith the reasons that I have given, but I have no doubt that the debate will continue. Stewart Stevenson did not disappoint. The last time that we debated science, he told us that—I do not think that I am misquoting him—in his spare time he plugged himself into a Van de Graaff generator. This time, he told us about his search for infinity, about Mary Queen of Scots’s lovers and latterly—possibly most relevant—about Professor Higgs. I recently had the pleasure of meeting Professor Higgs. I hope that we can find ways of exploiting, in an academic and a science engagement way, the benefits that come from the pride that is felt in his achievements.

The member touches on one of the founding principles of the curriculum for excellence, on which all of us across the Parliament are agreed, which is that the education system must inculcate in people enthusiasm and skills. If they have enthusiasm and skills, they will be able to cope with new knowledge in an ever-changing world. Iain Gray rightly highlighted the role that parents have in inculcating that enthusiasm and knowledge. He compared the funding of various events. I do not want to get too drawn into that, other than to say that we could trade figures on the funding of individual events in the arts and the sciences. Suffice it to say that I think—as I hope that he does—that the arts and the sciences are equally important to the school curriculum. I do not completely understand why he keeps raising the spectre that, because I am keen on Scottish history, the importance of science is somehow being relegated in our schools. Iain Gray also rather laboured the point that the scientific era took off in Scotland only after 1707. It is possible to make that argument, but it is also possible to argue that the internet did not really take off in England prior to that date either, and I am not sure what that proves. Fiona McLeod rose—

I was going to say that I need to make some progress but, looking at the clock, I see that I do not, so yes, I will.

I will deal with Stewart Stevenson’s intervention first. I will resist the temptation to claim that the fact that the discovery of logarithms predates the union proves much about politics. I will try to steer clear of such analogies.

Similarly, I will resist the temptation to which that intervention gives rise. I will simply say that all arguments about science 300 years ago involve a fair amount of speculation. However, the member makes an interesting point. As we tackle today’s big science issues, from climate change to dealing with an ageing population, science engagement activities have the potential to provide a safe space for the discussion of topics that might be controversial or have an ethical dimension. Contentious topics usually provide the best opportunity to get to the nub of people’s hopes and fears about the place of science and technology in the modern world. That is a healthy debate and one that is desirable in a mature democracy. Whatever the Scottish Government’s view is on a topic, we should support the public’s right to find out more and to engage directly with scientists and others who have an interest in an issue. That process is likely to include discussion of issues such as nuclear and wind power and the balance of energy in the wider context of climate change. Debates about food security will no doubt refer to the potential—good and bad—of genetically modified crops. [Interruption.] Whatever the policy position of Governments or of members who make noises around the chamber—

I was not criticising the members concerned for making noises but, if they wish to make them while standing up, I will gladly listen to them.

It is important for all politicians and Government officials to keep abreast of public opinion on a range of issues as the science develops. A number of members made useful points on various issues. Clare Adamson, Neil Bibby and Nanette Milne all highlighted the point that was made throughout the debate about the importance of women in science. It is worth adding that Angela Constance’s strategic group on women and work is looking at the skills gap in terms of gender and that the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s report “Tapping all our Talents—Women in science, technology, engineering and mathematics: a strategy for Scotland” has challenged all of us not only to ensure that female role models for science are developed but to take continual action to ensure that such role models are presented early in people’s education, particularly at school. Mark Griffin and Neil Bibby made the important point that, if we are going to promote engagement with science, it must include the less-affluent areas of Scotland. A great deal of that has to do with school leadership, of which there are very good examples in many of our most deprived communities, as I have seen, and it has to do with having high ambition for everyone and their potential careers. It should be said that the science centres are doing good work in promoting the work of the science community in some of our most deprived communities and making connections between the work of the scientist and some of the issues that affect all of Scotland, but particularly those communities. I have seen a great deal of work done in schools, for instance, through the science centres on smoking, diet and other social issues that affect all of Scotland, but particularly the most deprived areas. Willie Coffey raised interesting questions about small and large companies investing in science and the role of science in the Government. Sandra White talked about some of the achievements of the Glasgow Science Centre and its work as an outreach facility for schools and communities in Glasgow. She also made good points about the highers and other qualifications that are required of people who go into primary teaching. Possibly the best thing to say about the debate that erupted over whether a science higher or a language higher is the most important in that context is that perhaps it is most important to ensure that the people who go into teacher training or teacher education courses get the opportunity to study those subjects once they get in. The GTC and others are debating whether people who do not have certain qualifications should be turned away, but I think that there is unity on the need to provide opportunities for people to do new subjects in languages and science once they get on to teacher education courses. The Government supports the sciencewise initiative, whose goals are to have evidence-based policies that are informed by research on attitudes and behaviours among stakeholders and the public; to increase awareness and understanding by policy makers of the value and role of public dialogue; and to embed public dialogue experience and expertise in public bodies with responsibility for policy that contains a major science and technology element. Through our involvement in the sciencewise steering group, we are exploring such projects with policy officials who work in areas as diverse as marine management and climate change behaviour. Members raised other interesting issues. For example, Liam McArthur talked about ensuring not only that careers in science are open to women but that we retain women in science. He referred to the cultural change that is necessary to ensure that the public have a role in all that. Interestingly, he said that talking about Scotland’s contribution to science—in his case, it is specifically Orkney’s—can facilitate enthusiasm and learning about Scotland. Of course, it need not be learning about Scotland in the abstract, as some people seemed to fear, but learning about things in Scotland, one of which is science—the local connection can bring that alive. Jim Eadie talked about the achievements of the University of Edinburgh and other Scottish universities, not least in power and renewables. I hope that science dialogue is a two-way process. Sometimes, the existing Government policy agenda drives the topic of debate, public engagement, dialogue and consultation about the scientific aspects of emerging issues, and that may lead us to focus some of our public science engagement funding on initiatives to support and inform that. Sometimes, it is the other way around. Public dialogue can drive the development of new or improved policies that are influenced or underpinned by science. Since becoming science minister I have visited a number of our science festivals and centres and I have seen at first hand how they make science accessible, fun and exciting for all ages. Today’s debate has confirmed that many of us value the science engagement sector. As part of Scotland’s cultural mix, there is certainly a place for science-related events and activities alongside areas that we would perhaps more traditionally class as the arts. I think that we agree that science engagement is more than just nice to have; it has a real impact, particularly on our young people. Among the myriad of influencers on learning, attainment and career choice, is there any evidence that science engagement makes a difference? I think that it does. It may be hard to measure the direct impact over the medium to long term—that fact is acknowledged by those who work in the sector and by the Wellcome Trust’s review of the UK’s informal science learning sector, which was published last year. Although regular and sustained access to innovative and exciting activities may have an influence, the views of parents and peers are also likely to feature prominently, as is the experience of STEM subjects in the classroom.

I did not think that I could do it, Presiding Officer. Despite the reservations that some members offered, I believe that the debate has been useful. Engagement with the science world and the public is useful and it is part of our drive to support Scotland as a science nation. We have all recognised the importance of our continuing funding of science centres, science festivals and other initiatives, especially in these difficult economic times. They truly ensure, in every real sense, that Scotland is that science nation.

To be fair to myself, I have only just mentioned the issue, so in saying that I have mentioned it only briefly the member does not take account of what I will say later in my speech. However, he makes an important point about the need to ensure that we redress the imbalance that exists in areas such as physics. It is certainly fair to say that, across the science sector, there is a greater opportunity for women to engage in careers, but I accept that, particularly in physics and engineering, a great deal more work needs to be—and is being—done. We also need to demystify science. That is particularly important given that much science research is publicly funded. People have a democratic right to know what they are paying for. Science engagement activities can also highlight Scottish science strengths. We should all feel proud of areas in which we lead the world—for example, through our contribution in surprising areas such as space science, as well as in plant and animal science. All that work can encourage debate and discussion on current and ethical issues, such as energy use and climate change, or health-related issues. I hope that such debate can lead to positive behaviour change on travel choices, recycling and diet and exercise, as well as having a democratic function if public dialogue is linked to public policy development processes. I also believe that it is good for scientists to be reminded that their work does not exist in a vacuum—although I suddenly realise that the work of some scientists probably does exist in a vacuum; I was speaking figuratively. Public reaction to and interaction with emerging scientific developments is part of the research process, and the science community must remember that, too. What is the Scottish Government doing to support science engagement? First and foremost, we have a comprehensive package of annual funding, which we believe is unique in the United Kingdom. I am pleased to announce that, in 2013-14, we will continue to support the four science centres in Scotland with funding that is worth a total of £2.53 million. Our Dynamic Earth across the road in Edinburgh, Glasgow Science Centre, Dundee Science Centre and the Satrosphere science centre in Aberdeen are major hubs for science engagement.

I will be honest and say that I do not have that figure before me. I understand that there is an entry charge, but I should say that, although the Government funds the science centres, we do not run them—they are run by independent trusts. There are comparative organisations and museums that are free, but it is not the case that the science centres are run directly by the Government. I accept that it is necessary to ensure the maximum level of access. That is why we encourage—indeed, we do more than that; we promote—access to the science centres through the schools.

I have already taken two interventions. If the member will allow me to make some progress, I may take one from him in a moment. [Interruption.] I beg your pardon?

I think that I heard a sedentary intervention, but I am prepared to take an intervention if the member has one.

Okay. The science centres attract around 650,000 visitors every year with a mix of exhibitions, shows and workshops for families, young people, school and nursery groups, students and adults. Although the science centres reach a significant proportion of the Scottish population, they are not easily accessed by everyone. That is one of the reasons why we are continuing to support science festivals in towns, cities and islands across Scotland. From Orkney to Edinburgh and from the Western Isles to Fife, Caithness and Dumfries and Galloway, the events provide a more localised, grass-roots focus to science engagement, attracting a combined audience of around 200,000 every year. Many festivals are organised by volunteers and charities and could not survive without input from local scientists. I am delighted to confirm that in 2013-14 we will support 19 festivals with £251,000 and that individual festivals will see no decrease in the funding offered for their events compared with that received in previous years. Indeed, the success of the Scottish science festivals and of our wider science base and science engagement sector was instrumental in the British Science Association choosing to hold its annual British science festival in Aberdeen last year, attracting 43,000 visitors. We recognise that there are still significant parts of Scotland that are less well served by festivals and science centres. Audiences in rural areas can feel remote from the nearest hub for science engagement. Even in our cities and towns there are many people who would never consider visiting a science centre, a festival, a museum or other venue where science engagement activities take place. With that in mind, in the past year we have pioneered a new approach to encourage science communicators to think more widely about their audiences. The new talking science grant scheme is an annual competition that challenges the sector to take science directly into communities in rural or deprived areas. In 2013-14, £250,000 will support 14 new projects that are expected to reach 78,000 people, as well as 16 projects continuing from last year. This year’s new projects include the Clipperton project’s floating lab, which is a converted boat that will tour Scotland’s canals this summer with activities that bring engineering and nature to life; and the University of Edinburgh’s hope beyond hype project that sees stem cell researchers working with patient groups and the wider public in rural areas, but especially young people, to explain the potential opportunities presented by that area of science. I said earlier that the focus of the debate is not on science in schools. However, I want to spend a moment to acknowledge that in 2013-14 we will continue to support a number of initiatives that provide schools with a way to help bring science learning and teaching to life in the classroom. For example, Edinburgh International Science Festival’s generation science tour takes workshops and shows to more than 50,000 primary pupils every year; the Institute of Physics lab in a lorry takes physics activities to 10,000 secondary pupils every year; and there are STEM clubs in schools, through the Scottish Council for Development and Industry’s young engineers and science clubs, and STEMNET’s advice service, both of which help teachers set up and run a science club. In addition, the big bang Scotland event that will be held in Glasgow next month will give young people a unique opportunity to explore STEM subjects in a fun and inspiring environment. It is coupled with the Scottish finals of a number of Scottish and UK STEM competitions. In 2013-14, we will provide more than £200,000 to support those and similar initiatives. Supporting the science engagement community is not just about funding. As well as our work with the organisations already mentioned, the Scottish Government works with a number of other science engagement providers by making connections and helping to drive partnerships and collaborations. That includes work with STEMNET—the UK-wide charity that promotes STEM in schools—and the Edinburgh Beltane at the University of Edinburgh, and regular liaison with our universities and research institutes to ensure that they are aligned with other initiatives. For example, partnerships in the science engagement community are embracing the 2013 year of natural Scotland, with a number of themed events and activities taking place across the country to highlight some science aspects of our natural landscapes and habitats. There is a great deal to celebrate about our science engagement community, but there will always be challenges, particularly in funding and how to increase audiences. That is especially the case in relation to communities that are less able or willing to engage with science. There is clearly a role for science communicators, industry and academia to play their part, and I know that there are many initiatives that involve collaborations between these three main areas. There is also a role for colleagues in the Scottish Parliament. We can help to raise awareness of the opportunities available, many of which are free of charge, for our local schools and communities to find out more about science. Colleagues in Inverness, Glasgow and the Borders may be interested in attending science festivals in those areas over the coming few weeks, and I am sure that many members will want to encourage schools in their constituencies to attend the big bang Scotland event in Glasgow on 14 June, to compete for prizes or just have a great day out, immersed in science. The science engagement sector in Scotland is clearly thriving and playing an important role in helping scientists and the public come together. By making science more accessible and exploring the opportunities and challenges posed by current research and new developments, we can help ensure that the wider public has the tools that they need to make informed decisions on issues that affect their everyday lives. That is an important aspect of building a science nation, and I look forward to continuing to support our diverse science engagement sector in achieving that. I move, That the Parliament values Scotland’s science centres and science festivals; notes the efforts made by them and other organisations to make science accessible to a public audience of all ages, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s continuing support for a range of public science engagement initiatives through annual funding.

Given the figures that he has just given, does the member acknowledge that science research funding is awarded on the basis of excellence? Scotland outperforms on excellence, which is why we get more money.

I will do my best. I realise that Mr Findlay could not be pleased to take part in the debate. I realise that he feels that, somehow, the fact that I am speaking about science today means, in his words—I hope that I do not misquote him—that I drew science out of the “unlucky bag”. I do not know what he means by that, but he had the opportunity to amend the motion, which I am sure would not have caused his face to crack. Despite the criticisms that have been made of the debate, I—and most of the members who have participated—feel that it has been useful and a good opportunity to highlight not just the work that the Government is doing but the work that the science community is doing to engage with the people of Scotland. Whether we are talking—as we have been—about science centres, museums, universities, colleges or community groups all organising their own events, a wealth of activity is taking place to make science more accessible to a wide public audience of all ages.

I did not arrange that as some sort of Christmas lecture experiment, but I welcome the fact that the sun is shining. The science engagement sector will continue to play an important role in helping us to make sense of the world around us, the latest developments and the impacts—both good and bad—of new technology. Members made a number of useful speeches, to which I will try to refer in the short time that I have left. Liz Smith and Nanette Milne talked about geology qualifications. I appreciate the points that were made and the spirit in which they were put. The SQA makes independent assessments about the provision of qualifications, although it has to take some account of the use that is made of those qualifications. I understand that 44 people made use of such a qualification at all levels in the past year, and the SQA must take some account of that. However, the SQA has made efforts to address the concerns that have been raised about earth sciences by ensuring that aspects of geology feature in or are subsumed by other qualifications, such as those in geography and biology.

In the continuous professional development of teachers, the science centres—particularly Our Dynamic Earth—have a beneficial role in ensuring that teachers have the confidence to talk about earth sciences. I hear the points that the member makes. I hope that she accepts in good faith the reasons that I have given, but I have no doubt that the debate will continue. Stewart Stevenson did not disappoint. The last time that we debated science, he told us that—I do not think that I am misquoting him—in his spare time he plugged himself into a Van de Graaff generator. This time, he told us about his search for infinity, about Mary Queen of Scots’s lovers and latterly—possibly most relevant—about Professor Higgs. I recently had the pleasure of meeting Professor Higgs. I hope that we can find ways of exploiting, in an academic and a science engagement way, the benefits that come from the pride that is felt in his achievements.

The member touches on one of the founding principles of the curriculum for excellence, on which all of us across the Parliament are agreed, which is that the education system must inculcate in people enthusiasm and skills. If they have enthusiasm and skills, they will be able to cope with new knowledge in an ever-changing world. Iain Gray rightly highlighted the role that parents have in inculcating that enthusiasm and knowledge. He compared the funding of various events. I do not want to get too drawn into that, other than to say that we could trade figures on the funding of individual events in the arts and the sciences. Suffice it to say that I think—as I hope that he does—that the arts and the sciences are equally important to the school curriculum. I do not completely understand why he keeps raising the spectre that, because I am keen on Scottish history, the importance of science is somehow being relegated in our schools. Iain Gray also rather laboured the point that the scientific era took off in Scotland only after 1707. It is possible to make that argument, but it is also possible to argue that the internet did not really take off in England prior to that date either, and I am not sure what that proves. Fiona McLeod rose—

I was going to say that I need to make some progress but, looking at the clock, I see that I do not, so yes, I will.

I will deal with Stewart Stevenson’s intervention first. I will resist the temptation to claim that the fact that the discovery of logarithms predates the union proves much about politics. I will try to steer clear of such analogies.

Similarly, I will resist the temptation to which that intervention gives rise. I will simply say that all arguments about science 300 years ago involve a fair amount of speculation. However, the member makes an interesting point. As we tackle today’s big science issues, from climate change to dealing with an ageing population, science engagement activities have the potential to provide a safe space for the discussion of topics that might be controversial or have an ethical dimension. Contentious topics usually provide the best opportunity to get to the nub of people’s hopes and fears about the place of science and technology in the modern world. That is a healthy debate and one that is desirable in a mature democracy. Whatever the Scottish Government’s view is on a topic, we should support the public’s right to find out more and to engage directly with scientists and others who have an interest in an issue. That process is likely to include discussion of issues such as nuclear and wind power and the balance of energy in the wider context of climate change. Debates about food security will no doubt refer to the potential—good and bad—of genetically modified crops. [Interruption.] Whatever the policy position of Governments or of members who make noises around the chamber—

I was not criticising the members concerned for making noises but, if they wish to make them while standing up, I will gladly listen to them.

It is important for all politicians and Government officials to keep abreast of public opinion on a range of issues as the science develops. A number of members made useful points on various issues. Clare Adamson, Neil Bibby and Nanette Milne all highlighted the point that was made throughout the debate about the importance of women in science. It is worth adding that Angela Constance’s strategic group on women and work is looking at the skills gap in terms of gender and that the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s report “Tapping all our Talents—Women in science, technology, engineering and mathematics: a strategy for Scotland” has challenged all of us not only to ensure that female role models for science are developed but to take continual action to ensure that such role models are presented early in people’s education, particularly at school. Mark Griffin and Neil Bibby made the important point that, if we are going to promote engagement with science, it must include the less-affluent areas of Scotland. A great deal of that has to do with school leadership, of which there are very good examples in many of our most deprived communities, as I have seen, and it has to do with having high ambition for everyone and their potential careers. It should be said that the science centres are doing good work in promoting the work of the science community in some of our most deprived communities and making connections between the work of the scientist and some of the issues that affect all of Scotland, but particularly those communities. I have seen a great deal of work done in schools, for instance, through the science centres on smoking, diet and other social issues that affect all of Scotland, but particularly the most deprived areas. Willie Coffey raised interesting questions about small and large companies investing in science and the role of science in the Government. Sandra White talked about some of the achievements of the Glasgow Science Centre and its work as an outreach facility for schools and communities in Glasgow. She also made good points about the highers and other qualifications that are required of people who go into primary teaching. Possibly the best thing to say about the debate that erupted over whether a science higher or a language higher is the most important in that context is that perhaps it is most important to ensure that the people who go into teacher training or teacher education courses get the opportunity to study those subjects once they get in. The GTC and others are debating whether people who do not have certain qualifications should be turned away, but I think that there is unity on the need to provide opportunities for people to do new subjects in languages and science once they get on to teacher education courses. The Government supports the sciencewise initiative, whose goals are to have evidence-based policies that are informed by research on attitudes and behaviours among stakeholders and the public; to increase awareness and understanding by policy makers of the value and role of public dialogue; and to embed public dialogue experience and expertise in public bodies with responsibility for policy that contains a major science and technology element. Through our involvement in the sciencewise steering group, we are exploring such projects with policy officials who work in areas as diverse as marine management and climate change behaviour. Members raised other interesting issues. For example, Liam McArthur talked about ensuring not only that careers in science are open to women but that we retain women in science. He referred to the cultural change that is necessary to ensure that the public have a role in all that. Interestingly, he said that talking about Scotland’s contribution to science—in his case, it is specifically Orkney’s—can facilitate enthusiasm and learning about Scotland. Of course, it need not be learning about Scotland in the abstract, as some people seemed to fear, but learning about things in Scotland, one of which is science—the local connection can bring that alive. Jim Eadie talked about the achievements of the University of Edinburgh and other Scottish universities, not least in power and renewables. I hope that science dialogue is a two-way process. Sometimes, the existing Government policy agenda drives the topic of debate, public engagement, dialogue and consultation about the scientific aspects of emerging issues, and that may lead us to focus some of our public science engagement funding on initiatives to support and inform that. Sometimes, it is the other way around. Public dialogue can drive the development of new or improved policies that are influenced or underpinned by science. Since becoming science minister I have visited a number of our science festivals and centres and I have seen at first hand how they make science accessible, fun and exciting for all ages. Today’s debate has confirmed that many of us value the science engagement sector. As part of Scotland’s cultural mix, there is certainly a place for science-related events and activities alongside areas that we would perhaps more traditionally class as the arts. I think that we agree that science engagement is more than just nice to have; it has a real impact, particularly on our young people. Among the myriad of influencers on learning, attainment and career choice, is there any evidence that science engagement makes a difference? I think that it does. It may be hard to measure the direct impact over the medium to long term—that fact is acknowledged by those who work in the sector and by the Wellcome Trust’s review of the UK’s informal science learning sector, which was published last year. Although regular and sustained access to innovative and exciting activities may have an influence, the views of parents and peers are also likely to feature prominently, as is the experience of STEM subjects in the classroom.

I did not think that I could do it, Presiding Officer. Despite the reservations that some members offered, I believe that the debate has been useful. Engagement with the science world and the public is useful and it is part of our drive to support Scotland as a science nation. We have all recognised the importance of our continuing funding of science centres, science festivals and other initiatives, especially in these difficult economic times. They truly ensure, in every real sense, that Scotland is that science nation.

Good progress is being made in taking forward our ambitious policy on languages to create the conditions in which every child will learn two languages in addition to their mother tongue. The allocation of £4 million for 2013-14 as initial funding to local authorities will start to move forward our aim to enable young people to start learning a second language from primary 1. I have convened a strategic implementation group, which will meet for the first time next week, to provide leadership and momentum in driving the policy forward.

The member rightly points out that, in order to increase the numbers of people studying modern languages in secondary school, we have to increase provision in primary school. The initiative to which I referred seeks to do that. It is an ambitious plan, but it is necessary to achieve our aim. That is why we want people to come out of primary with a grounding in foreign languages. I should point out that the figures for presentation at higher show an increase—which I accept is very modest—of 1.3 per cent while this Government has been in office. I want to increase that figure, but I certainly think that we can improve on the record of the member’s party when it was in government, which managed to reduce the numbers presenting for modern language highers by 17 per cent.

In its Gaelic language plan, the Scottish Government has committed to making use of Gaelic in a variety of day-to-day operations. We will shortly strengthen and renew the plan. Through that, we will identify how we can strengthen our support for the language. Our draft plan will go out for public consultation.

The Government is in the early stages of preparing such guidance, which will be presented. I suspect that the member will agree with the reasons for it, which are to ensure that we maintain the quality and standards—and, indeed, the definition—of Gaelic-medium education, which I know is a subject that he is interested in. We want to ensure that total immersion in the language means what it says and that there are the fluency and the capacity to go on to further levels of study.

On 11 December, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and I met Aberdeenshire MSPs to discuss the senior phase of the curriculum for excellence and associated parental concerns in Aberdeenshire. The following day, the cabinet secretary met the council’s director of education and education convener to discuss those matters further. Since then, Education Scotland’s director of inspection has attended Aberdeenshire Council’s education committee, and my officials in the Scottish Government and Education Scotland continue to work closely with the council on the development of the curriculum for excellence in its schools.

I am certainly aware of the concerns, which the member alludes to, that have been raised in Aberdeenshire around the planning for the senior phase of the curriculum for excellence, including in relation to the number of national 5 qualifications. To help to address those concerns and to develop a greater understanding of schools’ approaches and rationale, Aberdeenshire Council set up a senior phase working group, which is, I am glad to say, making progress. More generally, I am glad to say that, particularly with the announcements by universities in recent weeks on their attitudes towards the curriculum for excellence, parents’ understanding of and attitudes towards the new qualifications are becoming clearer and are clearly positive.

I know that Aberdeenshire Council’s education committee has made it very clear that the needs of individual pupils should be considered in considering subject choices. That is one of the most important things. I think that there is an understanding of the need for flexibility and that there is an increased appreciation generally that, although the number of subjects that are taken in fourth year is certainly important, that is certainly not the be-all and end-all in respect of the number of qualifications that pupils will leave school with or, indeed, what universities and employers are looking for. However, I welcome the fact that Aberdeenshire Council has indicated the need for flexibility to allow for the needs of individual pupils.

It is the responsibility of each local authority to allocate the total financial resources that are available to it on the basis of local requirements and priorities, including provision to raise educational attainment. In February this year, Mr Russell wrote to Glasgow to congratulate it on the tremendous work that teachers have been doing to improve outcomes for young people in Glasgow. Between 2007-08 and 2012-13, the budget for local government increased by 8.9 per cent, which was more than the increase in the resources within the Scottish Government’s control. That demonstrates the strong financial settlements that have been agreed with local government during challenging financial times.

I certainly agree with the member that poverty is a barrier that prevents too many of our young people from taking up opportunities and which affects their life chances. The Government is far from complacent about that. Of course, it is up to Glasgow City Council to allocate its resources, but the Government has allocated £1.24 billion of revenue to Glasgow for the financial year 2013-14, in addition to £105 million of capital. I say that not to minimise the scale of the problem but to indicate the Government’s commitment. I share the member’s view that nobody should miss out on educational opportunities in life because of poverty.

I agree on the importance of preventative spend and that we want to raise attainment at all levels and all points on the spectrum. It is worth saying that Glasgow has achieved significant progress in that respect. In 2006-07, 10 per cent of people left school without qualifications, but the figure has reduced to 4.9 per cent. The issue is about raising attainment at every point on the spectrum and in high achieving schools as well as schools in communities that face real barriers in the form of poverty, which I mentioned earlier.

As part of its approach to offender management, the Scottish Prison Service provides a wide range of supports to help offenders to achieve qualifications. That includes class subject teaching, access to information and communications technology equipment, designated study times, one-to-one tuition and peer support where appropriate. For those who are studying at a higher level, additional supports include telephone tutorials and tutor visits provided by Open University Scotland. The extent of such support will vary between individual prisoners depending on their personal learning needs and the type of study involved. Specialist assistance is also available for those who are identified as having a barrier to learning and for those for whom English is a second language.

The starting point will always be that we want to motivate any offender to be part of a learning programme. I do not think that money is necessarily the only means of motivation and evidence seems to indicate that offenders who take part in such programmes do so because they genuinely want to learn. I visited educational facilities in Perth prison and was impressed by the degree to which that motivation exists. It is also worth saying that a considerable amount of intervention is taking place to identify some of the educational and literacy problems that offenders bring to prison with them, and that will further encourage people to take part on such programmes.

The Scottish Government believes that the safety of pupils when travelling to school is of paramount importance and must be maintained. Achieving safe transport routes to school is a matter for individual local authorities.

Although the member is right to say that I cannot comment on an on-going consultation, it is fair to say more generally that the Government has been active on issues relating to school transport. The publication of a guide to improving school transport safety was produced in December 2010. It is primarily for use by Scottish local authorities and includes legal obligations and responsibilities, information on casualty risk and on the school journey, and 10 ways in which local authorities and others can reduce risk and improve safety of pupils. If Aberdeen City Council proposes to close any of its schools, it is required to follow the process in place under the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010. The member should certainly encourage his constituents to participate in the consultation process so that people can make the council fully aware of their views.

The statutory environmental requirements for Scottish schools are contained in the School Premises (General Requirements and Standards) (Scotland) Regulations 1967. Those regulations, which apply to all schools, prescribe standards for a range of environmental factors including heating and ventilation. It is for local authorities to take the necessary action to comply with the regulations. Further guidance for local authorities on internal environmental conditions in schools can be found in the Government’s publication “School Design: Optimising the Internal Environment—Building our Future: Scotland’s School Estate”, which is available on the Scottish Government website.

Again, that is a matter primarily for the local authority, although I know that the member has been diligent on this issue and has previously raised with me the suitability of the buildings of three schools in his constituency—Broomhill, Corpus Christi and Blairdardie—whose conditions are described as poor. My understanding is that Glasgow City Council is in the process of renewing such buildings. However, I do not have a timescale for that process. That is for the member to discuss with the local authority. Ultimately, if the member has concerns about the safety of a building, he might wish to take the matter up with the Health and Safety Executive. However, it is primarily something about which he should speak to the local authority.

A number of initiatives are in place to ensure that Scotland is ready for the advent of horizon 2020. A multi-agency steering group was established in 2010 to ensure that the support mechanisms are in place for Scottish organisations that wish to engage in EU research and development programmes and to co-ordinate Scottish responses to developments in existing and future research and development programmes. Key elements of the support available are a series of roadshows through the spring and summer of this year and the introduction of an innovation voucher scheme specifically to support small and medium-sized enterprises to engage with horizon 2020.

I certainly agree whole-heartedly that we have a truly excellent research base in Scotland. There are obvious synergies between the ambitions of our innovation centres and the European Institute of Innovation and Technology’s KIC programme. Both seek to support successful collaborations between industry, academia and businesses to address some of the significant societal and technological challenges that we face. The Scottish Government gives strong moral support to those endeavours. I am sure that the United Kingdom Government, as the member state Government, would wish to give such support as well.

We are aware of a number of educational programmes to help schools tackle sectarianism. The promotion of diversity and equality is an important element of curriculum for excellence. Education Scotland, which is the national body for supporting quality improvement in Scottish education, promotes diversity and equality in its work and has a specific work stream on combating sectarianism. That work focuses on identifying and sharing good practice, reviewing and improving resources and engaging in professional dialogue across education in Scotland. All approved resources are available directly from the Education Scotland website.

I am happy to join the member in congratulating them and in commending all efforts that have been made in our schools to combat sectarianism. I have been struck on a number of recent visits to schools by the enthusiasm that many pupils have shown for projects such as those using the novel “Divided City”, which engages young people in the issues around sectarianism. I am more than happy to agree that those are all efforts to be applauded.

Although only a minority of my crofting constituents are owner-occupiers, the crofting community in general will certainly welcome the minister’s intention to close the loophole. He has indicated that the legislative measure that will be taken will be an expedited one. What will he do to seek crofters’ views on the bill’s content as it makes it way through Parliament?

The Scottish Government firmly believes that science and engineering are key to achieving the overall purpose of creating a more successful Scotland. To that end, we provided £1.9 million for the academic year 2012-13 to support an additional 300 funded university places, which will increase to 1,200 additional places by 2015-16; Skills Development Scotland and Scottish Enterprise are developing an engineering skills action plan, which will be prepared by mid-July 2013; and we have provided £250,000 to establish careerwise, which is targeted at attracting more women to the sector. In addition, we have provided £25,000 to the Engineering Development Trust this year to support its Go4SET programme for Scottish secondary schools.

I certainly agree with the member about the need to promote engineering as a career. I outlined some steps that have been taken on that. I also made the point that we have increased the number of places that are available for people to study such subjects. An important point is that, if we are to exploit Scotland’s potential as an engineering nation, we must encourage among women the option of engineering as a career. A great deal of effort is made to that end in schools.

The member talks about global responsibility. Does she feel that the 180 or so countries in the world that do not posses nuclear weapons are acting irresponsibly?

I am given to understand that the member intends to abstain on the vote on the motion, but would he care to refer to it and tell us whether or not he is completely agnostic about whether it was right to go ahead with the war on the premise given for it by the Prime Minister at the time?

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with the Scottish Qualifications Authority on a range of issues. It has recently sought clarification on the contract that it signed with the Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain. We fully recognise that the SQA has, for many years, undertaken work in a range of countries to the benefit of the citizens in those countries.

The member’s point about the first contract also applies to the second contract—those are not matters that would routinely be brought to ministers. In this case, the matter was not brought to ministers, as the SQA is a body with its own board, which takes its own day-to-day decisions. I understand the points that are being made. As I say, dialogue with the SQA to establish more information is on-going. However, I point out that the Scottish Government has made clear its concerns about human rights abuses in Bahrain. Indeed, we have said similar things to the United Kingdom in that respect. Again, like the UK Government, the SQA has an educational engagement in Bahrain. Of course, the distinctive feature of the UK Government’s engagement with Bahrain is that in 2012 it signed an agreement on defence co-operation.

I am happy to provide information once those conversations have taken place with the SQA. I have to say that these were very much decisions for the SQA. Of course, I stand by Scotland’s educational engagement in a country such as Bahrain and am more than happy to provide the chamber with information on what the SQA is doing. However, I must point out that, as well as the member’s Government in the UK supporting and being involved in a defence co-operation arrangement after last year’s human rights abuses, it also approved a rather large sale of military hardware. I will not embarrass the member by listing some of the items that were sold.

Although I reiterate that the SQA is an arm’s-length organisation with its own board, I am, as I have already indicated, more than happy to supply information about and detail on the conversation that the Government will have with the SQA.

I have been accused of many things but, so far, I have never been accused of being complicit in the suppression of an ethnic group, and I ask the member to consider the tenor of his remarks. As I have already indicated, the Government will provide information to the chamber on our conversations about the nature of all contracts with all countries. I reiterate that the SQA’s engagement around the world is beneficial to the people of many countries around the world as well as to Scotland.

Music is a regular part of the curriculum in our schools and we want all children and young people to have access to music and the opportunity to learn and explore the subject. In light of some recent concerns about instrumental music tuition charges, we have set up an instrumental music group, chaired by David Green, to examine the issues around the provision of instrumental music tuition, including charges applied by local authorities. The group has already met twice and will report to ministers by the end of June 2013. We have also announced £1 million funding, administered by the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland, for the purchase of new musical instruments. The key aim will be to enable young people to learn a musical instrument who would otherwise be unable to do so due to the cost of purchasing or renting an instrument.

It is of course local authorities’ responsibility to decide on, and justify to their local citizens, their policies and budgets on this and other issues. I would fully expect local authorities to want to deliver the entitlements in relation to curriculum for excellence experiences and outcomes on music. Nigel Don makes the important point that the benefits of music in school extend far beyond music, to many other parts of the curriculum and not least to personal confidence for young people. I hope that all that will be taken into account when the instrumental music group reports.

Raising the educational attainment of pupils from the poorest backgrounds is a key priority. We are delivering the conditions for raising educational attainment through our delivery of curriculum for excellence, and by investing in teaching and leadership through the work of the national partnership group and its follow-up delivery group, the national implementation board. Our core programmes for children and young people have particular benefits for those from more deprived backgrounds. Those programmes include: getting it right for every child; more choices, more chances; play, talk, read; and the literacy action plan. Following the work with the raising attainment group—which worked with the Scottish Government last year to provide advice on how best to secure improvements in schools—we are working with key partners to deliver specific actions to secure continuous improvement in the system. Those actions are based on the core value that equity in educational opportunity and access and engagement is the route to success for all.

As Jim Eadie does, I recognise that that question goes to the very heart of our having an education system that delivers opportunities for all. I certainly recognise the value of the many activities around the country, such as breakfast clubs, summer schools and other targeted programmes that can all help to provide children with a healthy start not only to their school day, but to their educational day. It is important for authorities and schools to establish evaluated and targeted out-of-school activities. As a Government, we are working with key partners to help to deliver those and other measures, which we will certainly continue to monitor.

Following the national conference last November, good progress has been made. The 10 primary and secondary schools that are involved in pilot projects continue to demonstrate practical ways in which the one-plus-two languages model may be implemented. They are being supported in that by visits from Education Scotland and Scotland’s national centre for languages, and by Government funding of £120,000 this school year. The pilots will be evaluated in the summer to inform how best the policy can be taken forward. Local authorities have been asked to assess their current provision and future needs for teacher training and support. To help them do that, they have been provided with an audit tool devised by Scotland’s national centre for languages. We are continuing discussions with stakeholders on issues including the distribution of £4 million additional funding in 2013-14. The Parliament’s European and External Relations Committee is also making a helpful contribution through its current inquiry into foreign language learning in primary schools.

I am happy to say that Lochyside Roman Catholic primary school in Fort William in the Highlands and Islands is one of the first schools to take part in some of the pilots that I have just mentioned. There is no reason whatsoever why primary school children cannot happily learn two or three languages—that is the norm in many European countries. Although I appreciate that we have a long way to go, that is a completely valid aspiration for us to have in Scotland, too.

I am never disappointed by Hugh Henry’s disappointment. In many respects, he is perhaps one of those people who have nothing to fear but hope itself. There is every evidence—as I have just outlined—that the one-plus-two languages model is a valuable proposal. We are funding it and I am personally committed to it.

The Scottish Government has made good progress in supporting local authorities to establish Gaelic-medium schools. When the current Administration came into government, there were two Gaelic schools in Scotland; by the end of this session of Parliament, we expect there to be eight such schools either established or planned. I am also pleased to say that this morning we announced a further £800,000 for Glasgow City Council to assist the construction of the city’s second Gaelic school at Glendale. The announcement follows other Gaelic capital support to Argyll and Bute, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Highland and North Lanarkshire over recent years.

First of all, I point out to the member that the Scottish Government is prepared to make a significant investment in the project. For that reason, we will seek a firm reassurance from the council that it will go ahead and be delivered—as the member has suggested—as soon as possible, in line with parents’ clear expressed wishes. The Government’s commitment to funding the project is not undermined by the present delay. Indeed, in addition to that commitment, I intend to explore in discussion with the council local concerns that we understand have been expressed about timescale, overall costs and the link to hostel renovation in Portree and, again, will seek reassurance that the Scottish Government is supporting a project that will be delivered without undue delay.

I listened with great interest to the debate, and I thank Alex Johnstone for bringing the issue to the Parliament’s attention. Children especially have made the online environment their natural home. That was brought home to me a year ago when I found my four-year-old niece advising me not only that I should get myself an iPad, but on which type I should get. For many children, the internet is not simply a device, a form of technology or a tool; it is an integral part of their lives, seamless with the physical world that lies outside of chat rooms, social media and blogs. As Mr Johnstone quite rightly said, it is another place where children go and interact with one another and with other people. The Scottish Government remains committed to ensuring that the safety and wellbeing of Scotland’s children and young people is a key priority wherever they go. While it is the prerogative of children and young people to explore and enjoy the online world, it is our responsibility to ensure that they do so safely. We need to ensure that our children and young people are fully equipped with the knowledge and skills that they need to use the internet safely. To that end, I was encouraged recently to see a class of primary 5 pupils in Fife learning about such basic questions as whether they should allow photographs of themselves to go online and whether they should allow strangers to have their home address. As Mr McDonald pointed out, none of this need take away from the enormous benefits that the internet brings, not least in rural areas, as Ms Grant observed. We also believe that parents should be supported and empowered to protect their children online, and the current options on parental controls are an essential part of this work. Mr Johnstone acknowledged the difficulty of trying to police the internet. It is not simply a matter of filters and hardware; rather, as he pointed out, understanding and awareness are needed among parents, children and young people about the risks of the internet. We are working with many stakeholders in Scotland to improve the level of understanding, particularly through schools. Kezia Dugdale mentioned the important reality that in some cases whole websites are devoted quite openly and commercially to the persecution of individuals. She also mentioned correspondence, which she did indeed have with the Government and with me in seeking a meeting to raise awareness around the issue. It was felt at the time that respectme was already undertaking a campaign of awareness, but that does not take away from the importance of the matter that she raises. For that reason, I am happy to meet her. The Scottish Government is already planning a number of steps to raise awareness. They include supporting the UK safer internet centre’s “connect with respect” theme for safer internet day 2013, in which respectme is also involved, and launching an internet safety awareness competition for all Scottish schools, which will coincide with safer internet day on 5 February. The Scottish Government-led stakeholder group on child internet safety will continue to monitor online safety in Scotland. Under the curriculum for excellence, health and wellbeing is now a curriculum area in its own right. Learning in health and wellbeing ensures that children and young people develop the knowledge and understanding that they need for mental, emotional, social and physical wellbeing now and in the future. That learning will, I hope, promote confidence, independent thinking and positive attitudes and dispositions, and it will help to develop the ability to make ultimately positive choices. Building up children and young people’s own capacities, skills and resilience as opposed to trying to resolve their difficulties for them will engender a sense of self-respect that will, in turn, impact on their respect for others. Those principles apply equally across settings, be it in the classroom, in the playground or in children’s online activities. We know that children and young people’s wellbeing can be severely impacted by bullying, and I take the issue very seriously. Mr Robertson spoke very powerfully indeed about the responsibility that social networking sites have to ensure that they do not publish not only material that is actively harmful but material that encourages others to promote harmful behaviour as well. Mr Dey and others mentioned that children as well as adults are capable of cruelty. Bullying of any kind is totally unacceptable and must be dealt with quickly whenever and wherever it happens. The Government recognises that anti-bullying approaches are best developed locally in consultation with the community. That is reflected in “A National Approach to Anti-Bullying for Scotland’s Children and Young People”, which aims to strengthen local solutions by offering guiding principles and common visions and aims. I echo the sentiments of the motion and those of a number of speakers in the debate, and I commend the national anti-bullying service respectme. It supports adults who work with children and young people, building capacity to prevent and tackle all types of bullying effectively through training, policy development and the provision of advice and information through its website.

I entirely concur with what Dennis Robertson said about the need to tackle the industry. Although it may be very difficult to police the internet, not least because so many sites and servers are located outside this country, that does not excuse websites such as the one that the member mentioned from moral responsibility and it does not absolve them from severe public and political criticism, such as that that has taken place today in this chamber, if they promote the type of disgraceful material that he has described to us. It is also important to say that the Government funds ChildLine Scotland to provide help and online services that offer direct support to children and young people who experience bullying, which can be invaluable in helping them deal with the issues. We also provide funding for the choices for life initiative, whose website also contains useful information. Cyber-bullying is a relatively new phenomenon. What may have in the past been passed around in notes or written on a wall is now being written on social media sites. Because of those developments, we all need to ensure a safe online environment for children. For that reason, I welcome the motion and look forward to a time when we ensure that all children and young people are empowered to make the internet the positive force that it can be in their lives. Meeting closed at 17:46.

We are aware of the large body of international evidence that links lead exposure to a number of poor outcomes, including low attainment, but it is not currently possible to use official data to link individual instances of lower attainment with exposure to lead early in childhood.

The member was right to point to studies that cover the effect on, for example criminal behaviour, IQ and learning disability. A number of measures have been taken over the years to eliminate lead, not just from petrol and the atmosphere but from paint and other items in schools. I am conscious of the need to maintain the purity of water in the school estate. Whenever a complaint is made to Scottish Water about not just schools but other buildings that have lead pipes in them or lead communication pipes to them, action is taken. If the member is concerned that that is not happening in individual schools, I will be more than happy to hear from him about it.

The Government is setting up an instrumental music group to examine the issues around the provision of instrumental music tuition, including charges applied by local authorities. I am happy to confirm that the group will meet for the first time this month and report its findings by the summer. The Government will continue to take the issue forward in that way.

Iain Gray will not be too surprised to hear that I do not agree with his assessment. As I indicated, I have set up a group that will try to bring local authorities to a common position on the matter, on which it will duly report. Around the country, the position on instrumental music tuition differs from local authority to local authority, but there is an expectation that the group will at least address how to ensure that, as a basic minimum, courses that provide a Scottish Qualifications Authority qualification are not subject to charging. It will also try to ensure that local authorities can agree on a common position. Iain Gray will be aware that the Government has spent £1 million on providing new instruments for music tuition around the country. I hope that he welcomes that.

I am sure that David Green, who convenes the group, will want to consider the availability of instructors as well as the costs. I hope that he will make recommendations on that.

A wide range of factors can cause some young people not to achieve their potential in English and maths following the transition to secondary school. Under curriculum for excellence, reporting across schools is important to ensure well-planned and smooth transitions. There is a strong focus on building literacy and numeracy across the curriculum. Education Scotland supports authorities and schools with sharing best practice on transitions through a variety of approaches, including seminars and guidance.

The member will be aware that the Government makes efforts to ensure that, when subjects have a shortage of teachers, the supply need is met. The Government has stated its view about the ineffectiveness of aspects of the previous Government policy that he mentioned. It is important to say that literacy and numeracy are embedded in curriculum for excellence and are given very high priority. For instance, the Government does not shy away from the substantial dropping-off in numeracy standards that was shown in the most recent survey of literacy and numeracy, although I should say that that survey was conducted before curriculum for excellence was fully implemented.

The teaching standards set by the General Teaching Council for Scotland require teachers to be able to identify and respond appropriately to pupils with difficulties in or barriers to learning. During initial teacher education, student teachers will gain sufficient knowledge of the most common additional support needs for them to be able to support the child in question themselves or, if necessary, to seek specialised information and specialised support. Teachers’ career-long contractual requirement to undertake continuing professional development provides further opportunities for them to augment what they have learned during initial teacher education.

The member is right to highlight that early intervention is crucial to ensuring that—to use our own language—we get it right for every child. Indeed, my colleague Aileen Campbell has been busy in that respect. Schools and local authorities are doing many things on this matter. For example, teachers’ continuing professional development through many means, including the glow web service, is very much about identifying the additional needs that children might have. I return to the fact that element 2.1.4 of the standard for full registration for a teacher stipulates that as a requirement—and, indeed, a requirement that is increasingly understood. To pick out one example, I note that the identification of dyslexia above many other things—or perhaps I should say alongside many other things—can make an enormous difference and we have launched our dyslexia toolkit to aid its identification at the earliest possible stage.

On 20 November 2012, the Scottish Government published its response to the languages working group report “Language Learning in Scotland: A 1+2 Approach”. We have accepted all of the report’s 35 recommendations, either in full or in part, and are now working with local authorities and other stakeholders to discuss and agree the next steps in taking forward our commitment to a one-plus-two languages policy, building on last year’s successful joint conference with the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland. We are providing funding for 10 pilot projects in primary and secondary schools across Scotland in the current school year to demonstrate how a one-plus-two model might best be delivered and have also earmarked £4 million for languages within funding for developing the Scottish schools curriculum to assist local authorities in taking forward the policy in 2013-14, subject to parliamentary agreement to the budget bill.

I certainly welcome the support that has been shown in Falkirk and evidenced in the local press for the one-plus-two model. As I have done previously, I can indeed confirm that Gaelic will be among the languages included in the project.

The value and importance of Scottish literature is being promoted in a variety of ways across education and at every stage of learning. Support is provided by a range of bodies including Education Scotland, the Association for Scottish Literary Studies, the Scottish Book Trust, Stòrlann and Scottish Language Dictionaries. I am also pleased to recognise that the first world congress of Scottish literatures will be hosted by the University of Glasgow in July 2014.

As someone who studied Scottish literature at Glasgow, I certainly concur with the member’s enthusiasm for Scottish literature chairs. I know and value the contribution that Professor Alan Riach has made as chair of Scottish literature at the University of Glasgow. I agree that it is certainly unusual for any country to have only one university chair solely dedicated to its national literature. I would of course welcome the creation of similar posts in other universities and will continue to engage with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and universities on the issue.

Does the member acknowledge that the benefit that Scotland reaps in research funding is due not to any act of charity but to the excellence of Scottish institutions?

I must first apologise for my lateness. As my plane sat on the runway at Inverness airport, it crossed my mind that perhaps something that science could contribute usefully to my life would be a teleporter, or, failing that, some jump leads that I could carry about with me. The debate has been very interesting and has drawn a wide variety of contributions. In response to a remark that Murdo Fraser made, I am unable to say—having arrived when I did—whether Michael Russell picked up the speech that I intended to deliver, so I will not try to refer to it. It has been particularly good to have had interest in the debate from the learned societies, which are important contributors of evidence for public policy through not just their formal papers and their support of the annual science in the Parliament debate but their informative newsletter and regular updates on current science stories and events. They also produce some interesting reports. The Institute of Physics launched “Physics, the key to a thriving Scottish economy” in this building in October. It showed that Scotland has performed better than the other nations of these islands. I think that we have largely agreed on the importance of scientific evidence in informing decision making and further demonstrated how the evidence comes from the hard work and dedication of scientists and engineers from all walks of life, wherever they work. I will refer to the contributions of some members. I am not quite sure where Mr Fraser was headed with some of his arguments about global warming; he struck me as being rather sceptical. I thought that some of his comparisons with eugenics were a little far fetched, but it is certainly legitimate that everyone in the chamber and elsewhere should scrutinise and interrogate science. That said, Mr Fraser seemed to argue against his own position slightly in his comments on GM. It is worth adding that, although the Scottish Government does not support GM trials, it supports wider crop research to the tune of £8 million a year. Members have largely agreed on the importance of having access to independent advice from both the chief scientific advisers and the Scottish science advisory council.

I appreciate the distinction that the member makes between the warming of the earth and the presence of a man-made factor that is behind that, but I think that the overwhelming scientific consensus is that there is a man-made agency behind the rise in the temperatures of the earth and the seas. Each of the independent advisers has a large remit of their own, but there is potentially considerable added value in their co-ordinating their advice. Regular meetings that will start in the new year are being arranged between them. I already regularly meet Professor Calder, and meetings in future will include updates on the combined discussions. To answer a point that Mr Gray and Mr McArthur made about the First Minister, the First Minister is arranging to meet the Scottish science advisory council as part of his continuing commitment to regular engagement. Indeed, only a few days ago, he was in my constituency meeting the scientific community, which is engaged in work in various areas of research around the development of omega 3.

There is, of course, the Scottish science advisory council, which advises the Government, and I certainly believe that that advice is taken seriously. The importance of engaging with the public on the science that underpins all policy is certainly given the recognition that it merits.

I will have to make some progress before I take further interventions. Mr George Adam managed to mention the science centres in Scotland and the science festivals in a speech that contained an impressive number of namechecks for Paisley. It is worth remembering the work that can be done with young people and the wider public, which can help Government scientists to develop valuable new skills and provide a new perspective on their role. I know from being at the Scottish Government’s science and engineering profession annual conference last month that that fits in with the work of the profession board in supporting the career paths of Scottish Government scientists. Part of the chief scientific adviser’s role is to act as head of profession and ensure the continued quality of the evidence by encouraging peer review and continued professional development among Government scientists. Murdo Fraser’s amendment talks of the need for greater focus on the promotion of STEM subjects and on presenting the advantages of STEM careers. It is vital that we attract young people into careers in science, engineering and technology. Apart from anything else, STEM degrees are good degrees to have, as the employment rate from them is 84 per cent. The curriculum for learning approach will help to ensure that pupils at all stages can explore the real-life relevance of science. I believe, for the reasons that I have already described, that the greater focus that he is looking for is already under way, and for that reason I can happily accept the amendment. Many members—including Neil Findlay, Iain Gray and Neil Bibby, among others—rightly referred to the role of women in science. It is interesting that even in a subject such as biology, in which women traditionally outnumber men at undergraduate level, industry and academia still have difficulty in retaining that highly trained talent. The Royal Society of Edinburgh produced an informative report on that earlier this year and, since then, we have held Scotland’s first employment summit for women; launched the new £250,000 careerwise Scotland initiative, which is aimed at encouraging more young women to consider careers in the field of science; and committed to funding the Scottish resource centre for women in science, engineering and technology. The issues that were raised around constitutional change were interesting. Scotland’s excellence in the field of science holds true regardless of future constitutional changes. Our universities are arguably the strongest part of Scotland’s science heritage. That will be a legitimate debate to have in the time leading up to the referendum, and I am sure that it will take place within the academic community. I am not sure about the relevance of Dr Simpson’s remarks regarding the 1921 Anglo-Irish treaty—it presently evades me—but there will be discussion of some of the broader issues.

As I have named the member, I will.

I am tempted to say that the world has moved on since then. There seems to be an assumption, on the part of some Labour members, that the Scottish Government has only one model in mind when it comes to potential funding models for Scotland after independence. There are many models and many countries that share research councils. That is worth bearing in mind. The issue of Scotland getting more than her just return in academic research funding has been raised a number of times. The reason for that is not any political decision to kill Scotland with kindness, but the fact that Scotland is excellent in the field of scientific research. The Parliament has learned that we probably do not give enough attention to the subject of science in our deliberations. I therefore encourage all members to take up the opportunities that are presented to them to engage with scientists and all those connected with science and to celebrate their work and achievements. As I sat on the plane today, I was rather worried that I would miss out on hearing from Renaissance man, in the form of Mr Stewart Stevenson. He did not disappoint. His remarks on the Van der Graaf generator were an interesting contribution to the debate but, coming from a man who has in the past—rather to my fear—asked me parliamentary questions about algebra, did not come as a surprise. I could sum up by talking about all the various speeches from members, of which many were learned and helpful, but I have time only to mention one more. Mr Henry said that his personality and outlook on life were scarred by physics. In defence of physics, I must say that that is one thing for which physics should not have to take responsibility. [Laughter.] Fundamentally, however, I believe that the chamber united today and that the purpose of the debate was to show how important the decision-making process is and how essential a part of it scientific evidence is. For those and many other reasons, I invite members to support the motion.

I congratulate Alison McInnes on the motion for this debate on Camphill Scotland, which has of course achieved cross-party support. We have heard from members about the quality of the support that the Camphill movement provides for children, young people and adults of all ages with learning disabilities, mental health issues and other support needs. Camphill communities in Scotland support more than 400 children, young people, adults and older people through a mixture of residential and day support. More than a third of those people are under 26. I welcome the contribution that third sector partners, including Camphill Scotland, make to delivering services for people with learning disabilities. As we have heard, the entire Camphill movement takes its name from Camphill estate in the Milltimber area of Aberdeen, where the Camphill founders opened their first community for children with special needs in June 1940. As Lewis Macdonald said, the origins of the movement are all the more remarkable, considering that many of its founders were fleeing Nazi persecution at that time. The expansion of Camphill to become a worldwide movement with more than 100 communities in more than 20 countries, including 12 in Scotland, is a credit to the dedication of the staff, co-workers, volunteers and everyone else who has contributed to its success over the decades. Alex Fergusson, Aileen McLeod and Mark McDonald pointed to the achievements of Camphill in the field of food, not least in cheese, and I felt that I could almost smell that achievement keenly, given that my last sustenance was a bacon roll at 8 am in Stornoway airport. The debate has provided a valuable opportunity to mark the contribution and achievements of Camphill internationally. The Camphill school in Aberdeen has played a major role in the success of the movement. The school provides care, education and therapy services for children and young people aged 3 to 19 with additional support needs arising from autism and complex physical disabilities. Through the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004, the Parliament set a clear expectation that every child or young person in Scotland should have any additional support needs identified and met. In response to the point that Alison McInnes made about the relationship between local authorities and Camphill, it is certainly the case that organisations such as Camphill play a crucial role in augmenting local authority provision and supporting some of our most vulnerable young people. The 2004 act places duties on local authorities to meet children’s needs, and those apply just as much to placements in independent schools as they apply elsewhere. Following the completion of Peter Doran’s review of complex needs provision last month, we are now taking forward his recommendations in order to ensure that every pupil gets the right help at the right time and in the right place. In the joint Education Scotland and care commission inspection report on Camphill School Aberdeen that was published in January 2012, all the quality indicators were ranked very good or excellent. Particular strengths of the school include: happy, relaxed children and young people who feel safe, valued and respected; the dedication and enthusiasm of staff; and the use of the natural environment to help to develop children and young people’s skills. As noted in the motion and by several members, the Camphill school also achieved the eco-schools green flag status earlier this year. Along with the Royal Blind School, the Camphill school is the only independent all-through—that is, from three to 18—additional support needs school to hold green flag award status in Scotland. A further 14 all-through ASN local authority schools have also attained green flag award status. Camphill Scotland also deserves credit for its role in promoting the development and wellbeing of Camphill communities, including encouraging communities to work together and helping them to learn from one another and collaborate for common benefit. That community and ecological aspect of the Camphill schools was highlighted by both Joan McAlpine and Maureen Watt. In addition, Camphill Scotland engages with national policy and legislative changes, including self-directed support, the “The same as you?” learning disability policy and the children and young people bill. The Scottish Government is now working on a new strategy document for people with learning disabilities that maintains the principles and direction of travel that were established by “The same as you?” Progress needs to be maintained on reducing barriers and discrimination so that the aspirations of people with learning disabilities to live meaningful, fulfilled, independent, included and healthy lives can be met. The national drive to move away from long-term residential care for people with learning disabilities towards support in the community has been incredibly successful, as the vast majority are now supported in their local communities, including in Camphill communities. Having choice and control is also critical to achieving independence for those with learning disabilities. The on-going work on the passage of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill and the wider self-directed support strategy will have a clear part to play in all of that. By way of conclusion, let me say that Camphill provides an outstanding education in its broadest and most inclusive sense. With that in mind, I very much welcome this opportunity to recognise its achievements. Meeting closed at 17:47.

The outcomes to which the member refers are those that are set out in our well-established national performance framework and, in particular, those relating to science learning, skills, employment and economic potential—all key components of sustainable economic growth. That section of the draft budget 2013-14 refers to funding programmes that are run by the office of the chief scientific adviser. Those support a wide range of informal science learning and public engagement initiatives, including our science centres and festivals, and they help to ensure that science plays its part in our drive for a smarter, healthier and greener Scotland.

The member will be aware that several functions of the chief scientific adviser are now being carried out by the funding council, which accounts for some of the changes. For example, the overall downturn in the budget for the science centres is considerably less than advised because of that factor. In 2012-13, £2.5 million has been allocated for science centres alone, aside from other aspects of outreach.

Safe transport routes to school are a matter for individual local authorities. The Scottish Government provides funding to Sustrans to work with schools and local authorities to encourage schools to develop travel plans for their pupils and teachers and to identify safe routes in their areas. In addition, in 2010 Transport Scotland funded the Transport Research Laboratory to produce a guide to improving school travel safety. The TRL is currently undertaking a review of the use of the school travel guide and will report its findings in early 2013.

Yes—indeed I do. Although any change in the route that is taken to the school is obviously a matter for the local authority to consider, I hope that North Lanarkshire Council will consider very seriously indeed any representations and concerns that are put to it by parents. It is obviously important for pupils and their parents that they are able to get to and from schools safely. I am aware that North Lanarkshire Council’s consultation on the proposal to close Abronhill high school has recently ended, and my understanding is that the council plans to take a final decision in the new year.

The Scottish Government, Education Scotland and the Scottish Qualifications Authority continue to work closely together to monitor the preparedness of secondary schools for the new national qualifications and to support the implementation and understanding of curriculum for excellence. As part of that process, Scottish Government and Education Scotland officials are in contact with Aberdeenshire Council and have offered support to the council and its schools.

The obvious answer, as Alex Johnstone will be aware, is that the parents will have to make representations directly to the local authority. However, I hope that I can reassure him by pointing out that although the Government has never attempted to direct schools and local authorities on a default number of subjects to be studied, we have always made it clear that the purpose of the new curriculum is flexibility, and that the number of subjects should be tailored not only to the needs of individual schools and communities, but to the needs of individual young people. We would always expect schools and local authorities to tailor the options that are available to young people to their needs as individuals.

The Government engages constantly with employers and with colleges and universities to talk about the structure and meaning of the new qualifications. I can only repeat what I have just said, which is that the Government does not direct local authorities on the number of subjects that are to be studied to examination level, although we expect local authorities to provide a structure that is sufficiently flexible to allow discretion to be shown for individual pupils.

Schools and education authorities across Scotland are working with their learners, parents and wider partners, with support from Education Scotland and the Scottish Qualifications Authority, to develop and finalise their curriculum models for the senior phase, including the number of subjects. They are making use of the flexibility that curriculum for excellence provides to develop models that best suit their circumstances and needs and, as I indicated earlier, the needs of individual learners.

The Government and Education Scotland are more than happy to engage with local authorities and schools about those issues, and indeed on any cases that the member wants to bring to the Government’s attention. The point that the member raised in his initial question about the stage at which choices are made is relevant, in that we see a transition to a model in which choices are not prematurely made before the end of secondary 3. We certainly do not see curriculum for excellence being about narrowing choice; quite the reverse—it is about introducing flexibility and choice into the system to meet individual needs.

Did you say Alistair Darling? I think that the cabinet secretary has a cold. We will blame it on his ears. All I would add is that the engagement that takes place with local authorities is on-going, as the member will be aware. I am more than happy to discuss that with any local authority that comes to me. The Government will continue that, through Education Scotland and directly.

I stand corrected. I think that my colleague may in fact have misheard you. I apologise. The curriculum for excellence is firmly focused on the needs of individual learners and on providing them with the values, qualities and skills that they need to progress successfully to further learning and employment. It is about raising standards in education and ensuring improved outcomes for all young people. I know that we are all agreed on those objectives and that everyone is working together to deliver them.

Youth work and the CLD sector have a significant role to play in the implementation of CFE. They are important delivery partners that offer young people valuable opportunities and the Government is more than happy to work with them.

I thank Iain Gray for lodging the motion that we are debating. I certainly welcome this opportunity to listen to the thoughts and views expressed by members. Like all members here, I am passionate about children and young people experiencing all aspects of the broad general education that they are entitled to under curriculum for excellence and in my view that includes the opportunity to play a range of musical instruments. One of the benefits of my job is that I get to visit schools and see at first hand what is being achieved in our classrooms every day. I never cease to be amazed by the innovative examples of teaching and learning that I witness. I concur with Mr Gray, Patricia Ferguson and other members about the liberating power that music has for many communities within Scotland and worldwide. That is why I absolutely agree that music—and learning to play a musical instrument—can play a key role in a child’s education, benefiting their academic and social development and, as Liz Smith mentioned, inspiring them in other areas of the curriculum, too. It never pleases me more than when I attend—and occasionally sing at—national events such as the Mod, where I am able to listen to youngsters from around the country giving expert vocal and traditional instrumental performances. I saw that at first hand when I was compering the Barra local mod earlier this year. This debate is ultimately about the value of instrumental music tuition and our shared belief that every child should have the opportunity to learn to play a musical instrument. That being agreed, it is necessary to clarify what Mr Gray requested in his motion: “That ... Parliament ... notes that ... 24 of Scotland’s 32 local authorities are charging up to £340 per year for instrumental music tuition”. I stress that the charges are applied to instrumental music tuition provided via the authority’s instrumental tuition service; the charges are not applied to classroom music lessons as part of the child’s curriculum learning. I appreciate that there is an issue in some authorities about classroom teachers being able to provide tuition in only three or four instruments themselves, and a debate then emerging about what other musical instruments should be free. That is an important debate to have, not least because of Tavish Scott’s point about the importance of some instruments to local musical traditions. I think that we all agree that local authorities are under a great deal of pressure to deliver the services that are required of them, and the issue of charging for instrumental music tuition is not straightforward. If Liz Smith or others have evidence of local authorities that are profiting from any charges applied for accessing such provision, I would be pleased to look at that. I do not have such evidence at present. Out of all the authorities that apply charges for their instrumental tuition service, it should be said, in the interests of fairness, that only one does not offer concessions. All other authorities offer a range of concessionary rates dependent upon local policy and family circumstances. I agree with Mr Gray, Clare Adamson, Jenny Marra and many others that no child should be denied the chance to develop their musical talent. There is—and there should be—systems in place to ensure that no child is ever denied an opportunity because of their background. This Government is committed to working with local authorities and COSLA to find a way forward on this matter. We need to establish greater clarity regarding the position around the country on charging for instrumental music tuition. Our first priority is to examine the position for pupils undertaking SQA national qualifications. Scotland on Sunday’s let the children play campaign raises a number of issues, some of which have been echoed by members in the chamber tonight, and not least of which is the array of different charging practices throughout the country. I am committed to finding solutions to the issues raised by the campaign. We are working with our colleagues in local government to find a way forward, in tough financial times, so that we maximise access to music tuition. Other members mentioned the youth music initiative. I have met my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs about the initiative’s contribution to the debate. The initiative has received wide recognition for providing high-quality music-making opportunities for all young people—not just schoolchildren—and particularly for those who may not otherwise have had opportunities to participate. That is an important factor, given the cost of individual instruments, to which Stuart McMillan and others referred. Without a doubt, part of the increasing pressure that we face for instrumental music tuition in schools comes from the continued success of the youth music initiative. I was pleased to hear that the Scottish Brass Band Association has attributed the dramatic increase in the number of brass bands in Scotland to youth music initiative funding. Funding projects and creating opportunities for young people to get involved in all types of music are a continued commitment from this Government. To conclude, and to respond briefly to issues raised by Alison Johnstone and others, the provision of instrumental music tuition in schools varies widely across Scotland and is a complicated matter. However, it is a matter that the Government is committed to examining in detail. I will pick up on Malcolm Chisholm’s point about the need to begin with principles and say that the Scottish Government begins with the principle that no child should be excluded from developing their musical talent because of financial pressure or their background. Learning in music and the wider expressive arts plays a role in supporting young people to recognise and value the variety and vitality of our culture locally, nationally and globally.

I am just concluding, but I will give way.

I can certainly undertake to report back to the Parliament soon. By soon, I do not mean in glacial time. I would like to be able to report back on some of the progress of those discussions early in the new year. For those reasons, I commit the Scottish Government to helping to address the issue of instrumental music tuition in schools. I express my support for the sentiments of the motion. Meeting closed at 18:24.

The promotion of opportunities to learn British Sign Language arose during the work of the languages working group. British Sign Language is already part of the learning experience of pupils in a number of Scottish schools. Local authorities and schools have the responsibility for developing language approaches that meet the needs of all their learners, including British Sign Language where appropriate.

Mark Griffin raises an important subject. There are, of course, some schools in which British Sign Language-related courses are happening, including Dingwall academy and Clydeview academy in Gourock. There are other schools, although there are perhaps no centrally held figures on them. I am certainly open to ensuring that we have the widest possible access to British Sign Language courses. For instance, in the one-plus-two languages programme for Scotland, there is recognition of the fact that, if someone’s first language is sign language, that should be recognised and celebrated as a linguistic achievement.

Assessment arrangements for students who require additional support during written examinations that are undertaken in schools is the responsibility of the Scottish Qualifications Authority. It has policies and procedures in place to allow adjustments in candidates’ external assessment, usually in exams, for candidates with additional support needs, where that is justifiable. Decisions about what support is needed for students with dyslexia in further and higher education are made by colleges and universities. Disability advisers in institutions will be able to advise such students what assistance is available to them in their academic studies and in written examinations. With the support of Dyslexia Scotland, the Scottish Government launched the dyslexia toolkit to help with the identification of pupils with dyslexia. An enhanced version of the toolkit was launched at the Scottish learning festival this year.

I should perhaps clarify my understanding that, on the whole, exam markers are not made aware of any issues of disability or indeed dyslexia that candidates have, and that all candidates are marked on the same basis. However, during exams, every effort is made to make allowances for candidates with dyslexia, be it in the form of extra time, a scribe or perhaps computing assistance. Where exams in modern languages deal with grammar and the construction of language, some of those allowances might be difficult to make, but computing or information and communication technology allowances would be more than possible.

Education in science, technologies such as computing, engineering and maths is a priority for the Scottish Government as those areas are key drivers of Scotland’s future economic prosperity. The Government is keen to encourage more school pupils to consider a career in science, technology, engineering and mathematics and we are doing various things to incentivise that. We provide about £2.5 million to support the four science centres in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dundee and Aberdeen, which together reach about 600,000 people every year. We also spend £220,000 supporting 18 science festivals in towns, cities, islands and regions across Scotland. Through the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, we will fund a further 1,200 STEM places at Scotland’s universities over the next three years.

I certainly agree that the examples that the member gave—4G and the film “Brave”—provide great opportunities not only to showcase the talent that exists in our computing and software engineers in Scotland but to make a wider audience aware of the careers that exist within the profession.

We want to maintain our record of high uptake and achievement of science qualifications. As part of that, our recent response to the science and engineering education advisory group report highlights our priorities of building the expertise of teachers, ensuring that pupils experience science learning that is inspiring and relevant, and developing young people’s awareness of pathways into science, technology, engineering and mathematics careers. We are also promoting broader science engagement for young people through the science centre network and the talking science grants scheme.

I am always happy to speak to school communities and parents who want to know how the curriculum for excellence and the new qualification system will develop. However, I have to say that the picture across Scotland is definitely one of increasing rather than decreasing the choices available to pupils and of strengthening the experience of a broad general education, including a broad science education in the first three years of secondary school. There is no evidence that science subjects are being squeezed out. For instance, recently the idea was raised with me that fewer pupils might be able to study three sciences at the end of their fourth year, when they do exams. Less than 2 per cent of pupils did that under the old system and there is no evidence to suggest that pupils’ choices are being restricted in that way. However, if the member knows of any concerns that parents have about courses, I am more than happy for them to be raised with me.

I would take the criticism more seriously—

I would take the criticism more seriously were it not coming from a party which has just cut the capital budget for Scotland by a third. If he wants that in decimal terms, it is 33.3-something per cent.

Others have given very eloquent accounts of Neil Armstrong’s life and achievements. Perhaps I can add to them—without intending to be in any way flippant—by saying that it was thanks to Neil Armstrong that I first learned as a child of the existence of the town of Langholm. It was only some 25 miles away from where I lived, but in the Scottish Borders—with all that that traditionally implies—that was indeed a giant leap. I mention that because, as others have said, one of the many generous things about the late Neil Armstrong was his willingness to work to inspire a whole generation about science—something of which his famous 1972 trip to Scotland and his on-going connections with his ancestral town were but parts. I am grateful to Willie Coffey for giving us the opportunity to reflect on Neil Armstrong’s achievements and to restate our commitment to encouraging Scots of all ages to take inspiration from him and to strive to achieve new things in their lives and for their communities. Unlike Mr Adam, I had not quite arrived in this world when the moon landing happened, but I share his recollection of the importance of the space race and the culture around it to a generation of children. During our debate, we have remembered Neil Armstrong as the first person to step on to the surface of another world. It is difficult to overstate what a transformation that represented, not only in our understanding of space, but in our dramatic new understanding of the earth. Perhaps the most influential of all the photographs that were taken from the moon was that of the earth. It was the first time that humans had truly seen their planet in its entirety. That point was well made by Mr Gray. Perhaps less well recognised—although it was alluded to today—is the fact that Armstrong and his crew were exposed to significant personal danger. As Willie Coffey mentioned, in the minute before the lunar module was due to land on the moon, Armstrong realised that its trajectory was such that it was heading for a rock. Not only did Armstrong safely take manual control, as we heard, but he skilfully balanced the need to use extra fuel to reach the ground against the need to conserve enough fuel in the tank to be able to take off again from the moon’s surface. Having discovered that the ascent engine’s ignition switch was broken, the astronauts improvised a fix using part of a ballpoint pen to activate the module’s launch sequence. All that ingenuity enabled them to return home—something that was, as Stewart Stevenson mentioned, by no means regarded as a foregone conclusion. Indeed, such was the doubt about whether the astronauts would get off the moon that President Nixon had two different speeches prepared to read out to the nation. As Ms McAlpine reminded us, today’s debate is an opportunity to celebrate Scotland’s international standing in space research and satellite systems development. We have a national space technology centre, and Scottish Enterprise is working to develop a space innovation partnership to further promote excellence here. Scotland of course has long had a pioneering scientific research base, too, which is well illustrated by the recent work and achievements of Professor Higgs of the University of Edinburgh, whom I am pleased Elaine Murray mentioned. Having had a flash of inspiration in 1964 while he was out walking in the Cairngorms, he went on to propose the existence of a particle that is now called the Higgs boson. This summer, the European Organization for Nuclear Research—CERN—announced the discovery of supportive experimental evidence for the existence of the Higgs boson—a particle that is often referred to as the most sought-after particle in modern physics. Earlier this month, the First Minister opened the new Scottish dark sky observatory near Dalmellington, within Galloway dark sky park, which is supported by the Scottish Government. As the only gold standard dark sky park to have an observatory, it will provide a good focal point for people to capitalise on the excellent star-gazing opportunities there. Scotland’s links to space travel continue. Following in Neil Armstrong’s inspiring footsteps at NASA is space shuttle commander Bonnie Dunbar, whose grandparents were from Dundee and Banff. Dr Dunbar, I am pleased to say, took a saltire into space. She recently travelled back to Scotland by more conventional means to help to promote an event at Glenelg to celebrate the fact that there is, as Mr McGrigor mentioned, now a Glenelg on Mars. Advances in science and technology will continue to help to underpin not only our economy but our culture. We must continue to nurture them, both by attracting leading researchers from around the world and by ensuring that our young people have educations that can lead to similar pioneering careers in science and engineering here in Scotland. Today, however, the Scottish Parliament is honoured, along with countless organisations and bodies around the world, to recognise the sheer scale of Neil Armstrong’s “giant leap for mankind”. Landing on the moon was the act of a truly pioneering spirit and a triumph for all who are able to use discovery and ingenuity to find practical solutions to unexpected problems. Those same qualities help people and nations to prosper, which is why Neil Armstrong’s enduring contribution is his continuing ability to inspire young people to strive to be the very best that they can be. 13:15 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

The provision of school sports facilities is important to the Government and education authorities. Consequently, high-quality sports facilities will always feature as part of the consideration of any proposals for new schools.

First, I congratulate Anderson high school and its rector, Valerie Nicolson, on the significant achievement of a new school building. Obviously, there is always negotiation between the Government’s schools for the future programme and local authorities around such matters. However, within all the arrangements, the Government puts the interests of the sporting life of the school near the top of the agenda. That is a conversation that continues.

I am happy to get back to Neil Findlay, although I agree with your assessment, Presiding Officer.

This Government is committed to raising the literacy standards of all children and young people as part of our overall aim of improving the life chances of all. I welcome literacy initiatives such as the reading bus in Aberdeen as an excellent example of our commitment to eradicating illiteracy. We want to capitalise on such initiatives, which is why we have set up five national literacy hubs within local authorities. Those will help to provide key evidence of the crucial components of success and to identify how we can work together to share those more widely and effectively across the country. Within the literacy action plan, we have made a commitment to report to Parliament on progress on raising literacy standards by late 2013. Through the work of the standing literacy commission—which produced an interim progress report on our literacy action plan on 12 September—the Scottish survey of literacy and numeracy, and the work of the literacy hubs, I am confident that we are already making an impact on raising literacy standards for all.

I am certainly happy to consider those issues further. I am aware of the cross-curricular nature of much of what is done in the project to which Kevin Stewart referred. Education Scotland has a key role in identifying and sharing innovative practice in a systematic fashion across the country. Education Scotland is already aware of the Apardion project, which is part of Aberdeen’s reading bus project and was launched on Burns day this year. I will ask officials to consider ways in which the key findings on the project can be shared with other parts of the country.

All pupils’ mental arithmetic skills are assessed as part of on-going learning and teaching. Education Scotland supports teachers in that in a variety of ways, including through the recent publication of a professional learning resource on numeracy. Mental arithmetic skills are assessed at primary 4, primary 7 and secondary 2 as part of the Scottish survey of literacy and numeracy in order to provide a picture of national performance. The first numeracy survey report was published on 28 March this year. In the senior phase, mental arithmetic skills are assessed as part of national qualifications.

Mr Stevenson rarely disappoints. I heard members saying, “Hear, hear.” I hope that they understood what they were agreeing with. I am aware of the member’s interest in the area. I have established that the Trachtenberg system was invented during world war 2, not by a young Mr Stevenson but by a Russian Jew called Jakow Trachtenberg. I understand that it is sold as a software package and a range of books on the internet. The methods are quite detailed and, once learned, they are meant to enable learners to multiply any combination of numbers. The 16 sutras of Vedic mathematics, which were presented by a Hindu scholar and mathematician during the early part of the 20th century, do likewise. I am sure that local authorities and Education Scotland will grapple with these issues, but I will not pretend to understand them any further.

The Scottish Government published “Guidance on Education of Children Absent from School through Ill-health” in 2001 to support education authorities and their partners in fulfilling their duty to make provision other than at a school for children and young people who are unable to attend school due to ill health. The guidance includes advice on education in hospitals.

I can confirm that the stakeholder group will meet again before the end of the year. The Government takes seriously the need to ensure that it receives the group’s full report. I think that we all agree that there is a need for revised guidance on the back of the 2001 guidance. Clearly, education authorities have a duty to provide education in these circumstances, but it is in everyone’s interest that we update the guidance. As I said, with that in mind there will certainly be a meeting of the group before the end of the year.

The Government has committed £250,000 to careerwise Scotland, which is an initiative to encourage more girls to consider science, technology, engineering and mathematics careers, including in the energy sector. We will work closely with the Scottish Trades Union Congress, industry and our new science, technology, engineering and mathematics education committee to develop the way forward. In addition, Education Scotland promotes careers in the energy sector through its materials and online resources.

I know that the member has raised this extremely important issue in written questions. The Government is certainly aware of the your future in energy programme, which helps to raise young people’s awareness of career options in the energy sector and to develop the relevant skills. It is vital that we engage with young people at a very early stage in their learning to ensure that they are informed of future career and other opportunities that are available, and subjects such as mathematics, science and technology, which support pathways into energy sector careers, play a very strong role in that respect. Education authorities and schools will make their own judgments about the most appropriate teaching resources but, as I have said, the Government is certainly convinced by the member’s argument that, as with any other area of science and engineering, the energy sector should appeal as much to female as to male candidates for jobs.

As others have done, I thank Margaret Mitchell for lodging the motion that we are debating. As Nanette Milne rightly mentioned, Margaret Mitchell, as convener of the cross-party group on dyslexia, is a passionate advocate for raising public awareness and understanding about dyslexia and for ensuring that those affected receive the support that they need. I share that passion. Every pupil in Scotland should experience the broad general education that they are entitled to under curriculum for excellence. However, without appropriate support, many of our children and young people face barriers to learning that could prevent them from realising their true potential. As others have mentioned, unidentified, dyslexia can cause frustration among parents, teachers and, most important, pupils. I heard about that directly today from Ellie Gordon-Woolgar who, as others have mentioned, is a 12-year-old pupil at Edinburgh academy. She presented me with a blue dyslexia awareness ribbon that I intend to wear during dyslexia awareness week. For those who are looking for the ribbons, there are some at the door at the back of the gallery. As Neil Bibby mentioned, dyslexia brings strengths to many people, such as creativity and abstract thinking, as ably demonstrated by Ellie and her campaign. However, dyslexia also brings real challenges. As members have recognised, the ability to read and to communicate ideas in writing is critical if everyone is to access the full range of available educational opportunities. Without appropriate support, a pupil with dyslexia may fall behind their peers, lose confidence in their abilities, and potentially disengage from learning altogether. That individual tragedy can become a collective national loss. In response to Mark McDonald’s points, it is vital that we ensure that people with dyslexia who are moving on from school—to work or to further or higher education—receive the support that they need to avoid that loss of potential. Scotland has real strength in the most vital factor for modern economies—the human capital that is afforded by our greatest asset, Scotland’s people. If we are to continue to grow and develop, we need to build on that strength and create a Scotland where everyone is given the opportunity to succeed. Therefore, it is our responsibility to ensure that we have an education system that lives up to those aspirations and unlocks the true potential of our pupils. As a Parliament, through the additional support for learning legislation, we set a clear expectation that every child and young person in Scotland should have any additional support needs identified and met. Mark McDonald rightly mentioned that we have come a long way. Although we have certainly made substantial progress in provision for pupils with dyslexia, we should all acknowledge that more needs to be done. Across Scotland, 1.8 per cent of pupils receive additional support as a result of having dyslexia, but organisations such as Dyslexia Scotland estimate that the true figure could be as high as 10 per cent. As Margaret Mitchell said, we see substantial variations among local authorities in recorded support rates. For example, while 2.8 per cent of primary pupils in Inverclyde receive support for dyslexia, the equivalent figure for North Lanarkshire is 0.2 per cent. In the secondary schools of Aberdeenshire the figure is 6.1 per cent, while only 0.6 per cent of secondary pupils in North Lanarkshire receive similar support. I do not mean to single out North Lanarkshire Council; I merely point out that the picture across the country is extremely varied. Early identification of dyslexia needs to be a priority for all our schools. Those figures suggest that the needs of too many pupils in our classrooms are going unrecognised and unmet. Our statistics also indicate that pupils with dyslexia are not yet achieving parity with their peers in academic attainment or access to higher education. If we compare the outcomes last year for pupils with dyslexia with those for pupils with no additional support needs, we find that 25 per cent of those with dyslexia achieved at least five qualifications at standard grade credit level or equivalent, 13 per cent achieved at least three highers at grades A to C and 13 per cent went on to higher education, whereas the equivalent figures for those with no additional support needs were 59, 40 and 38 per cent. Being diagnosed with dyslexia does not diminish a pupil’s potential, and I will not accept any limits being placed on people’s ambitions. The example of Jackie Stewart that was mentioned earlier is instructive in that regard. I have asked Education Scotland to investigate why those disparities exist and to identify and share the good practice that I know exists across Scotland.

I cannot compel local authorities to use the excellent material in the toolkit, but I would certainly encourage them to do so, because it plays a valuable role in identifying people with dyslexia at an early age. I will visit Kyle academy in Ayr next month to see for myself how teachers and pupils there are destigmatising dyslexia through school assemblies. That is part of a wider dyslexia-friendly schools model that South Ayrshire Council has adopted to improve dyslexia provision across its schools. I will be accompanied by Education Scotland, which will begin reviewing provision in schools following the Easter break. I was delighted to launch the new and enhanced addressing dyslexia toolkit at the Scottish learning festival last month. I believe that, if they are adopted, the approaches that are described in the new online toolkit will lead to significant improvements in identification rates and attainment. I want to put an end to the days when pupils with dyslexia disengaged from learning as a result of a lack of support. There is no reason why every pupil in Scotland with dyslexia should not be identified early and receive the help and support that they need. That is their entitlement, and this Government will do everything in its power to make that a consistent reality across Scotland. In that spirit, I commend the motion to the chamber. Meeting closed at 17:39.

The 2009 school estate strategy set out a joint commitment between national and local government to create a school estate—school buildings and grounds—that allows everyone to experience the full range of experiences and outcomes in the curriculum for excellence. Architecture and Design Scotland’s schools programme provides advice and guidance to authorities and schools to help put children and young people at the heart of design and so deliver well-designed spaces inside and outside the school building. We recognise the importance of school grounds in promoting physical activity and healthy lifestyles. That is why we launched in January this year the £1 million school play project, which is led by grounds for learning. The project will develop exciting outdoor landscapes in 31 schools and support a further 20 to develop their outdoor play provision by 2015.

I very much welcome the member’s commitment to parents’ involvement. Part of my work is to phone round parent councils. An emerging theme is that parents are willing to become involved in the work that the member describes. We have a youth sports strategy that touches on those points, but the issue partly comes down to our attitude to outdoor education. I do not want to suggest that we should celebrate Scotland’s weather, but it is increasingly understood that we should understand play to involve outside play in a wider variety of weathers.

Oifigear Riaghlaidh, ged a tha mi moiteil deasbad air plana nàiseanta na Gàidhlig ùr fhosgladh an-diugh, tha mi ag aideachadh bhon a’ chiad dol a-mach nach bi planaichean a-mhàin gu leòr airson na Gàidhlig ath-nuadhachadh. Seachdain no dhà air ais, chuala mi cuideigin air Radio nan Gàidheal ag ràdh—gu searbh, gu ìre—gun robh e an dòchas gum biodh rùm gu leòr anns an taigh-tasgaidh ùr ann an Eilean Leòdhais airson a h-uile seann phlana Gàidhlig. Ann an dòigh modhail, is dòcha gun robh e a’ toirt rabhadh dhomhsa. Ach ged nach eil plana sam bith gu leòr, tha iad deatamach agus feumail. Air sgàth sin, is ann le fìor thoileachas a tha mi a’ fosgladh an deasbaid air a’ phlana cànain nàiseanta Gàidhlig 2012-15, a tha air a chruthachadh fo lagh Achd na Gàidhlig (Alba) 2005. Tha mi taingeil do Bhòrd na Gàidhlig airson an cuid ùine, saothair agus lèirsinn ann a bhith ag ullachadh a’ phlana. Tha mi cuideachd gu h-àraid taingeil do Art MacCarmaig, a bha roimhe na chàthraiche air a’ bhòrd, airson obair cho cruaidh air a’ phlana seo. Dè tha sinn ag iarraidh? Tha mise ag iarraidh dà rud gu math sònraichte. Airson a’ chiad rud, tha mi ag iarraidh gum bi an àireamh de dhaoine ann an Alba aig a bheil a’ Ghàidhlig ann an 2021 air ais aig an aon ìre ’s a bha e ann an 2001. Bhiodh sin a’ ciallachadh gun robh sinn air grèim fhaighinn air stiùir tancair-ola na Gàidhlig mu dheireadh thall. Airson an dàrna rud, tha mi ag iarraidh gum bi daoine leis a’ Ghàidhlig deònach Gàidhlig a chleachdadh nas trice agus gum bi àitichean agus suidheachaidhean ann far am bi e comasach Gàidhlig a chleachdadh. Airson seo a thachairt, tha feum air ro-innleachd airson fàs. Seo na tha againn leis a’ phlana nàiseanta. Tha am bòrd air grunn raointean-leasachaidh ainmeachadh agu seo iad: dachaigh agus tràth-bhliadhnaichean; foghlam ann an sgoiltean agus tidsearan; foghlam seach-sgoile; coimhearsnachdan; àite-obrach; ealain agus meadhanan; dualchas agus turasachd; agus corpas a’ chànain fhèin. Fhad ’s a tha sinn a’ gluasad air adhart leis a’ phlana, bheir e cothrom dhuinn ar dealas Gàidhlig bhon mhanifesto a chomharrachadh. Ach tha am plana ag ràdh rudeigin tòrr nas bunaitiche na sin. Mar a bhios fios agaibh, bha rannsachadh air a dhèanamh o chionn ghoirid mu choimhearsnachd Shiaboist ann an Leòdhas. Chan eil adhbhar sam bith dhuinn creidsinn nach eil suidheachadh Siaboist diofraichte bho bhaile sam bith eile air a’ Ghàidhealtachd. Anns an fharsaingeachd, tha an rannsachadh ag innse gu bheil an t-àm againn dùsgadh. Mar eisimpleir, tha a’ mhòr chuid de choimhearsnachd Shiaboist taiceil don Ghàidhlig—agus tha sin math—ach fhuair an rannsachadh a-mach gun robh cuid a dhaoine den bheachd nach robh feum ann an cuid Gàidhlig a chleachdadh airson a bhith taiceil dhan Ghàidhlig. Tha deagh eisimpleir an seo dha na coimhearsnachdan eile far a bheil Gàidhlig làidir—cleachd i no caill i. Na bithibh a’ fèitheamh timcheall airson cuideigin eile Gàidhlig a shàbhladh. Agus don Riaghaltas agus buidheanan Gàidhlig, tha seo a’ dèanamh soilleir cho deatamach ’s tha e gu bheil smachd aig coimhearsnachdan fhèin mar a bu chòir cànain a leasachadh. Air sàillibh seo, bha mi cho toilichte a bhith an sàs ann am plana Gàidhlig Shiaboist. Is e seo a’ chiad plana den t-seòrsa, agus tha mi air leth toilichte gun tug coimhearsnachd ceum cho sònraichte mar seo. Feumar a-nis dèanamh cinnteach gu bheil coimhearsnachdan eile mothachail air a’ phàirt chudromach a tha aca a thaobh dèanamh cinnteach gum bi a’ Ghàidhlig seasmhach agus gu bheil na goireasan aca seo a dhèanamh. Following is the simultaneous interpretation: Although I am extremely proud to open the debate on the “National Gaelic Language Plan 2012-17”, I recognise from the outset that plans alone will not revitalise the language. A couple of weeks ago, I heard someone say on Radio nan Gàidheal—somewhat bitterly—that he hoped that there would be plenty of space in the new museum in Lewis for every old Gaelic plan that has been produced. In a polite way, perhaps that was a warning to me. Although no single plan will ever be enough, a plan is still useful and important. For that reason, I am extremely pleased to be opening the debate on the national plan, which has been produced in line with the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005. I would like to thank Bòrd na Gàidhlig for the benefit of its time, energy and insight in preparing it. In particular, I would like to pass on my thanks to Arthur Cormack, the former chair of the board, for his work in the plan’s preparation. What do we want? As many members know, I would like two things in particular. First, I would like the number of people who have Gaelic in Scotland in 2021 to be back at the 2001 level. Secondly, I would like to see people with Gaelic being prepared and willing to use the language more often, and for there to be opportunities and places for them to do so. The only way to achieve any of that is to have an unapologetic strategy for growth. The national plan is such a strategy. The board has listed a number of development areas, which are grouped under the headings: “Home & Early Years”; “Education: Schools & Teachers”; “Education: Post-school Education”; “Communities”; “Workplace”; “Arts & Media”; “Heritage & Tourism”; and “Corpus” development. As we make progress with the plan, it will enable us to demonstrate commitment to our Gaelic manifesto commitments. In addition, the priorities in the plan will contribute to other manifesto commitments in areas such as language learning, Scottish studies, early years education and literacy. The plan also says something more fundamental. As many members are aware, there was a recent study into Gaelic in the community of Shawbost in Lewis. I have no reason to believe that the picture in Shawbost is much different from that in other areas of the traditional Gàidhealtachd. Bluntly, the survey is a wake-up call. The community was broadly highly in favour of Gaelic, but a proportion of the Gaelic speakers who were surveyed believed that it was possible to be strongly in favour of Gaelic while seeing no need to speak Gaelic very much. That is a good example to communities where Gaelic is strong: use it or lose it, and do not wait for others to save the language. For the Government and Gaelic bodies, the study highlights the importance of giving communities control over how the language should be developed. That is why I was pleased to be involved in the launch of Shawbost’s Gaelic language plan. It is the first plan of its type to be published and I am very pleased to see the community take such a positive step. We must ensure that other communities see their important role in the survival of the language.

Tha mi a’ tuigsinn gun robh rudeigin a’ tachairt dìreach an-dè airson a bhith ga chuimhneachadh, agus tha mi gu math taiceil dhan a h-uile oidhirp a tha ann ann an Alba air fad sin a dhèanamh. Bha mise aig rudeigin anns an sgìre agam a’ cuimhneachadh bhàrd na sgìre—na Mic Mhuirich—agus tha an aon seòrsa leasain ann an sin cuideachd. Air sàilleibh sin agus rudan eile, tha mi toilichte a bhith an sàs ann am pròiseactan den t-seòrsa sin. Feumaidh sinn a-nis a bhith a’ dèanamh cinnteach gu bheil coimhearsnachdan mothachail mu dheidhinn nan rudan seo. Bhon a thàinig sinn do Riaghaltas ann an 2007, tha sinn air ar taic do ar cànan a dhearbhadh. Mar eisimpleir, chuir sinn stad air gearraidhean airson cànain dùthchasach aig àm an sgrùdaidh air cosgaisean, a’ sealltainn gu bheil comas aig ar cànan piseach a chur ris an eaconamaidh ann an iomadh dòigh, a’ gabhail a-steach craoladh, cosnadh agus turasachd. Tro stòras calpa nan sgoiltean Gàidhlig, tha sinn air sgoiltean agus aonadan Gàidhlig a leasachadh air feadh Alba. Tha sinn a-nis ag obair air stiùireadh ùr airson foghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig agus tha mi an dòchas gum bi seo deiseil san fhoghar 2013. Tha Gàidhlig ri faicinn ’s ga cluinntinn anns gach ceàrnaidh de dh’Alba. Tha an obair shoirbheachail MG ALBA agus BBC ALBA air a bhith uabhasach cudromach a dh’ionnsaigh seo. Mar as àbhaist, tha Sabhal Mòr Ostaig agus Fèisean nan Gàidheal agus am mòd ag obair air iomairtean ùr a bhios a’ neartachadh a’ chànan. Am bliadhna, bha fiù ’s Disney a’ cur ri luach agus inbhe na Gàidhlig leis an fiolm ùr “Brave”. Ach, leis a seo, tha mi mothachail gu bheil dùbhlain shònraichte air thoiseach oirnn. Tha oifigear-trusaidh luchd-teagaisg Gàidhlig a-nis ag obair aig a’ bhòrd, agus mar sin tha barrachd tidsearan ùr againn am bliadhna na bha againn riamh ron seo. Le iarrtas foghlam Gàidhlig a’ sior-fhàs, tha feum ann airson tuilleadh tidsearan a tharraing agus a chumail ann am foghlam Gàidhlig cho mòr ’s a bha e riamh. Tha sinn mothachail air na trioblaidean an lùib seo a dhèanamh agus is ann air sàillibh seo a tha am bòrd air buidheann-obrach a stèidheachadh airson coimhead air a’ chùspair seo. Dhà-riribh, tha làn fhios agam gu bheil duilgheadasan ann le cuid de dh’ùghdarrasan ionadail a tha a’ cleachdadh nan tidsearan a tha aca airson Gàidhlig a-mhàin airson teagasg sa Bheurla, agus feumar seo a cheartachadh sa bhad. Ged a tha e sgoinneil gu bheil sgoiltean Gàidhlig stèidhichte ann an Glaschu, Dùn Èideann, Inbhir Nis, Port Rìgh agus an Gearasdan, tha sinn ag aideachadh gum feum adhartas tachairt ann an àrd-sgoiltean cuideachd. Tha sinn mothachail gu bheil àitichean timcheall na dùthcha le deagh ùidh agus iarrtas sgoiltean Gàidhlig a bhrosnachadh, ann an Òban, Obar Dheathain, Peairt, Condobhrait agus eile. Tha e deatamach nach e pàrantan a-mhàin a bhios a’ toirt seo air adhart agus gum bi sinn a’ soilleireachadh do dh’ùghdarrasan ionadail na buannachdan an lùib a’ chànain. Cuideachd, ann am mòran sgoiltean beaga air feadh na Ghàidhealtachd agus anns na h-eileanan, tha aonadan Gàidhlig a’ fàs. Ma tha a’ chuid as motha de phàrantan ga iarraidh, is e an ath cheum sgoil Ghàidhlig a stèidheachadh dhaibh. Tha mise deiseil agus deònach airson còmhradh leis na comhairlean agus coimhearsnachdan sin, agus tha mi an dòchas gum bi rudeigin a’ tachairt leis a seo air feadh na dùthcha. Thàinig am Pàrtaidh Nàiseanta don Riaghaltas le dealas iarrtas airson foghlam meadhan na Gàidhlig a chur dhan lagh. Ged a tha sinn fhathast aig ìre gu math tràth leis a seo, tha mi an dòchas gun teid seo tron Phàrlamaid ann an 2014. Gu dearbh, chan eil e uile mu dheidhinn sgoiltean idir. Feumar dèanamh cinnteach gum bi Gàidhlig air a bruidhinn agus a cleachdadh gu cunbhallach gach latha anns an latha an-diugh. Tha mi den bheachd gu bheil planaichean Gàidhlig air leth cudromach ma tha sinn a’ dol a lìbhrigeadh seo. Bu mhath leum taing a thoirt seachd do gach buidheann poblach a tha air plana Gàidhlig ullachadh. Is dòcha gu bheil seo cunnartach do mhinistear a ràdh, ach tha mi a’ toirt cuireadh an-diugh do choimhearsnachdan Gàidhlig a bhith radaigeach anns na rudan a tha iad ag iarraidh agus ag ràdh. Tha mise làn dòchais airson na Gàidhlig, ach cho fad ’s a tha mi ag obair air planaichean tha mi a’ tuigsinn nach eil planaichean ag obair no a’ soirbheachadh fa-leth no nan aonar. Tha pìos bàrdachd le Maoileas Caimpbeul a’ tighinn a steach orm. Tha e ag innse sgeul mu oilthigh nam boiteagan far an robh an roinn Ceilteis aca a’ deasbad nàdur de ghnìomhairean mi-riaghaltaich fad an latha. Mar a thuirt am bard “thàinig lòn dubh an seo”. Oifigear Riaghlaidh, tha mi a’ tighinn do cho-dhùnadh. Tha plana làidir agus freagarrach againn, ach chan eil an obair againn airson na Gàidhlig seachad an-diugh—chan eil ann ach toiseach tòiseachaidh. Tha mi a’ cur mo thaic ris a’ ghluasad seo. Following is the simultaneous interpretation: I recognise that an event took place yesterday to remember Rob Donn. I am very supportive of every effort that is taking place in Scotland. In my own area of the country, there was an event in remembrance of the MacMhuirich bards and there is a lesson for us there. I am happy to be involved in such projects. We must ensure that we are in clear support of the language and, since we came to government in 2007, we have proved that we are. We stopped the cuts to indigenous language budgets and showed that languages can improve the economy through such things as broadcasting and tourism. Through the Gaelic schools capital fund we have been able to support the development of new schools and units while helping with improvements at other schools. We are working on the development of new guidance for Gaelic-medium education, which I hope will be available in the autumn of 2013. We now have better support for Gaelic learning at all ages. Gaelic is more visible in Scotland through MG Alba and BBC Alba. Sabhal Mòr Ostaig and Fèisean nan Gaidheal continue to go from strength to strength with new initiatives. The Mod now has a very impressive number of young people attending and participating. Even Disney has added to the status and prestige of Gaelic with the inclusion of the language in their new animated production “Brave”. With those successes come particular challenges. We have a designated Gaelic teacher recruitment officer at the board, and that has helped us realise the highest number of Gaelic teachers qualifying in a single year. However, we clearly require more teachers to meet growing parental demand. We are aware of the difficulties in recruiting and retaining individuals in Gaelic-medium education, which is why the board has established a short-term working group to look into those challenges. I am aware that in some local authorities Gaelic probationers who have been allocated specifically to deliver Gaelic-medium education are being used in the English stream. That needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency. It is very good to have Gaelic schools in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Inverness, Portree and Fort William, but we also need to ensure that progression is available to secondary school pupils. We know that other communities, such as Oban, Aberdeen, Perth, Condorrat and many others, have shown great interest in encouraging the development of Gaelic schools. It is essential that that should not just be parent led and that we take steps to encourage local authorities to see the benefits of the language and to provide those learning opportunities. There are many examples of small schools throughout the Highlands and Islands with growing Gaelic units. If it is the wish of the majority of parents, the next step is to establish a Gaelic school for them. I am ready and willing to discuss that with councils and those communities. I hope that something will happen with regard to that throughout the land. The SNP came to power with a commitment to look at legislation to deliver a parental right to Gaelic-medium education. We are at the early stages of the process but I hope that we will see a bill taken through Parliament in 2014. Of course, it is not all about schools. We need to ensure the vitality and acceptability of the language in everyday life. The Gaelic language plans deliver in that regard and must be supported. I commend the public bodies that have produced plans. Gaelic language plans should be embraced, not feared. They need to be seen not as a burden or something that attracts additional cost but as a better use of resource. The aim is clear: to reverse the fortunes of Gaelic in Scotland. That is not something that the Scottish Government or Bòrd na Gàidhlig can achieve by itself. I am full of hope for the future of Gaelic but I fully understand that plans alone will not be enough to make the difference. A piece of poetry from Maoileas Campbell springs to mind. He tells a story of a university in which worms in the Celtic department debated the nature of irregular verbs all day. As the bard said: “a black bird came here”. We have a strong and appropriate plan, but the work for Gaelic is not done. This is merely a start. I commend the motion to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the principal and urgent need of Gaelic in Scotland is to see an increase in the number of people learning, speaking and using the Gaelic language; notes that the development areas and strategic priorities contained in the National Gaelic Language Plan have been identified and selected by Bòrd na Gàidhlig for the purpose of securing this aim, and further agrees that this plan should, therefore, be regarded as a strategy for growth that will encourage the Gaelic communities of Scotland to promote the language and speak it in more settings.

Tapadh leibh, Oifigear Riaghlaidh. Chan eil fhios agam dè a’ Ghàidhlig a tha air “filibuster” ach nì mi mo dhìcheall. Anns an samhradh seo fhèin, bha mi air a’ phlèana eadar Steòrnabhagh agus Glaschu air feasgar ciùin soilleir—bha aon feasgar ciùin soilleir ann am bliadhna-sa—agus bha am plèana thairis air taobh an iar na h-Alba. Bha taobh an iar na h-Alba air fad ri fhaicinn. Tha cuimhne agam gun tàinig e a-steach orm nach robh ann ach 100 bliadhna bhon a bhiodh a’ mhòr-chuid de dhaoine anns a’ chuid as motha de na sgìrean fon a’ phlèana agam a’ bruidhinn anns a’ Ghàidhlig, anns na h-Eileanan an Iar, an Eilean Sgìtheanach, Muile, Ìle, Colla, Tiriodh, Rois. Bha a’ Ghàidhlig aig cha mhòr a h-uile duine anns na sgìrean sin agus aig a’ chuid mhòr cho fada a-steach air an dùthaich ri Loch Abair, Loch Nis, Cataibh, Bràigh Mharr agus sìos tro Earra-Ghàidheal gu Cinn Tìre agus faisg air Dùn Omhain eadhon. Fiù ’s ann an Glaschu fhèin, bha na mìltean mòra de Ghàidheil ann bho Innse Gall agus, mar a chuala sinn bho Uisdean Henry, bho Dhùn nan Gall cuideachd. Dè thachair? Uill, mar a chuala sinn, tha sin furasta a ràdh. Bha a h-uile pàirt den stàit gu follaiseach agus gu tur an aghaidh na Gàidhlig, agus gu sònraichte anns na sgoiltean, far an robh e air a dhèanamh gu math soilleir dhan chloinn nach cuireadh a’ Ghàidhlig biadh air a’ bhòrd. Tha an deasbad seo ag innse, tha mi an dòchas, nach eil Alba—no an luchd-poilitigs ann an Alba—a’ smaoineachadh mar seo anns an latha an-diugh. Agus, bho na rudan a thuirt na buill, bha sin furasta fhaicinn agus a thuigsinn. Aig an aon àm, tha mi an dòchas gu bheil an deasbad ag innse nach eil sinn den bheachd gu bheil a h-uile rud ceart agus dòigheil mu staid na Gàidhlig. Tha tòrr againn ri dhèanamh fhathast. Tha misneachd a dhìth air cuid de dhaoine aig a bheil a’ Ghàidhlig gus Gàidhlig a chleachdadh. Tha tidsearan a dhìth airson cumail suas leis an iarrtas a tha ann am-measg phàrantan airson foghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig. Rinn tòrr bhuill puingean gu math feumail mu dheidhinn nan cuspairean sin. Mar eisimpleir, rinn Annabel Goldie puingean gu math feumail mu dheidhinn craoladh, eachdraidh agus tidsearan. Bha mi dìreach an-diugh aig cùrsa sreap a tha ann airson tidsearan a tha ag obair air na sgilean Gàidhlig aca, agus tha an Riaghaltas a’ bruidhinn ris na colaistean cuideachd mu dheidhinn cùrsaichean ùra a stèidheachadh airson oileanaich a tha a’ dol a-steach airson a bhith a’ teagasg tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig. Rinn Uisdean Henry puingean gu math feumail cuideachd mu dheidhinn na buile mhaith a tha ann bho fhoghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig agus an ceangal a tha ann eadar a’ Ghàidhlig agus an eaconamaidh. Bha Dàibhidh MacThòmais a’ bruidhinn mu dheidhinn Alba mar dhùthaich trì-chànanach agus thuirt e cuideachd gu bheil a’ Ghàidhlig a’ dèanamh feum dhut nad sheann aois. Chì sinn dè thachras—uill, seansa gum bi daoine eile a’ faicinn dè thachras ma tha a’ Ghàidhlig a’ dèanamh feum sam bith dhan inntinn ann an dòigh mhath ann an seann aois. Thuirt Niall Bibby gu bheil easan a’coimhead air adhart ris a’ Mhòd ann am Pàislig. Tha mise a’ coimhead air adhart cuideachd; bidh an còisir againn a’ seinn ann. Rinn Niall Bibby puingean cudromach mu dheidhinn an fheum a tha ann airson fiosrachadh ciamar a bhios an Riaghaltas a’ cur am plana ri chèile. Nochdaidh sin, ach tha mi a’ smaoineachadh gum bi a h-uile duine ag aontachadh gu bheil feum ann airson clachan-mìle air an rathad eadar far a bheil sinn an-dràsta agus a’ bhliadhna 2021, far a bheil amas mòr againn airson na h-àireamhan a bhios a’ bruidhinn a’ chànain. Rinn Iain Ó Finnaí puingean mun teaghlach aige fhèin, ciamar a bha a’ Ghàidhlig làidir agus ciamar a tha i a-nis, leis a’ ghinealach òg, làidir anns an teaghlach aige fhèin. Bha Lewis Dòmhnallach a’ bruidhinn mu dheidhinn an teaghlaich aige fhèin cuideachd. Is e teaghalch gu math foghlamaichte a tha ann; is ann às an teaghlach aigesan a thàinig am bàrdachd aig Raibeart Burns tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig. Cuideachd, rinn e puing gu math “inventive”, mar a chanas iad, mu dheidinn a’ cheangail eadar a’ Ghàidhlig agus an tairgse airson CalMac. Seo puing mhath mu dheidhinn cho cudromach ’s a tha a’ Ghàidhlig. Following is the simultaneous interpretation: Thank you Presiding Officer—I do not know what the Gaelic is for “filibuster”, but I will do my best. This summer, I was on the plane between Stornoway and Glasgow on a lovely evening. The plane was flying over the west coast of Scotland—all the coast could be seen—and it occurred to me that it was only 100 years since the majority of people in the areas that the plane was flying over could speak Gaelic, including the Western Isles, Skye, Mull, Islay, Coll, Tiree and Ross-shire, and that it extended to the majority of people in mainland areas, including Lochaber, Inverness, Sutherland, and Braemar, down into Argyll and Kintyre and near Dunoon. Even in Glasgow there were thousands of Gaels from the Outer Hebrides, and some from Donegal, too. So what happened? As we heard today, it is easy to see that every part of the state was obviously against Gaelic—especially the schools, where it was made clear to the children that speaking Gaelic never put food on the table. The people of Scotland and Scottish politicians do not think that nowadays, as is clear from what members have said today. However, the debate tells us at the same time that not everything is okay or as it should be with Gaelic, and that there is a lot yet to be done. People require confidence to use the language and we require teachers to keep up with the demand among parents for Gaelic-medium education. Many points were made on those subjects; for example, Annabel Goldie made useful points about broadcasting, history and teachers. I attended a course, which is on-going, for teachers who are working on their Gaelic skills. The Government is looking at the colleges and is establishing new courses for students who wish to teach in Gaelic. Hugh Henry made useful points about education in Gaelic and the link between Gaelic and the economy. Dave Thompson spoke about Scotland as being a tri-lingual country and about how Gaelic helps people in their old age. There is a chance that other people will look at what happens to see whether Gaelic is of any use for the mind in old age. Neil Bibby said that he is looking forward to the Royal National Mod in Paisley. I am looking forward to that, too, because our choir will be singing there. He referred to important points about the need for information and how the Government will put the plan together. The plan will appear, but I think that everyone will agree that there is a need for milestones on the road between where we are now and 2021; we have huge ambition on increasing the number of Gaelic speakers by then. John Finnie made a point about how Gaelic is strong in his family’s younger generation and Lewis Macdonald talked about his family, too. His is a very educated family; indeed, the translation of Robert Burn’s poetry came from his family. He also made inventive points about Gaelic in relation to operating the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services and how important Gaelic is to CalMac.

Tha mi ag aontachadh leis a sin. Cuideachd, bha puingean eile sa deasbad agus, ma thà ùine gu leòr agam, tillidh mi dha na buill sin. Tha mi an dòchas gu bheil an deasbad feumail airson tòrr adhbharan, ach tha mi airson mo thaing a thoirt dhan a h-uile duine a tha air pàirt a ghabhail ann—tron fheasgar tha mi air èisteachd gu furachail ris na puingean a thog buill eile eadar na pàrtaidhean agus thairis air na pàrtaidhean gu lèir. Anns an spiorad sin, tha mi glè dheònach taic a thoirt dhan atharrachadh air a’ ghluasad bho na Tòraidhean. Mar a bha Màiri Scanlon ag ràdh, tha e cudromach gu bheil sinn a’ cumail sùil air ciamar a tha na poileasaidhean seo ag obrachadh a-mach. Rinn Màiri Scanlon cuideachd puingean inntinneach mu dheidhinn sgoiltean samhraidh agus ciamar a tha iadsan ag obair ann an Èirinn. Ann am fasan, tha rud no dhà den aon seòrsa a’ tachairt ann an Alba. Chunnaic mi rudeigin den aon seòrsa a’ tachairt aig Fèisean nan Gàidheal ann an Carlabhagh anns an sgìre agam fhèin. Mar a tha an t-atharrachadh air a’ ghluasad ag innse, tha e feumail dha-rìribh gu bheil sinn a’ faighneachd fad na tìde dè na poileasaidhean a tha ag obair agus dè na poileasaidhean a tha gun fheum. Tha e cudromach nach eil poileasaidh na Gàidhlig dìreach a’ ciallachadh gu bheil sinn ag ràdh ruinn fhèin, “Is math a rinn thu nach eil a’ Ghàidhlig marbh.” Feumaidh amas pragtaigeach a bhith againn mu na tha sinn airson a dhèanamh leis a’ Ghàidhlig. Tha an t-amas sin againn. Tha liosta de phrìomachasan Gàidhlig anns a’ phlana far a bheil sinn an an dùil barrachd adhartais fhaicinn. Gun teagamh, is e an fhìrinn gun deach mòran a choileanadh mar-thà ann an saoghal na Gàidhlig ach gu bheil tòrr fhathast ri dhèanamh. Tha e deatamach gu bheil gach neach, coimhearsnachd, ùghdarras agus buidheann ann an Alba a’ tuigsinn gu bheil àite aca anns an obair seo agus gum faodadh na poileasaidhean agus prògraman aca a chur gu mòr ri suidheachadh na Gàidhlig san àm ri teachd. Bha ball no dhà eile a’ bruidhinn anns an deasbad agus canaidh mi rudeigin mun deidhinn. Bha mi toilichte a chluinntinn Sìne Urchadan is i a’ bruidhinn mu dè cho cudromach ’s a tha foghlam anns na bliadhnaichean aig toiseach na sgoile no ron sgoil. Bha sin a’ tighinn a-steach orm. Following is the simultaneous interpretation: I agree with that. Other points have been made in the debate, which I will come to if I have enough time. I hope that the debate is useful for many reasons. I would like to thank everyone who has taken part in it—I have listened with great interest to points that my colleagues have made. In cross-party spirit, I am very happy to accept Mary Scanlon’s amendment. As she said, it is important that we keep an eye on how policies work out. Mary Scanlon also made some interesting points about summer schools and how they work in Ireland. There are one or two things like that happening in Scotland. I saw something similar happening at Fèisean nan Gàidheal in Carloway in my consituency. It is true that we are looking at the policies that are working and those that are not and it is important that the Gaelic policy does not involve just saying to ourselves, “Well done—Gaelic is not dead.” We need to have practical aims for what we will do with Gaelic. We have such aims. We must give priority to Gaelic in the plan and we would like to see more progress being made. It is true that much has already been achieved, but there is a lot still to be done. It is essential that individuals, communities, Scottish local authorities and other bodies recognise that they have a role to play, and that their policies and programmes can have a significant effect in shaping the future of Gaelic. I would like to mention one or two other members who spoke in the debate. I was happy to hear Jean Urquhart talk about how important pre-school education is.

Sure.

Uill, mar a thuirt mi, tha an Riaghaltas seo air am buidseat airson na Gàidhlig a dhìon agus airgead a chur a-steach a Ghlaschu cuideachd. Bha mi toilichte a cluinntinn mu dheidhinn Maxwell Drive ann an òraid a’ bhuill, oir bha mise a’ fuireach ann am Maxwell Drive nuair a bha mi nam oileanach agus canaidh mi gun robh Urdu agus a’ Ghàidhlig air am bruidhinn air an aon sràid. Tha leasan ann an sin airson a h-uile duine. Cuideachd, tha fhios agam gu bheil còmhradh a’ dol eadarainn mu dheidhinn cànanan coimhearsnachd ann an Glaschu agus dè cho cudromach ’s a tha e gu bheil cothroman anns na sgoiltean cànanan eile ionnsachadh cuideachd. Tha mi ag ràdh seo a-rithist ris a’ ghinealach òg aig a bheil a’ Ghàidhlig: bithibh radaigeach. Na bithibh a’ feitheamh air Bòrd na Gàidhlig no ormsa, ged a bhios sinn gur cuideachadh. Bithibh làn misneachd, bithibh moiteil gu bheil a’ Ghàidhlig agaibh agus gu duine sam bith a tha a’ faighneachd fhathast carson a tha mise agus daoine eile a’ bruidhinn anns a’ Ghàidhlig no carson a tha sinn a’ bodraigeadh Gàidhlig ionnsachadh, chan eil ach aon fhreagairt agam: carson nach biodh? Chan eil ach dusan gnìomhaire mì-riaghailteach cumanta ri ionnsachadh anns a’ Ghàidhlig. Agus gu duine sam bith a bhios a’ faighneachd carson a tha mi a’ cleachdadh na Gàidhlig an seo an-diugh anns a’ Phàrlamaid, canaidh mi seo: dìreach anns an aon dòigh nach eil cù ga thabhasnn airson na Nollaig a-mhàin, chan eil cànan sam bith ann airson a’ mhòid no airson Bòrd na Gàidhlig no airson planaichean Gàidhlig. Tha cànanan ann airson cleachdadh agus bruidhinn, agus ma tha a’ Ghàidhlig agaibh, bruidhinnibh i. Following is the simultaneous interpretation: As I said, this Government has a budget for Gaelic, which it has protected. Money has gone to Glasgow. I was happy to hear the member mention Maxwell Drive. I used to live on Maxwell Drive when I was a student, and I can say that Urdu and Gaelic were spoken on the same street. There is a lesson there for everyone. I know that conversation is going on between the communities in Glasgow and I know how important it is that schools provide the opportunity for children to learn other languages. I have a message for the young generation who have Gaelic, which is that they should be radical. They should not wait for Bòrd na Gàidhlig or for me, although we will help them. They should be full of confidence and proud that they have Gaelic. To anyone who asks why I or other people speak Gaelic and why we bother to learn it, there is only one answer: “Why wouldn’t we?” There are only 12 irregular rules to learn in Gaelic. To anyone who asks why I am using Gaelic in Parliament today, I say that, just as a dog is not just for Christmas, the Gaelic language is not just for the Mòd, Bòrd na Gàidhlig and Gaelic plans. The language is there to be spoken. If you have the language, speak it.

Where the child of an immigrant family remains legitimately in Scotland after their parents or carers have been removed on grounds of immigration status, local authorities are required by parts I and II of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in their area who are in need, and to offer necessary support to their families. That can include a range of interventions, which include formally looking after a child if that is appropriate. The Scottish Government encourages public authorities to follow the getting it right for every child approach to address the needs of the child in question, and to take action through co-ordinated planning and reviewing progress. Our proposals for the children and young people bill seek to strengthen that approach. In order to support those who are seeking asylum or who have been granted refugee status, we are providing funding of £1.65 million from 2012 to 2015 to the Scottish Refugee Council in order to provide information and support.

Yes. Local authorities have a responsibility in that area, but the Scottish Government works with them to ensure that such support is provided. The Government provides support to a number of agencies that work in that area, such as bridging the gap, the greater Pollok integration network, Maryhill citizens advice bureau, the Maryhill integration network and others. We are also providing more than £800,000-worth of support between 2012 and 2015 to those organisations that work in schools and elsewhere.

I am grateful to Sarah Boyack for raising the matter in Parliament and for the considered contributions of members to the debate—not least those of David McLetchie and Jenny Marra, to name but two. We have a long tradition in Scotland of aiming to provide excellent education. That excellence is in abundance at the postgraduate end of the scale. It has been a policy of the Scottish Government to support as many people as we can in that regard. Education plays a huge part in underpinning Scotland’s international competitiveness, particularly when we can prioritise postgraduate study around some of the key subjects that drive our economy and social improvements, such as life sciences, engineering and teaching. Without minimising the financial pressure that clearly exists for many students, it is true to say that Scotland is the only Administration in these islands to provide support across a comprehensive list of postgraduate disciplines, including law, which is the subject that we are debating today. This year, the postgraduate students allowances scheme will support around 5,000 students studying more than 450 postgraduate subjects at 18 institutions. However, that was not always the case. Support for law and other subjects has evolved over a number of years and prior to the changes that we introduced two years ago, after consultation with representatives of the universities and the Law Society, the system supported only about 1,800 postgraduate students in Scotland with living and fee costs. To broaden that out—I remind members that the total number of students in higher education in Scotland is nearly 300,000—the Government removed the living costs element and used the money to support more students with their fees. That raised the number that we could help to around 2,700. Support was still provided on a discretionary basis, however, and this year we developed the arrangements such that Scotland-domiciled and European Union students who follow a designated course of study in 2012-13 can apply for a non-means-tested loan of up to £3,400, which can be put towards the cost of their tuition fees. We estimate that, with the improved arrangements, the number of students who benefit from our postgraduate support arrangements will increase to around 5,000. Approximately 700 of those students will be law students. There is a need for the legal profession to give more thought to how it supports people who want to enter the profession, as Liam McArthur and other members said. The Government is not promoting bigger numbers at the expense of wider access, as is suggested in the motion. Widening access is a priority for the Government. We committed in our manifesto to introducing statutory agreements that would force the pace of change, and that commitment will be taken forward in the post-16 bill that we plan to introduce later in this parliamentary session. In relation to widening access, significant resources are required, so we must prioritise. Our priority is to get as many students as possible through a first degree at undergraduate level. That remains our objective, despite the budgetary pressures to which Rod Campbell and other members referred.

The Government wants to keep up a dialogue with students and the profession on that. However, it must be acknowledged that in Scotland we have what is widely recognised—by the National Union of Students and others—as the best package of student support in the UK. In practice, that means that students finish their first degrees with, on average, less than half the level of debt that is built up by students who study in England. Completion of a first degree with a relatively low amount of debt is therefore the starting point for our postgraduates. Universities are autonomous bodies, which is relevant in the context of Lewis Macdonald’s interesting suggestions about reforming the shape of law degrees. In Scotland we are funding 400 more undergraduate places this year, when acceptances at English universities have fallen by nearly 50,000 as a direct result of the UK Government’s policy and its betrayal of a generation of students through the introduction of fees.

No. I am concluding. Budgetary realities mean that we are not able to provide living costs support to postgraduates on top of the fee support and teaching grant support that we provide. After postgraduate students have met their living costs, they will still have less debt than many graduates elsewhere in the UK. That is the reality of how we support higher education in Scotland—it is not to minimise the financial pressures on individual students. I thank Ms Boyack for raising this important issue in the Parliament. The dialogue with the student body and the profession will continue. 13:28 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

Through curriculum for excellence, all children and young people are entitled to a broad general education from the early years through to secondary 3, including the music experiences and outcomes that are outlined in the expressive arts curriculum area. The Scottish Government expects all our children and young people to have access to music at school and to have the opportunity to learn and explore the subject. Under the Education (Scotland) Act 1980, education authorities have a duty to secure adequate and efficient provision of school education in their areas and to make that available free of charge. That includes music lessons provided as part of that school education. The Scottish Government has written to all local authorities to ascertain the current position on charging for all forms of music tuition. We will work with education authorities to ensure that there is equitable access to music provision and that it is consistent with statute.

I warmly agree with the member’s statement that music is there for fun and to develop the whole learning experience and self-confidence of the young person concerned. It is important to draw a slight distinction between music teaching as part of school education and music tuition on top of that. Nonetheless, since July the Government has been in touch with local authorities and has begun a process on the matter, as we are aware that there should be a more level playing field than there is and that there is a variety of practices relating to fees for tuition that is provided over and above the lessons that are provided in school as part of the school curriculum.

I stress again that we may be talking at cross-purposes at points in the debate. There is tuition in an instrument outwith the normal school curriculum, and there are music lessons in school. I cannot agree with the statement that very few children get music in school. The curriculum for excellence puts music at the centre of the school experience. That said, the Government is keen to remind local authorities what their duties and limitations are when it comes to making charges for instrumental tuition over and above that.

We will certainly seek information from Highland Council and other councils to ascertain any trends in music uptake and to consider whether that is connected to any charges for music tuition that are levied by those authorities. I note that the charges in Highland Council were increased in 2010 following a public consultation that recognised that that was preferable to reducing the number of instructors. That said, my previous point stands: music should be at the heart of every child’s educational experience.

As I mentioned, the Government has been taking an interest in this issue since July. It should be said that a variety of charges are levied throughout the country. In Aberdeen, charges are as high as £340 for music instrument tuition. It is an issue that the Government wants to look at. Incidentally, I will be interested to see the deliberations of the Education and Culture Committee, whose meeting on the subject has just ended and which has taken a great interest in it.

Ministers and Government officials meet local authorities on a regular basis to discuss a range of issues related to the school estate.

I expect to make an announcement by the end of the month, although the member will appreciate that I am unable to speak about specific projects or applications at this stage.

I expect to be able to announce which schools have been successful in securing funding in the third and final phase of the Scotland’s schools for the future programme by the end of September 2012.

Although, as the member is aware, these are matters for Glasgow City Council, I certainly commend him for his diligence in pursuing the council on these issues.

The member will appreciate that, as I have said previously, I cannot discuss individual applications from individual local authorities here. However, I can tell him that every application is looked at extremely carefully on its merits.

The member will be aware that the Government has a manifesto commitment to halve the number of pupils in crumbling schools, which we are well on the way to achieving. In 2007, we had some 60 per cent of pupils in good-quality school buildings; by 2010 that figure had risen to 82 per cent. We continue to improve the situation and we are confident that we will meet that manifesto commitment nationally.

The Scottish Government does not routinely produce that information for standard grade 7 only. The recent Scottish Qualifications Authority results—pre-appeals—show an increase in the pass rates at grades 1 to 6. There is also an increase in those achieving grades 1 to 3. Following the valuable work of the headteacher-led attainment group, the Scottish Government is working with partners to raise the attainment of all learners and to address the long-standing link between deprivation and attainment.

I am very happy indeed to congratulate the staff and pupils on their very considerable achievement, which has been brought to my notice by the member and by others. I will be happy to visit the school as part of my on-going programme of school visits. I understand that Education Scotland will be conducting a follow-up inspection next month, and I look forward to reading the results of its findings.

Opportunities to learn Scotland’s languages are being promoted and strengthened in collaboration with Education Scotland, Bòrd na Gàidhlig, Stòrlann Nàiseanta na Gàidhlig, the Association for Scottish Literary Studies, the Scots Language Centre, Scottish Language Dictionaries and other partners. A Scottish literature website is being developed by Education Scotland in partnership with the University of Glasgow. A network of co-ordinators will support professional learning and sharing of practice and will help to build confidence in the use of Scotland’s languages. Progress is also being made on a learning about Scotland co-ordinators network, which will promote learning and teaching about Scotland, with a key explicit role of promoting the Scots and Gaelic languages. Recommendations on Scottish texts in the new national qualifications in English have been implemented and progress is being made on the development of an award in Scottish studies.

I confirm that we want more opportunities for those in our schools to learn, and learn about, BSL and that we recognise not only its value as a means of communication but its cultural and social value.

Will Annabel Goldie give way?

I thank Annabel Goldie for that. Annabel Goldie has provided a number of estimates, but will she nonetheless acknowledge that in actual terms the numbers show that full-time-equivalent places have been maintained in Scotland’s colleges nationally?

The Scottish Government welcomes the opportunity to debate this motion. I recognise Patricia Ferguson’s close interest in North Glasgow College as member for Glasgow Maryhill and Springburn. Last December, I had the pleasure of visiting North Glasgow College and seeing the tremendous work that is done there in what are often challenging circumstances. I commend the contribution that it makes to the people of north Glasgow. Under the principalship of Ronnie Knox, the college provides life-changing opportunities for many people who have suffered disadvantage or endured deprivation. At long last, the college has an estate that matches its ambition. The motion highlights—and this has never been a secret—that North Glasgow College, like every other college, has had to withstand budget reductions that we would have rather not implemented but which were made necessary by Westminster’s unnecessary and unwarranted reduction of £3.3 billion in Scotland’s block grant over this spending review period. The lodger of the motion seems curiously coy—or perhaps I should say “loyal”—about mentioning those cuts. The motion goes on to tell us, in a way that falls some way short of what I would describe as rapier precision, that it “understands” that there is the “possibility” of “potential redundancies.” Of course, I do not minimise the impact on college staffing caused by the reductions that we have been forced to seek. However, we have made absolutely clear our expectations of colleges. We do not believe that there is any need for any member of staff to be made compulsorily redundant and we have said that to every college principal. With that in mind, I have—as has been mentioned—had representations from Bob Doris MSP and others, who have urged that, whatever decisions colleges make about mergers, they should make them in a transparent way. However, we do not have the power to compel or direct colleges in what they do, as Drew Smith and Hugh Henry know fine well. That power used to exist and, if it still did, we might use it from time to time. However, ministers’ ability to hold colleges directly to account through a power of direction was removed in 2006 by the Labour minister at the time, Allan Wilson. We will take no lectures about the role of Government in removing the threat of redundancy, but I will take an intervention.

As the member knows, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council makes decisions about the funding of individual institutions. To claim that the Government is directly responsible for decisions that colleges make about their own staff is slightly disingenuous. As I am sure every member knows, we have embarked on the most ambitious reform programme of colleges since 1992. In recent months, we have heard much criticism of the funding settlement for colleges. Unfortunately, we have heard rather less about the additional £40 million that has since been identified for investment in the college sector for 2012-13. I do not in any way seek to minimise the challenges that face all our colleges, but I believe that that is a remarkable achievement, given that we are in midst of the worst economic crisis that most of us can remember. I am pleased that Patricia Ferguson has identified in her motion that the purpose of a college is to equip young people with the skills necessary to drive forward Scotland’s economy. It must surely stand to reason, therefore, that college provision should be closely aligned to the needs of the labour market. The Government’s position is clear: we have asked colleges to refocus their provision on courses that increase employability by delivering the skills that are most highly prized by employers. That will, of course, mean that colleges will sometimes have to look critically at courses that perhaps do meet a specific economic need. That a strategic decision that goes right to the heart of tackling the scourge of youth unemployment. A number of members highlighted the role of colleges in addressing our economic needs and the needs of the young unemployed in particular. Annabel Goldie made that point, even if she somewhat undermined it by calling for an end to free education and claiming that college student support had been reduced to £84 million when it has been maintained at £95 million. We are already reaping the benefits of some of the measures that have been taken. The latest figures show a 9 per cent increase in the number of full-time students studying advanced-level courses and a 1 per cent increase in the number of full-time non-advanced courses. Those are the true indicators of what we are achieving in the college sector: better courses and better attainment for better life chances. The success of the college sector should rightly be measured by the quality and economic relevance of provision, not wholly by simplistically counting courses. The debate has been useful. It has not been entirely straightforward at times, but we have heard informed contributions from Sandra White, Joan McAlpine and Paul Martin—he was making an informed contribution until he resorted to the straightforward untruth that the cabinet secretary had told young people in Scotland that they should not go to college. He should reconsider that outlandish claim. In conclusion, our vision is for a college sector in which learners who complete a course can be confident they have achieved a prestigious qualification that is highly prized by successful employers in Glasgow and beyond.

Opportunities for all was launched in April, when we guaranteed every 16 to 19-year-old in Scotland a place in education or training. Beyond that, staff across all agencies that support young people leaving care provide a range of advice and support to help them to access the opportunities that are available to them. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council recently concluded three college pilot programmes that supported care leavers. The aim was to improve access to college for members of that group through providing more support and information while raising awareness of their particular needs within education. Additional funds were granted for the current academic year to support the mainstreaming of that approach.

The issue does not lie with the criteria for the grant, although the Government is always happy to receive representations on such matters. We have always acknowledged that we must get more people from care backgrounds into further and higher education, which means intervention at much earlier stages in the education process. We have encouraged universities to set admissions targets for people from looked-after backgrounds, and we intend to pursue outcome agreements in that area.

As the statutory responsibility for the provision of education rests with local authorities, it would be a matter for the individual authorities concerned to consider refurbishing schools in close proximity to Commonwealth games venues before 2014.

We have had no indication from Glasgow City Council that it intends to refurbish those particular schools. However, we are aware that the council intends to carry out an assessment of the primary school estate over the coming months with a view to carrying out a programme of refurbishment. Further to the assessments being completed, I understand that the council will develop a timetable for implementation of the programme. All local authorities are preparing their bids for support from phase 3 of the £1.25 billion Scotland’s schools for the future programme. It is for Glasgow City Council to consider its bid, and we look forward to hearing from it in July.

As the statutory responsibility for education in Scotland rests with local authorities, it is for individual authorities to determine health and safety policies in their primary schools. As that area is reserved, it would be for the Health and Safety Executive to consider the need for such guidelines.

As I indicated, while the Scottish Government does not have a statutory responsibility to provide the schools or to enforce health and safety, I sympathise with the spirit of the member’s question. We of course seek to improve the condition of school buildings, and the financial commitment that we have made through the Scottish Futures Trust and the schools for the future programme is testimony to that. As I said in a reply to an earlier question, we await a response from Glasgow City Council about its plans for school refurbishment. If the member has concerns about anything specific in his constituency that he wants to bring to my attention, I am happy to meet him about it.

I understand that the cabinet secretary has recently received correspondence specifically on the issue of asbestos. The Government expects the best of local authorities in ensuring that disruption is minimised and that, above all, safety concerns are to the fore in whatever building operations take place.

As part of the development of a long-term plan to support implementation of the additional support for learning legislation, Scottish Government officials are engaged with key stakeholders and networks. Officials will consider the recommendations made in the “Communication Matters” report as part of that process.

The Government will introduce a plan to support the implementation of additional support for learning, and I reassure the member that the specific issue that he has raised about looked-after children will form part of the focus of that plan. In addition to engaging with official stakeholders and networks, Scottish Government officials plan to consider the recommendations made in the report that the Education and Culture Committee has produced. Specifically, the issue of access to dispute resolution mechanisms will be considered within that.

The member raises the important issues of the relationship between schools and parents and, as he put it, the decipherability of the material that is available. In instances where understanding does not exist between schools and parents on these matters, we hope that issues can be resolved locally. In the minority of instances where they cannot or where people are dissatisfied, we will of course want to give consideration to some of the issues that I mentioned in my previous answer.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will Richard Baker take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Bonjour. Guten Tag. I am delighted to open the debate on why languages matter—improving young people’s opportunities. This is a welcome opportunity to discuss where Scotland stands in terms of language learning and what aspirations we should have for our young people and society in engaging with an increasingly globalised world. The debate follows on from the publication last week of the languages working group report, which meets our commitment in the curriculum for excellence action plan that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning announced on 21 September last year. As someone with a passion for languages, I believe that the case for languages is pretty self-evident. It strikes me as intrinsically interesting that Norwegian puts the definite article on the end of a noun or that Gaelic has no words for yes and no. However, as last year’s modern languages excellence group report set out, in Scotland and elsewhere in the United Kingdom, we are often confronted with negative or lukewarm attitudes towards learning other languages. Perhaps the most disappointing of all such attitudes was one that I heard in the media this week, when someone suggested that teaching languages might somehow be “wasted” on children from working-class backgrounds. I am happy to say that that was not the dominant reaction. The excellence group report stated the positive case for language learning, framing it within the benefits that language learning offers the individual learner as well as the economy and society. The report also sought to debunk common myths about languages, such as the idea that everyone in the world speaks English and that therefore learning other languages is unnecessary. In fact, 75 per cent of people in the world do not speak English and, of those who do, most do so as a second language. In any case, that view ignores research that points to the competitive advantage that multilingual youngsters from other countries bring to the competition for jobs with their UK counterparts in global companies and organisations. The Government is determined to be ambitious for the people of Scotland. In last year’s election, our manifesto included a commitment to introduce, over the course of two sessions of Parliament, a norm for language learning in schools that is based on the European 1+2 model, to create the conditions in which every child will learn two languages in addition to their mother tongue. We therefore set up the languages working group to consider how a 1+2 model might be delivered, taking account of Scotland’s circumstances. In particular, the group was asked to consider how such a model could be delivered within the framework of curriculum for excellence. The working group report, which was published last week, and the accompanying report on the link between languages and employability further emphasise the economic benefits of improving the language learning experience of Scotland’s young people. The reports also present a strong argument for giving our children and young people the opportunity to learn languages from an early age, thereby providing them with similar opportunities to those that are available to their counterparts in many other countries. We need to recognise that multilingualism among children and young people is viewed as a norm in many parts of Europe in a way that is almost difficult to believe in Scotland. When I visited Luxembourg some years ago, I was astonished to see that almost every nursery school, it seems, advertises the fact that it is capable of operating in not two but five languages: Luxemburgish, French, German, English and the main immigrant language in that country, which is Portuguese. In Friesland, in the Netherlands, I know of at least one school where children are expected to be fluent in Frisian, Dutch and English by the age of eight. In France, they are rethinking their language teaching with a new plan that includes an increased focus on early years learning, on improving the language teaching skills of kindergarten teachers and on how primary school staff can learn language teaching skills from secondary school teachers. By way of contrast, in Scotland we have seen a steady decline in the overall uptake of languages at secondary over a number of years. That is inconsistent with a modern globalised world in which people travel widely for jobs and leisure and speak several languages. I believe that it is now time for Scotland to create a cultural and educational environment that can help to attract children and young people to learning other languages; one that shows how languages can open doors to new cultures and literatures and that helps young people to see the world in different ways, as well as offering them many practical and economic advantages. Many schools are already working hard to provide young people with opportunities to develop a deeper understanding of other cultures, both European and non-European, through the study of languages. In addition, over the past couple of decades we have developed in Scotland a successful example of bilingual education in the Gaelic-medium sector. We now have many excellent examples of Gaelic-medium education in schools throughout Scotland and our aim is to see that ideal promoted and expanded. We are also seeing young people using their Gaelic language skills in post-school education and in employment. The introduction of Chinese into some of our schools and the contribution of the Confucius hub schools have helped many children and young people to develop a better understanding of a culture that is considerably different from our own, ranging from an introduction to tai chi, to an understanding of what it is like to be a pupil in China. Confidence in languages can lead young people to form strong relationships with their peers in other countries, as pupils at John Ogilvie high school in South Lanarkshire have done with young people in Spain. Such examples show that it is possible to overcome the cultural, societal and attitudinal barriers to language learning that we often encounter in Scotland. As a Government, we recognise the possibilities for young people’s life chances that come from learning other languages. We want schools to work towards a new model of language learning and teaching that is based on the mother tongue plus two additional languages, as first set out in the European Union’s Barcelona agreement of 2002. We acknowledge that this is a bold and ambitious objective—one to be delivered over several years. The languages group has come forward with 35 recommendations. I am grateful for the work of Simon Macaulay, who chaired the group, and to all those who contributed to its deliberations. The group has sought to strike a balance between the level of ambition that a 1+2 model represents and an honest critique of where we are starting from. I asked for a radical report, and the group did not disappoint me. I welcome the group’s key messages: that Scotland can and must do more to provide our young people with a better language learning experience; that language learning is life enhancing and can enable our young people to participate more fully in a globalised society and economy; and that Scotland’s increasing diversity of languages, including Scotland’s own languages, should be celebrated. I also welcome the group’s considered view that although introducing two additional languages is an ambitious goal, it is one that, over time and with the engagement of all those with a broad mind or an interest in languages, can be delivered. I do not intend to respond today to all 35 of the group’s recommendations. Some of them will need some time for careful consideration and discussion with stakeholders. However, I am particularly pleased to see the group’s recommendations in relation to language learning at primary school—in particular, its recommendation that Scotland needs to start language learning earlier, from primary 1, rather than from primary 6, which is currently the norm for most schools.

I thank the member for that considered point. The situation varies very much not just from country to country, but from school to school. We would be realistic about what kind of language learning a four or five-year-old would be asked to undertake—we would not expect fluency or anything resembling it from a four or five-year-old. Nevertheless, I think that we should introduce four and five-year-olds to the concept that there are other languages out there. In the past, that concept has not been introduced to such young people in our schools.

I have just taken one. Give me a moment.

Well, why not?

I readily agree with that. The younger that we introduce language learning, the more receptive children are likely to be to it. Implementation of the recommendations around that will set a bold new direction for language learning in Scotland’s schools. The policy will help to reinforce the ambition for modern languages as expressed in the curriculum for excellence, which is about raising the bar, with all young people expected to reach at least the second level by the end of primary. However, the group was aware that current experience has shown that modern languages, when left to primaries 6 and 7, can be vulnerable and are sometimes reduced to an add-on with limited input, which makes it very difficult to reach the desired level. Therefore, the group took the view that a new approach was needed, with language learning beginning in primary 1 and being embedded in the fabric of the primary curriculum. By the end of primary 7, having started vibrant language learning in primary 1, young people will have a deeper understanding of how language works, a deeper understanding of their first additional language, in particular, and better skills in talking, listening, reading and writing in the modern language than was possible previously. We recognise that the proposals will set significant challenges for our schools. However, some schools are already providing earlier access to language learning and are offering more than one additional language. Only last week, I visited Sacred Heart primary school in Bridgeton, Glasgow, where I saw a deeply committed staff teaching not one but four modern languages, with all pupils learning at least one additional language from primary 1. The group also recommends that young people should be introduced to a second language by primary 5. It proposes that that be done through a planned interdisciplinary approach to second language learning in primaries 5 to 7 and in the broad general education at secondary school. Initially, a second modern language need not be learned to the same depth as the first one but could be built on later, in the senior phase. We recognise that an earlier start to language learning also raises challenges for schools’ capacity to deliver. Some teachers may not have undergone language training and others may wish to update their language skills. However, we know that there is untapped potential in the system, with many teachers who are trained in languages not having the opportunity to make use of their current language training. The Government has proposed a budget for developing the Scottish schools curriculum. Within that, and subject to parliamentary agreement of the next budget bill in 2013-14, we intend to provide initial funding of £4 million on top of the £4 million that is already provided to local authorities for languages to pursue our ambitious aims and to enable young people in primary 1 to start learning a second language. We will discuss that and other questions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities in due course.

I am in my last minute. In the meantime, we will provide £120,000 to fund pilot projects to be run in the 2012-13 school year by Education Scotland and Scotland’s national centre for languages, which will demonstrate ways in which we can move towards a 1+2 model. The projects will raise the profile of modern languages in schools and demonstrate ways of introducing more languages in a way that will motivate and enthuse learners. The messages from the projects will be shared to inform the future development of language learning from 2013-14 onwards. In conclusion, our commitment to a new direction in language learning sends a strong signal that Scotland is open to business and to the world and that we are determined to ensure that our young people have every advantage that their multilingual peers have elsewhere. I hope that that ambition will excite and encourage everyone with an interest in language learning and that it will command wide support. I move, That the Parliament agrees that, in today’s globalised world, learning other languages is more important than ever and that it is in Scotland’s economic and cultural interests that young Scots are able to speak other languages; notes the report of the Languages Working Group and its recommendation that children should learn another language from primary 1; supports the Scottish Government’s far-sighted and ambitious aim to enable all young people to learn two languages in addition to their mother tongue during their time at school, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s plans for a pilot project programme for 2012-13 to demonstrate how the aims of the 1+2 Barcelona model of language learning can be turned into a reality in Scotland over the course of two parliamentary sessions.

I appreciate many of the sentiments that the member has expressed. On her last point, does she also agree that, for pupils who are perhaps challenged by literacy, the experience of exposure to other languages and, indeed, to the whole concept of grammar and language learning may well improve their abilities in their own language?

Hanzala Malik and I have spoken about the issue briefly in correspondence. I will be happy to arrange a more formal meeting, if that would be helpful. When we talk about 1+2 languages, we are not restricting ourselves to European languages because we also recognise the value of Asian languages. I will be very happy to have that conversation with Hanzala Malik.

I will be positive, but some of the things that Kezia Dugdale mentions were not part of the working group’s remit. Does she accept that conversations between the Government and stakeholders are the way to answer some of the questions that she raises?

The appeals process for the accreditation route to chartered teacher status is a matter for the General Teaching Council for Scotland.

I am grateful for Mr Scott’s background information on the matter. I am aware that, as he mentioned, he has been in touch with the Government. On 17 April, he wrote to Mr Russell, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, on behalf of his constituent Mr MacLean. I will certainly follow up the case with Mr Russell to ensure that Mr Scott receives a timely response. However, I reiterate that management of the appeals process is a matter for the General Teaching Council for Scotland, which is now an independent body. I will seek confirmation of this, but I understand that the adviser in question was appointed by the GTCS. It remains for that organisation to ensure that appeals are fair and well managed.

The Government has made it plain that there are many ways of achieving that end, one of which is to continue to raise the teaching profession’s status by, for instance, encouraging masters-level study for teachers’ continuing professional development and by making it clear that chartered teacher status is by no means the only way of achieving that. The Scottish Government will continue to develop CPD as it moves towards its ambition of teaching being a masters degree led profession.

The programme board last met on 15 February 2012, when it discussed the ICT in education programme.

I assure Neil Findlay that the Government is confident that there will not be a gap in the operation of the system and that, if a new system is to be procured, it will be procured by that deadline. There will be continuity of provision. Neil Findlay will understand that there is a limit to what I can say about the commercially confidential discussions that are taking place on the issue, not just because of the interests of the companies concerned, but because we want to ensure that we obtain the best deal and the best service for Scotland’s schools. However, I can reassure him on the point that he raised.

Devolved school management is an important enabler for local leadership and has been a feature of education in Scotland since 1993. The principle that underpins the scheme, and the previous Administration’s 2006 guidance, is flexibility for headteachers based on local needs. At the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning’s request, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities established a steering group in December 2011 to review the 2006 devolved school management guidance. The cabinet secretary is currently considering the group’s revised guidance, prior to issue.

There may be a few—or perhaps a whole stream of—misunderstandings about devolved school management in the member’s question. The approach that is being taken is not to specify a percentage of powers to be devolved to schools, but rather to devolve particular areas and responsibilities. In case the member has in mind the conspiracy theory that is doing the rounds of the Labour Party in Glasgow that the approach is a smokescreen for the privatisation of education and other things, I reassure her that that is nothing more than a mark of some people’s desperation about the council elections that are taking place next week.

Our expectation is that local authorities will make every effort to ensure that sporting facilities are made available in a way that addresses the needs of pupils and the wider community.

I readily agree with the member’s sentiment that we should maximise communities’ access to the facilities that are there, and not least in light of the forthcoming Commonwealth games. Sportscotland is undertaking an audit of sports facilities around Scotland, which involves a conversation with local authorities, and there is consideration of the McLeish football review, which among other things pointed to the need to ensure that the maximum possible co-operation exists between local and other authorities on the matter raised.

The position is different in different parts of Scotland, but it is certainly the case that in some parts of Scotland PFI contracts have proved less than helpful to community organisations that seek access to schools. Of course, one good thing about this Government, which I am sure members across the chamber would acknowledge, is that it has moved away from the recklessness of PFI as a Government policy.

Student teachers work with—[Interruption.]

Student teachers work with General Teaching Council for Scotland-registered colleagues in partner schools to observe the acute effects of exercise on pupils and they are expected to exercise professional judgment in relation to the referral of pupils to medical practitioners where pupils’ response to exercise raises cause for concern. If pupils have a known heart condition, teachers would take that into consideration when planning lessons. The Scottish Government actively supports a number of initiatives such as the cardiac assessment of young athletes programme and the familial arrhythmia network for Scotland, which are helping to identify heart conditions in young people.

There is continuing professional development for PE teachers and assessing children’s differing responses to exercise is considered. We are far from complacent about the issue. I am sure that the member knows the family in Selkirk, from where he and I both come, who were to the fore in founding the charity Scottish HART—Heart at Risk Testing—which aims to remember the life of one of my classmates, who died after playing football, and to ensure that we do something about such matters in the future. I commend the member for raising the issue.

I hear a member asking who is responsible for reducing budgets. That is, of course, the responsibility of the Westminster Government, which is implementing plans that were largely put together by the member’s party.

Okay. The Scottish Government recognises the value of the expressive arts in contributing greatly to children and young people’s mental, emotional, social and physical wellbeing. The recruitment and deployment of staff, including specialist teachers, are a matter for local government, as is the legal responsibility for providing an adequate and efficient education that is suitable to the needs of children. All class teachers are expected to be able to deliver elements of teaching and learning in art and design and music, along with all other areas of the primary curriculum, as part of their initial teacher education. Despite the United Kingdom budget cuts, local government’s share of the Scottish Government’s financial support has been maintained.

I am always happy to speak to organisations that are involved in providing music, art and other aspects of education in schools, and I am happy to hear more from the member. I agree that music and art education has made a huge difference to the lives of many children and is of great importance to our children and young people and to the image of Scotland. What is required for those subjects is not a standardised universal service. For that reason, I am happy to hear from the member about how the organisations that she mentioned would like to proceed.

The total for contracted unitary charge payments in respect of all school PFI projects that are operational or have reached financial close is estimated to be £13.7 billion.

The member will forgive me for saying that local authorities probably view those figures as both milestones and millstones. I am more than willing to congratulate the City of Edinburgh Council on securing support for those schools through Scotland’s building schools for the future programme. That is further evidence of the Government’s commitment to reduce by half the number of pupils in crumbling schools and to do so in a way that is more responsible than some of the financial solutions that were offered by our predecessors.

I can certainly provide such a list if the member wishes. I am sure that, in exchange, he will provide me with a list of schools that Labour ministers opened but which were commissioned by predecessor Governments. The Scottish Government has more than matched, brick for brick, the number of schools that were built by the previous Government. The proof is not in who opens the schools, but in the numbers—which are a favourable achievement for the Scottish National Party and not for the member’s party.

At a reception last Wednesday, on the eve of Yom Hashoah, the Jewish community’s day for commemorating and reflecting on the Holocaust, I was pleased to share my experiences of visiting Auschwitz with Scottish students as part of the Holocaust Educational Trust’s lessons from Auschwitz project. The Scottish Government renewed funding for the lessons from Auschwitz project earlier this year, which ensures that more young people from schools and colleges across Scotland will be able to participate in the project. Participants have come from more than 60 per cent of Scotland’s secondary schools and colleges. In collaboration with the Holocaust Educational Trust, the Holocaust Memorial Day Trust and other partners, we will continue to support and promote Holocaust education in the context of the curriculum for excellence.

I thank the member for those comments. They are particularly appropriate because, at the reception last week, we were fortunate enough to be joined by Henry and Ingrid Wuga, who faced persecution by the Nazis in occupied Europe before leaving all that they had known and eventually choosing Scotland as their new home. I recognise the value and importance of capturing the testimonies of Holocaust survivors and refugees and their reflections on life in Scotland. Therefore, I am happy to ask officials to meet the project organisers to explore how best to capture testimonies about those most important parts of our history from around Scotland.

The recruitment of Gaelic teachers is a priority. The Scottish Government is aware of the on-going need to recruit appropriately qualified teaching staff for Gaelic-medium education. A range of measures is in place to ensure that good progress is made with that and that sufficient teachers are available to allow Gaelic-medium education to expand.

I acknowledge the need for more Gaelic-medium secondary teachers in particular. It is positive that, this summer, 24 newly trained Gaelic teachers will enter the profession, which is double the number that came through the system last year. Eight of them will go into secondary teaching. The Government is fully committed to ensuring that a wider range of subjects is available in a wider range of schools through the medium of Gaelic.

Will the member give way?

There can be no doubt about the crucial importance of the ferries issue to the people of South Uist in my constituency. If I had not known that much already, it would have been pretty obvious to me from the meeting that I attended in Daliburgh recently—it has been referred to—which more than 200 people attended and at which they made their views plain. With that in mind, as local MSP I have responded—I sense from the tone from some quarters that I am criticised for it—along with many others in the Western Isles to both consultations associated with the ferries review and I have specifically mentioned the Mallaig to Lochboisdale issue. As I said in my response to the initial consultation, if the resources can be found, we need to look seriously at having a Mallaig to Lochboisdale link. Any solution would obviously have to respect the needs and wishes of all communities in the islands, but there is a very strong case to be made for a shorter sea crossing from Lochboisdale. As local MSP, I support that case, and it was good to get a chance to speak to people from Uist at the door today who are making that argument, too. I am glad to say that I believe that they have joined us in the public gallery. I welcome the specific recognition in the Government’s amendment of the importance of listening to communities before a final ferries plan is produced and of giving consideration to the issues that are being raised in Uist. I appreciate why the Government’s stance is to recognise the existence of the consultation process and not prejudice it.

As I understand it, the Government has said clearly that a consultation is under way and that it will consider representations, including those on the Mallaig to Lochboisdale question. I do not think that there is any need to obfuscate that point any further than the member has just done. As the local member, I readily see the benefits that would come to South Uist if there were a shorter sea crossing to the mainland, not to mention a more frequent one—all of us can agree that there is little point in viewing three ferry sailings a week in winter as a frequent service. That argument is certainly made frequently in the constituency that I represent. I understand the need for there to be improvements to the service, the impact of which would be felt in areas of economic activity as varied as tourism, crofting and fisheries. However, as the minister said, the debate about ferry routes cannot be isolated from a discussion of the issues around procuring new vessels, which is a discussion that we certainly have to have. The phrase, “fragile island economy”, is often used but is less often fully appreciated. South Uist certainly qualifies as a fragile local economy. Apart from the geography, it does not enjoy anything like the highest incomes in Scotland and it faces a continual battle with the elements and with the ever-present threat of depopulation. With those factors in mind, it is right that we explore every possible means of improving connectivity, whether that be through improved broadband or improved transport links, and ensure that the solutions that we come up with are the product of a genuine conversation in the community. I hope that we will see further progress of that kind in Uist, with more detailed discussion around the various options and costings for a shorter sea crossing, and I welcome the willingness of the minister to engage in that debate.

In that case, by way of conclusion, let me say that there is a surprising amount of agreement across the chamber on this issue, even if perhaps not everyone in South Uist will agree with the assertion of Elaine Murray that Lochboisdale is the primary settlement in South Uist.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am pleased to close for the Government in this debate on curriculum for excellence. I certainly welcome the curriculum’s successful implementation across Scotland. We must not underestimate how important it is for our young people and for Scotland’s future, which is what we should all be concerned about today. I am sure that we are, despite—I regret to say—the occasional evidence of my ears to the contrary from some quarters this morning. I welcome the reaffirmed support for curriculum for excellence that has been expressed today. Local authorities, nurseries, schools, colleges and their dedicated staff throughout Scotland have all made good progress in implementing curriculum for excellence, particularly in the past two years. Every time that I visit schools—a regular part of my job—I see that the new curriculum is already making a real improvement to learning and teaching. As Ken Macintosh rightly stated in Parliament in March 2008, “there has been broad political agreement on the aims and agenda of the curriculum for excellence—a move away from the dominance of exams and teaching to the test; a decluttering of the overcrowded curriculum; more room for teachers to teach”.—[Official Report, 19 March 2008; c 7063.] We must not forget those aims. Although formal assessment for the qualifications is not intended to begin prior to fourth year, learning during the broad general education—up to the end of S3—will contribute to learning for the qualifications in S4 and beyond. Therefore, the implementation of the new qualifications for pupils who will be in S4 in 2013-14 is a key milestone in the implementation process. Let me be clear: we cannot countenance wholesale delay of these qualifications. To do so would undermine the learning that our young people who are currently in S2 have followed since they were in primary school—a point that Marco Biagi made. Hugh Henry said that we should not gamble with the future of our young people and nor should we. Delay would represent such a gamble. We should not underestimate the risks to learners that are associated with asking them to change a course that they have been on since 2009. The intermediates will not build on the curriculum for excellence-based learning that pupils should have experienced in S1 to S3, and those who call for a delay must remember that. I feel the need to reiterate the point that we cannot run three examination systems simultaneously in Scotland, which, as the SQA has pointed out, is the implication of wholesale delay. Liz Smith and Liam McArthur made reasoned and measured contributions on the whole but, in their comments about East Renfrewshire Council, they overlooked the fact that it, uniquely, would not find itself in that position and, therefore, does not have much to teach us about the national situation. The Government is committed to providing additional support to teachers or schools over and above the unprecedented levels of support that are already being provided where it is felt that that is needed to ensure that they are prepared for the new qualifications. To respond to Neil Bibby on that point, 300 such events are planned around Scotland to help to achieve that, together with a deep audit that will involve speaking to all Scotland’s schools. As Stewart Maxwell and Clare Adamson pointed out, we have heard, and continue to hear, many calls against any delay from parents, teachers, headteachers, directors of education and others.

I am always happy to hear support from wherever it may come. I have phoned parent council chairs in Scottish schools over recent weeks and have yet to speak to one who wants the Government to take the advice that Mr Henry offers us on delay. I must also say that, when Margaret McDougall wondered in her speech what would happen if a child moved from an authority that had delayed to one that had not, she rather undermined the case for allowing local authorities to delay. Hanzala Malik offered a much more measured opinion in committee this week—other members have alluded to it—when he said: “There are still grey areas on the mechanism for support”, but “once those become clear … many of the concerns will evaporate quickly.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 6 March 2012; c 840.] When dealing with the future of our young people, all members have a duty not to feel compelled to fuel headlines that have a less-than-simple relationship with the facts.

I am afraid that I must close shortly. We have the opportunity today to send another powerful signal to teachers, parents, employers and learners that the Scottish Parliament appreciates and continues to back all their excellent efforts to make curriculum for excellence the success that we want and need it to be. We have a chance to give young Scots an even better education and to improve their life chances. We have a chance to make it clear that the package of support that we have developed means that schools throughout Scotland should be in a position to do what we need them to do—that is, to get on with the introduction of the new qualifications that our young people expect us to deliver. I trust that the Parliament will endorse what has been achieved across Scotland and look forward to the next stage in the journey. I hope that the Parliament will take that chance now and without delay.

We welcome and are taking forward the conclusions and recommendations of the Scottish studies working group, which were published on 1 March. The group recommended that learning about Scotland be embedded across the curriculum to promote coherence and progression and to ensure that such learning is not marginalised. The Scottish Qualifications Authority is investigating options for an award in Scottish studies and additional guidance, resources and support will be launched later this month to strengthen the place of learning about Scotland.

I strongly agree with that, and I hope that everyone agrees—although I sometimes wonder from the initial debate that we had about Scottish studies—that the best way of engaging young people’s minds to understand about the wider world is to engage them in the history, culture and activities of their communities and country. Liz Lochhead, Scotland’s makar, touched on that point. She is very much in favour of teaching Scottish literature and history that are, in her words, in no way “chauvinistic or uncritical” in their view of Scottish society. We are all about Scotland getting a chance to be criticised as long as people get a chance to learn about Scotland. Not everyone has had that chance in the past.

The Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004, as amended, requires education authorities to provide children and young people with the support that they need to overcome any barrier that they might face to accessing learning. The act also provides parents or carers with the right to be involved in decision making in relation to any additional support for their child. The Scottish Government funds organisations such as Enquire and the Govan Law Centre and funds the take note advocacy service to support parents who exercise their rights under the act. The accompanying code of practice outlines what education authorities can do to encourage good communication with parents. In order to provide better guidance to everyone who is involved in delivering education to autistic pupils in mainstream schools, the Scottish Government published the autism toolbox in April 2009, which contains specific advice on how to support parents and families of pupils with autism effectively.

I cannot comment on a situation in a particular school, and some of the issues are for local authorities to address. I remain happy to correspond with Helen Eadie about any specific concerns that she may have. The autism toolbox, which the Government has pioneered, does many things to give parents an increased and strengthened role. We are in the process of considering ways of improving the toolbox, so I would be happy to hear Helen Eadie’s views on how best to achieve that.

There are a number of significant anniversaries of historic events during 2013 and 2014. The Scottish Government, its agencies and partners will promote learning opportunities around those that enable a broad understanding of Scotland and of our place in the world. For example, we are collaborating with the National Trust for Scotland on plans for the 200th anniversary of the birth of David Livingstone in 2013. Being a native of Selkirk, I am also aware that 2013 is the 500th anniversary of the battle of Flodden. The year 2014 marks the 100th anniversary of the beginning of the first world war, the 1,450th anniversary of Columba landing on Iona and the 700th anniversary of the battle of Bannockburn. An innovative new visitor centre at Bannockburn will help to make it world-class site for learners and visitors.

As I said, the anniversary of the battle of Flodden is among the events that are in the Government’s mind. It is commemorated every year in Selkirk, at the common riding, and I am sure that significant events will be planned there and elsewhere, which the Government will be happy to be involved in.

I very much welcome the minister’s commitment to undertaking a proper study of the economic situation of hauliers and other companies. Will he extend that study to fuel costs, particularly in light of recent evidence that the UK Government’s much-trumpeted 5p fuel duty cut might not apply to many hauliers that buy directly from suppliers rather than retailers?

Does the member intend to continue quoting that statement, in which Mr Maciver talks about the utter hypocrisy of Labour’s position on the issue?

In order to help all teachers to identify the signs of literacy difficulties and dyslexia early in a child’s school life, the Scottish Government, in partnership with Dyslexia Scotland, launched the online assessing dyslexia toolkit in June 2010. That was supported by four regional seminars, which were attended by 338 teachers. On 17 November 2011, the Scottish Government announced an additional £40,000 grant to Dyslexia Scotland, which will be used to review and update the toolkit, to add new materials on how to support children and young people with dyslexia effectively, to make it more accessible for teachers, and to develop a section for local authorities on how best to implement it. In addition, Education Scotland supports public and third sector organisations that support adults with dyslexia. In 2010, they delivered 45 training sessions across Scotland. The Scottish Government has also allocated £38,000 to Dyslexia Scotland for this financial year to support its headquarters running costs, and an additional £10,000 to develop an awareness-raising DVD to be used in prisons.

I thank Margaret Mitchell member for her question and the spirit in which it was asked. Needless to say, I know that, through her involvement in the cross-party group on dyslexia, she is very knowledgeable on the matter. Teacher training endeavours to ensure that teachers are aware of a range of conditions, not least dyslexia, given the immense impact that it can have on people’s later lives. I mentioned prisons in my initial answer because we are acutely aware of the proportion of people in prison who have dyslexia and the role that staff in school have in ensuring that we deal with that. As far as the working definition is concerned, the toolkit has an involvement in that, but we have not gone down the route of introducing mandatory standardised assessment tests for dyslexia because that approach was rejected by, among others, the cross-party group on dyslexia in 2009.

There is no disputing the strength of feeling in Barra, Eriskay and Uist about marine special area of conservation designations. That was expressed at the time of the east Mingulay consultation and it is being expressed again about the Sound of Barra. Although I am bound by collective responsibility once decisions have been made, this one has not yet been made and, as a constituency MSP, it is my duty—until and unless a decision is made—to make clear what my constituents feel, as I have done for some years. The process around the designations, which are driven by the EU habitats directive, has given rise to expressions of enormous concern in Barra. In its dealings with SNH, the community feels that its economic concerns are being ignored. It is important that the minister tells us tonight, for instance, how he intends to protect scallop dredging not just in the short term, but for future generations. Above all, my constituents have expressed a strong feeling of grievance at a process that legally considers only scientific questions, not economic ones. In that context, it is worth stressing that the very existence of a pristine environment is down to the fact that generations of islanders have treated their environment responsibly. Some limited progress has been made. Most recently, I pointed out successfully to SNH that my constituents felt that it was ludicrous for SNH to include the Tràigh Mhòr in the proposals—an area that contains none of the designated habitats or species but which includes the island’s lifeline airport. I am happy to say that SNH has changed that element of its plans. A concerted campaign by the community—some of whom are in the public gallery today—has led, over time, to SNH unusually publishing in advance advice that it would offer about the management of any MSAC in the Sound of Barra. That would now include undertakings for there to be no impact on creel fishing and that demersal trawling could continue away from the most sensitive habitats. However, in the mind of the community that raises the question of what, in any practical sense, the MSAC is meant to achieve in a community that has legitimate concerns about its economic future. Some of the language in the motion is rather less apolitical than might be expected in a members’ business debate. The accusation of “government-sponsored ... damage” to the people of Barra—in relation to an issue that was first raised by a Government 10 years ago—is so partisan that a response might be necessary. The interest that some members have shown in supporting the cause stands in marked contrast with their record on the issue. For example, of the 27 responses to the consultation on the east Mingulay designation, only three came from political figures, who were the local MP, local councillor Donald Manford and me. All those responses said, as the member who lodged the motion just said, that it is no secret that the relationship between the community involved and SNH has broken down. The MSAC designation that is proposed in the Sound of Barra has provoked strong feelings in the area. I hope that proposals such as that for a fish farm in the sound provide evidence that investment in the area will continue, but people in Barra have frequently questioned why we have a legal framework for designations that is—from the point of view of somebody who lives in Barra—inflexible and illogical. I take part in the debate as the constituency MSP who represents Barra. From my many meetings with fishermen, crofters and others, I know the strength of their feelings, which I record again today.

The member asks about punishing colleges. Perhaps she can answer this simple question: why has the UK Government decided to punish Scotland so hard in its budget arrangement for the forthcoming three years ?

The Scottish Government hopes to see progress on Gaelic-medium education throughout Scotland and in many parts of Highland Council’s area. For that reason, the Scottish Government is working closely with Highland Council and other councils to support and encourage progress with Gaelic-medium education.

I am happy to confirm to the member that I have discussed both those schools and the related issues with Highland Council. I understand that the council is giving the proposals for both schools detailed consideration and I expect to hear from the council again very soon. The Scottish Government would certainly like both Gaelic schools to be established. I continue to have a dialogue with the council about the support that can be given for that. Establishing both schools is important to Gaelic and to the area. I look forward to working with the council to ensure that that happens.

I welcome the sentiments behind that question and the support for Gaelic-medium education. Arrangements for school transport are obviously a matter for local authorities, but it will not come as a surprise to the member to hear that I urge all local authorities to do everything to ensure that every parent who wishes their child to have Gaelic-medium education is allowed that. My comments on that are a matter of record.

From January to December 2011, 44 secondary inspections were carried out.

I certainly join the member in congratulating the school. Whenever innovative practice is identified, Education Scotland carries out innovative practice visits at the school concerned. The innovative practice is discussed with the district inspector, and the headteacher is also involved. Details of schools’ practices can be captured in a range of ways and best practice is certainly shared. A number of approaches, such as film clips and talking heads, case studies and interviews with staff and learners, can be used to ensure that the best and most innovative practice in schools in Scotland is widely disseminated.

Scottish ministers and officials regularly meet a wide range of individuals and organisations with an interest in modern languages. As the member knows, on 15 September I attended the first meeting of the languages working group, which has been set up to provide advice on implementation of the Government’s languages manifesto commitment on the one-plus-two model. Most recently, on 18 January I met consuls general and consulate education officers from France, Germany, Italy, Spain and Austria, to discuss language learning and teaching in Scotland’s schools.

The member will not find me disagreeing with her in saying that we should try to reverse the trend. The meeting with consuls was the beginning of a process in that regard. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities was unable to attend the meeting but intends to attend future meetings. We all have a shared interest in ensuring that foreign language assistants are more widely used. I am sure that the member agrees that not only are assistants educationally useful but they provide outstandingly good value to local authorities. I encourage local authorities to make use of them.

Since the Gaelic action plan was published in April 2010, the number of children entering Gaelic-medium education at primary 1 has increased from 390 in 2009-10 to 405 in 2011-12. Since “The National Plan for Gaelic” was published in March 2007, the number of children entering Gaelic-medium education at P1 has increased from 313 to 405, which is an increase of 30 per cent.

The Scottish Government recognises that the provision of Gaelic teachers is a priority. We work with all teacher-training providers to ensure that supply is not only maintained but increased. I am happy to keep in touch with the member and the institutions to ensure that that is happening. The Scottish Government provides support to Bòrd na Gàidhlig to employ a Gaelic teacher recruitment officer, whose purpose is specifically to address some of the issues that the member raised.

Although no national guidelines are issued in relation to testing for dyslexia, to help all teachers to identify the signs of literacy difficulties and dyslexia early in a child’s school life, the Scottish Government, in partnership with Dyslexia Scotland, launched the online assessing dyslexia toolkit in June 2010. That was supported by four regional seminars, which were attended by 338 teachers. In November 2011, we announced an additional £40,000 grant to Dyslexia Scotland. That will be used to review and update the toolkit; to add new materials on how to support children and young people with dyslexia effectively; to make it more accessible to teachers; and to develop a section for local authorities on how best to implement the toolkit.

The use of colour screening for Meares-Irlen syndrome falls outwith the scope of the national health service eye examination. However, under the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004, as amended, education authorities are required to identify, meet and keep under review the additional support needs of all pupils for whose education they are responsible. It is for South Lanarkshire Council to consider whether it might pilot the test. If such a pilot took place, the Scottish Government would be interested in the findings.

I hate to drag David McLetchie kicking and screaming into the 18th century, but when he talks about unilaterally breaking up partnerships, he will be aware that nobody in the SNP has suggested a unilateral declaration of independence; instead, we have suggested a negotiated one that is conducted under principles of international law.

The member mentions a number of issues of political principle. Is she entirely comfortable with her quote in today’s Herald that on the subject of Scotland’s future she is “on the same page” as the Tories?

Will the member take an intervention?

Is the member saying that no colleges or universities were merged under previous Governments?

In winding up the debate, I welcome the members of the Labour front-bench team to their posts. The ambition of this Government is to support and enable improved learning outcomes for all our young people. I would like to think that that goal is shared across the chamber—it has certainly been evident during the debate. Many children and young people across Scotland have a successful, rewarding and enjoyable education that enables them to enter their adult life ready and able to take full advantage of an increasing range of exciting opportunities. We must celebrate that success. More than that, I acknowledge that we must ensure that, across our education system, the professionals that lead learning are willing and able to develop their own practice to the benefit of all. In that regard, Christina McKelvie, Clare Adamson, Kezia Dugdale and Colin Beattie all rightly emphasised the need to ensure that the particular obstacles to education that face children from backgrounds of poverty and deprivation are at the heart of our thinking as a Parliament and a Government. There is much success in the system to build on, but we will achieve our ambitions only if we fully embrace a culture of continuous improvement in the quality of teaching and learning and in our expectations for our young people. The improvement of all our schools is possible and is necessary if we are to provide the future for our children and young people that they and Scotland deserve and require. On that much, we can probably all agree. However, before I say much else, I must turn to Hugh Henry’s speech. Six minutes into that speech, my colleague, Mike Russell, mentioned that he had not heard any positivity. I patiently waited another five minutes, but I have to say that it was a speech that rivalled the famous speeches of I M Jolly, Droopy and Margaret McDougall.

I will happily take an intervention.

I was just about to turn to Mr Henry’s comments on some of those issues. Although his comments about the exam system are interesting, I feel that to describe first and second-year pupils in our schools as “guinea pigs” and to raise in the minds of parents the idea that they are the subject of an experiment by the Scottish Government is not only unhelpful but pointing in the direction of an entirely unreasonable request, which is that we indefinitely delay the new exam system and never implement it, regardless of all its benefits.

No, thank you.

No. In a much more considered contribution, Margaret McCulloch talked of the needs of young people leaving school. This Government takes seriously the need to invest in employability and has demonstrated that through its £30 million investment in that area, as well as in our guarantee of opportunities for all, with the priority that is being given to 16 to 19-year-olds and the provision of 25,000 apprenticeships a year. Liam McArthur rightly emphasised the importance of the early years. This Government is committed to funding additional early learning and childcare to the tune of £1.5 million, which will be made available to local authorities from April. I would view Mr McArthur’s comments on college funding in a slightly different light, were it not for the fact that, as others have pointed out, the cuts in funding for colleges in England under a Government of which his party is a part are dramatically deeper than they are in Scotland. Looking forward to the year ahead, I am confident that we will make significant further progress over the coming 12 months as we begin to reap the benefit of the implementation of the key reports that the Government has commissioned and the work of the past few years. In April, the General Teaching Council for Scotland will become the first independent teachers regulatory body in the world. That is a major milestone for teaching in Scotland and, in many ways, it reflects the core strengths of trust and integrity that are present in our education system. A further 67 schools at least are to be delivered under the schools for the future programme, which is certainly proving to be a success, and we will continue to see successful progress with the implementation of the curriculum for excellence. We have brought a stronger focus on performance and on raising attainment and ambition levels among our young people. The curriculum for excellence is the vehicle that will enable the school journey and the journey beyond to be innovative, ambitious and relevant to and supportive of each child’s talents. To respond to Mr Fraser’s point about teacher employment, this Government is far from complacent about the situation. However, we must dwell on two facts. First, teacher employment is higher in Scotland than it is in England. Secondly, this year the Government has exceeded by 155 the teacher employment numbers that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the unions and the Government had agreed. The programme for the coming year will allow schools to focus on the individual learner and to develop skills in the classroom that will be of future benefit to the learner and to the Scottish economy.

The unions and the Government reached an agreement on that, but it is an issue that we are alive to and one that we will continue to monitor. The skills that Scotland needs will be greatly furthered by, among other things, the provision of good libraries, on which we heard from Fiona McLeod. She pointed out that libraries must not simply be replaced by Google. With that in mind, one of my colleagues mischievously googled the word “library”. As if to prove Ms McLeod’s point, it came up with a quote from Stephen Sommers’s film “The Mummy”, which includes the line, “I may not be an explorer or a treasure seeker, but I am a librarian and I’m going to kiss you.” That possibly makes the case for libraries over Google. We will continue to see schools working to provide their pupils with a variety of options to suit the needs of the learner rather than treating pupils in the senior phase as a uniform cohort.

The Government will, of course, listen to teachers’ views on the implementation of the curriculum for excellence, but the Parliament must give teachers and the country the confidence that the curriculum for excellence is the right way to proceed. In that context, Liz Smith rightly emphasised the importance of literacy and learning, and Marco Biagi, Jamie Hepburn, Graeme Pearson and others rightly stressed that we must not allow any of our young people to have their chances blighted by poverty. I think that one of the most telling contributions to the debate was that of Christina McKelvie, who pointed out that whatever actions Governments take and whatever money they put into the education system, ultimately the teaching experience is dependent on good, enthusiastic and confident teachers. I heartily agree with her comments about teacher of the year Christine Emmett, who is a worthy winner of that award and an exemplar for a teaching profession that does a great job for Scotland.

As an alumnus of the University of Glasgow, I am delighted to add my congratulations to the university today. I also congratulate Sandra White on securing the debate, which has given us a chance to celebrate the achievements of one of the world’s oldest seats of learning—and, it would now seem, one of the world’s most popular, too. Biased as I am in these matters, as a Glasgow graduate, I am happy to wax lyrical about the University of Glasgow and what an appealing place it is for any prospective student, and it seems that I am far from alone in that. To be number 1 in the UK for international student satisfaction is an accolade to be proud of. Indeed, it is but one more thing to add to the university’s many achievements since its foundation in 1451, which range from fostering the talents of seven Nobel laureates and being the home of Scotland’s first women graduates to ensuring the recovery of the stone of destiny in 1950. Ms White mentioned the egalitarian and international traditions of the university. The ability to react to the needs of international students is, as others have mentioned, a key component of a successful university. It is encouraging to note that an impressive 96 per cent of the university’s international students agree that Glasgow is a good place to be. In the interests of fairness—and speaking as someone who also enjoyed going to the University of Aberdeen—I am pleased also to agree with Mr Smith that it is not only Glasgow that has excelled in the recent i-graduate survey. All the institutions that took part in Scotland performed exceptionally well against institutions in the rest of the UK and other international comparators. Scotland scored above the UK and international averages on features such as campus environment, social and sports facilities, employability, visa advice, living costs and earning money. As Joan McAlpine pointed out, Glasgow’s campus is not restricted to the city of Glasgow but includes places such as the Crichton campus as well. However, as Ruth Davidson reminded us, the impact of the university is primarily felt in the city. As Bill Kidd mentioned, that impact is an entirely positive one and there is no easily visible divide between town and gown. Part of the university’s evident appeal to students is its world-class academic reputation, with a research base that includes pioneering work in the fields of medicine, engineering, ethics, physics and astronomy, as well as emerging disciplines such as bioelectronics, cell signalling and nanotechnology. As the minister with responsibility for science, I am pleased to say that the Scottish Government will continue to maintain Scotland’s world-leading position in scientific as well as other fields of research and will take steps to maximise the contribution that that makes to economic growth. The Scottish Government is investing record levels of funding in our universities. The spending review settlement increases our investment by £327 million over the next three years, which represents real-terms increases of more than 5 per cent in each year. It is worth highlighting that Glasgow has recently announced a number of international strategic partnerships with some of the top universities in the world. For example, the school of culture and creative arts at the University of Glasgow has entered an agreement with the Smithsonian Institution in Washington DC and George Mason University in Virginia, and the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning was present at the recent signing of an agreement between Glasgow and the University of Calcutta. Those international links underline the fact that there are more than 40,000 international students from more than 180 countries studying in Scotland. It is no surprise that international students have been identified as key contributors to the Scottish economy and to the academic, cultural and social experience at our universities and colleges. With regard to the points that Ms White and Mr Kidd raised about the UK Border Agency, the Scottish Government has raised those issues regularly with the UK Government on behalf of universities and colleges that have been in touch with us to express their frustration with aspects of current immigration policy. I concur with the view that international students are an enormous benefit to Scotland. It is more than unfortunate that UK policy in this area has been at odds, in many cases, with the ambitions of universities. The impact of the attitude of the UK Government—both real and perceived—and the new rules around immigration in this area were raised with Mr Russell when he visited India recently. The Scottish Government is providing funding of up to £100,000 to enhance the welcome facilities for international students. That indicates our very positive attitude towards them. As members know, we are in the process of reforming our post-16 programme to create a more sustainable approach to funding post-16 education. We believe that that will create better life chances for all our young people. However, although we have to consider what happens in Scotland, we also have to consider Scotland’s place in the world and the impact that that has on our education system. We all have to engage internationally, and we must continue to review our aspirations and targets to ensure that they are relevant and reflect what is best for Scotland. I believe that education is at the heart of what we do and is the key to future economic success for Scotland. The University of Glasgow clearly understands all that and continues to be one of Scotland’s greatest cultural assets. Like other members, I wish it every success for the future. If the opinions of its students are anything to judge by, being a student there is, above all, as much fun as it ever was. I celebrate that. Gaudeamus igitur, iuvenes dum sumus! Meeting closed at 17:36.

The Scottish Government has established a languages working group to provide strategic advice and direction on the delivery of our commitment to increase the opportunities for young people to benefit from learning two additional languages. Although that is a commitment over two sessions of Parliament, we want to see progress made as early as possible. Therefore, we have asked the group to consider what objectives and actions need to be set in the short, medium and longer term to deliver the commitment. The group is chaired by Mr Simon Macaulay, former assistant secretary of the Educational Institute of Scotland, and includes representatives of local authorities, schools, parents, higher education and business. The group has met twice and will report to ministers in April 2012. Details of the group, as with all our curriculum groups, are available on the Scottish Government website.

I certainly welcome the approach that is being taken in the member’s constituency and I know that, across the country, more and more schools are introducing languages from an earlier age; indeed, some nurseries are introducing children to languages through song and play. As is well known, children often find it easier and more productive to learn languages at a younger age. For all those reasons, I have asked our languages working group to consider the benefits of providing children with access to languages from as early an age as possible and to look at how we might encourage local authorities to do that. As I said, I expect to receive the group’s report in April, and I will certainly bear the member’s comments in mind.

I share at least one of the member’s views, which is that modern language assistants play a valuable role in our schools. In addition, they are excellent value for money, as the cost of each assistant comes in at less than £8,000 a year. For that reason, the Scottish Government has provided support across the board through its £4 million language fund. We have had a mixed response from local authorities, 25 of which appear to take a different view from the others on the issue. I have met one consul in Edinburgh, Herr Moessinger, who takes a keen interest in the future of the teaching of German in schools, and I intend to meet consuls and, indeed, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in the near future to find a way forward that all parties can agree on to ensure that the excellent benefits of modern language assistants are felt in all our schools throughout Scotland.

As I mentioned in response to Mr Keir’s question, the Scottish Government is working with a range of stakeholders including local authorities, Education Scotland, the Scottish centre for information on language teaching and research, which is Scotland’s national centre for languages, consuls general and cultural organisations to boost Scotland’s schools’ engagement with and performance in languages. We aim to introduce a model for language learning that is based on the European Union 1+2 model, whereby young people will be able to learn two other languages in addition to their mother tongue, to be introduced over two sessions of Parliament. That will enhance the opportunities for our young people to develop the confidence and skills that they will need to make their way in an increasingly globalised world. Our languages working group will report in April 2012 and offer advice and direction on delivering that commitment.

I very much welcome the involvement in this subject of the consuls in Scotland’s diplomatic quarter, whose advice is helpful. The picture is not universal to all languages in our schools—an increase has been experienced in Spanish. However, as I said to the German consul, the number of people who take exams in German has declined by about 10 per cent, which we would like to remedy. I look forward to the meeting with the consuls and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to find a way through the situation. It is worth adding that, if the £4 million that the Government gives to the language fund for local authorities were spent solely on modern language assistants, it would provide something like 500 of them. Even in these straitened times, local authorities might wish to consider that.

In 2010-11, 60,512 people used an individual learning account to support learning.

I certainly agree that individual learning accounts have proved immensely useful for a great number of people. Indeed, there have been 470 providers and 20,000 learner opportunities. However, I disagree with the assertion that we are doing harm rather than good. The Scottish Government is helping people to access learning through that mechanism. We have clearly rehearsed the argument that the Scottish Government is making a major commitment in college funding, despite the fact that £3.3 billion is being removed from Scotland’s budget in the coming three years.

I thank Dave Thompson, as others have done, for bringing the debate to Parliament. It has been a credible way of commemorating not just the people’s Bible project but the important anniversary that we celebrate. An Old Testament preacher once memorably told his student: “Of making many books there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh.” Ironically, his comment is preserved in a book. A few hundred years later, an author called Luke explained the reason for his two-volume work in the following terms: “It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, that thou mightest know the certainty of those things, wherein thou hast been instructed.” A Roman prisoner called Paul, anticipating his imminent execution, asks his younger disciple Timothy to “bring with thee … the books, but especially the parchments.” It is obvious that from its earliest days the Christian church has recognised the importance of written texts to its life and witness, in particular the scriptures of the Old and New Testaments. Nigel Don indicated some of the history of how the Bible came to be written in the vernacular in this country. This year marks the 400th anniversary of the King James version of the Bible. The desirability of a new translation of the Bible was first raised in 1601 by the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in Burntisland, attended by James VI. A few years later, he commissioned the production of a new translation. Of course, that was not the beginning of biblical scholarship in Scotland. The monastic tradition goes as far back as Iona, and in the scriptoria of our monasteries the Bible was copied out by hand, in much the same way as in the project that we are celebrating today. James VI had an inclusive and moderate approach to biblical scholarship—an approach that he did not apply to all his areas of policy as king. His publication became known as the King James—or authorised—version of the Bible. Nigel Don referred to the absence of footnotes in the King James edition. My understanding is that that was a deliberate policy to exclude the possibility of debate about the interpretation of certain verses of the Bible. It is difficult to overstate the importance of the King James Bible, and the Bible more generally, to the English-speaking world. Dave Thompson and John Mason spoke powerfully of the effect that the Bible had on their faith. The King James edition’s robust narrative style and the power and beauty of its poetry have given a rich legacy to the English language, along with many familiar phrases and expressions, such as “a coat of many colours”, “the powers that be” and “fight the good fight”. The Bible in general, and the King James version in particular, has had and continues to have a significant impact on Scottish history and culture. I wish to illustrate that by referring to a couple of areas in which the King James Bible has had an influence. The first is education. Scotland’s ancient universities were established, in part, to encourage the systematic study of Christian teaching generated particularly by the study of biblical texts. Later, the reformation of 1560 had profound implications for Scottish culture and especially for education. I realise that the way in which I phrased that omitted to describe Edinburgh as an ancient university. I hope that no one objects. The reformation gave expression to a particularly dangerous idea, which was the right to question the authority and teaching of the church in light of the teaching of the Bible—a right that could be exercised only if there was widespread access to education. It is interesting to note that the ideal of a national system of education, from parochial schools to universities, was set out by John Knox and others in “The First Book of Discipline”. The revolutionary ideal—a kirk and a school in every parish—took many years to implement; nevertheless it expressed a recognition of the importance of education, both for its own sake and to give everyone the opportunity to read the Bible. It also fostered a respect for education and learning that, as others have observed, resulted in 18th century Scotland boasting the highest standard of literacy in Europe. The emphasis in the reformation on education and the right to challenge authority, whether the authority of the church or others, was a significant factor in the development of the enlightenment in Scotland. The Scottish enlightenment was centred in the universities of Edinburgh, Glasgow and Aberdeen and its leading thinkers, such as David Hume, Adam Smith and Hugh Blair, taught Europe and America how to think and talk about the new areas of study, including economics, sociology and engineering. Of course, the biblical tradition in Scotland has given rise to irreverent comment about the role of preaching in Scotland’s culture, not least the apocryphal story of the Scottish preacher who indicated that his sermon would be on the verse “And it came to pass”, with particular emphasis on the word “And”. There is also the story of the man from Scotland who was found on a desert island after some years on his own. He had built not one but two churches with his own hand, and he explained to his rescuers that one was the church that he went to and the other was the church that he did not go to. All that aside, and some of that mockery aside, as Voltaire commented: “We look to Scotland for all our ideas of civilisation”. A bible in the vernacular has played an enormous role in that. Of course, the other area, aside from religion itself, on which the Bible has influence in Scotland is literature. The implementation of the ideal of a national system of education produced the literate public that was needed for that. We can see the prevalence of the Bible in something such as Burns’s “Cottar’s Saturday Nicht”. As Murdo Fraser pointed out, there is allusion to the Bible throughout our literature. James Robertson, in his short story “Bible Talk”, comments: “‘In anither thirty year,’ Tam said, ‘maist folk willna ken the Bible. No like we dae. Naebody’ll ken the language, the stories, the allusions. I honestly dinna ken hoo they’ll mak sense o the warld. Literature, for instance. Hoo can ye read literature if ye dinna get aw thae allusions?’” The Scottish Government recognises and values the transformative and lasting impact of the Bible in general and the King James version of the Bible in particular. For that reason, we welcome and recognise the work that the Scottish Bible Society and the Bible Society in England and Wales have done to promote the project. Meeting closed at 17:47.

By the end of this spending review period we will have invested £4.7 billion in colleges, which is 40 per cent more than the combined investment that was made under the last two terms of the previous Administration. We have made it clear that we wish colleges to play a full part in our guarantee to all 16 to 19-year-olds through the opportunities for all initiative. We have also indicated the priority that we attach to colleges providing learning opportunities to 20 to 24-year-olds, to those looking for jobs and to those with low or out-of-date skills.

I have not met those two firms. The Scottish Government keeps a close eye on and is in contact with the United Kingdom Government with regard to its proposals for welfare reform, some of which, as the member will be aware, are quite contentious.

The Scottish Government is committed to creating a modern, inclusive Scotland, which respects, promotes and realises human rights for all citizens. Education has an important role and enabling young people to develop as responsible global citizens is at the heart of the curriculum for excellence. Support on global citizenship and human rights education is being provided by a range of public and non-governmental bodies, including Education Scotland, the Scottish Human Rights Commission, UNICEF, Amnesty International, Oxfam, Black and Ethnic Minorities Infrastructure in Scotland and members of the IDEAS network.

I cannot speak directly for the Human Rights Commission, but I can certainly say that the Government is committed to many of the things that it has recommended, which is why citizenship, including human rights, is central to the curriculum for excellence. That is also why the Government is keen to engage with the cross-party group on human rights. I will certainly take on board what the member says about timescales and endeavour to write back to him.

All the Government’s activity in support of Gaelic aims to raise the status of the language in the wider community. That is done through education and learning, media and broadcasting, and arts and heritage. We are confident that the next national plan for Gaelic, currently out for consultation, will contribute to that aim.

I have no doubt that the future extent of those activities will be covered during the discussions on the draft Gaelic plan. The scheme is very good and I commend Highlands and Islands Enterprise for supporting it. The scheme increases the visibility of the Gaelic language in Scotland—a language that needs to be seen, heard and used. However, it has been demonstrated that a range of other measures have made progress in that area. Perhaps this is the opportunity to correct the more hysterical press on the issue, which has attributed the figure for the entire Gaelic budget in Scotland to Gaelic signs.

The member will be well aware that I am also responsible for the Scots language and that I have a strong interest in that subject. The Norse and Scots heritage of Orkney should be celebrated. The Gaelic language plan recognises that Gaelic belongs to Scotland, but I for one have an interest in recognising the particular requirements of the northern isles in that respect. However, it would be helpful if we recognised that Gaelic and, indeed, Orcadian are not threatened by each other but by another world language.

All our colleges will have a key role in delivering our guarantee to all 16 to 19-year-olds as part of our commitment to opportunities for all and in providing learning opportunities to 20 to 24-year-olds, to those looking for jobs and to those with low or out-of-date skills.

I agree with Bob Doris about the role of colleges in delivering our commitments, and particularly about the role of North Glasgow College, which I am happy to visit. I recognise the great work that the college does in its community.

We are supporting vocational skills training across Scotland through our support for 25,000 modern apprenticeship opportunities. It may interest the member to note that in 2010-11 the Scottish Borders increased the number of apprenticeship new starts delivered through employers in the local authority area to 307, up from 244. Through our post-16 reform programme, we are exploring the potential to move to a system in which funding is, indeed, allocated on a regional basis.

I thank the member for those points, but I should say that those are not the points—or at least that was not their tenor—that the principal made at an event this morning. Certainly, the Government recognises the particular economic problems that face the Borders and acknowledges that, in our plans for college reform, the same solutions for reform structures obviously cannot be applied in both urban and very rural areas.

We are building on the work of the activity agreement pilots by rolling out the approach across the country. An evaluation of the pilots identified key lessons and learning for the other partnerships. We are also investing £4 million to support local partnerships in delivering activity agreements and providing additional support through a dedicated national development manager.

Having seen the work of activity agreements at first hand, having been very impressed at their impact on the lives of many young people and valuing the role that the third sector can play, I am more than happy to participate in the meeting that the member has suggested.

There are 69 highers and 38 advanced highers available in session 2011-12.

To the extent that the information exists, I will certainly supply it to the member, but I think that his question is for the local authorities. All I can say is that, through the Scottish Qualifications Authority, the Scottish Government is determined to provide a wide range of qualifications that meet the needs of young people.

The member has raised that issue before, not particularly helpfully or usefully, to be honest. The new examinations are proving extremely popular with all those who intend to use them, whether as educators or, indeed, as people who propose to sit them. The changes that are taking place in that area seem to command wide support across the education sector.

Will the member give way?

This Government is about raising the expectations and ambitions of all Scotland’s young people. I emphasise that it is all of them: Scotland cannot afford to write off the ambitions of any individuals, communities or groups within its society. Approaches such as building new schools—as I saw this week with the beginning of the building of a new Auchmuty high school in Fife—and measures such as activity agreements that encourage and give confidence to young people who have not had opportunities during their secondary education or have become alienated from it all, play an important role in raising attainment and ambition, which are important to all Scotland. That much was reflected in the tone of many thoughtful speeches in the debate. As we heard, improving attainment will encourage ambition in our young people. It will also enable them to develop the skills and capacities that are needed to fulfil their potential. The Government’s priority is to ensure the best life chances for Scotland’s young people—to improve attainment and to do so by raising ambition. Members from all parties demonstrated that they understood that priority, although I think that Jenny Marra misunderstood it slightly. The Government is not saying that are no problems or that there is no room for improvement, but we are trying to be positive in the motion. Positivity, apart from being a moral good in itself, is, as any teacher will tell members, much more likely to get results. Some of the Opposition members complained about benign motions; all that I can say is that benign motions may achieve more than malign amendments. Ken Macintosh rightly made much of the importance of class sizes. They are part of a wider agenda for improvement. The Government will also focus on early years and embedding the GIRFEC principles. As members also rightly indicated, those principles have not been uniformly or universally applied. Ms Constance clearly indicated that the Government intends to put that right. The successful implementation of curriculum for excellence is a subject in itself, as are post-16 opportunities, which are the subject of investigation by the Government at the moment, following the cabinet secretary’s pre-legislative statement on the matter. Ken Macintosh made a point about class sizes. The fact is that the number of P1 to P3 children in classes of less than 18 is up 70 per cent. I realise that he may not want to give credit to the Scottish Government for that or to Derek Mackay for it in Renfrewshire, but it is a fact that cannot go unacknowledged. As a minister with an interest in the tertiary education sector, I say to some of the Labour members in particular that the use of the word elitist helps no one. I say that because the Government clearly has a commitment to young people of all backgrounds. If that was not the case, we would not offer 25,000 new apprenticeships or guarantee 16 to 19-year-olds without work the opportunity of education or training. I am sure that, every time that somebody says that universities are elitist, a Scot from a less-than-privileged background will think, “University is not for the likes of me.” Can we please get beyond calling universities elitist?

As I believe was explained to Ken Macintosh only recently in committee, class sizes are substantially smaller than those under the previous regime. Continuing to bring them down remains the ambition and the work of the Scottish Government. Every time we debate attainment, we talk—rightly—about the inequalities in Scotland’s society, which are reflected in educational opportunities. I am happy to and think that it is important to acknowledge the realities of those inequalities. Participation rates in tertiary education have improved for the second year running, but I would like them to improve more rapidly. John Pentland was right to make a point about improving equality of access to our tertiary education sector for young people who are from less wealthy backgrounds. He said that schemes had been abolished. I remind him that the Scottish Government has created two new schemes with the aim that he described—the schools for higher education programme and a scheme for access to the professions. Articulation is an important part of what the Government is trying to achieve. We are trying to ensure that we do not stick to rigid and outdated concepts about how people will end up in higher education, for instance. We must be much more flexible about allowing movement between different forms of education and genuine lifelong learning. One aspect that will support that approach and encourage equality of access to tertiary education is that the Government has made it clear that higher education will be free in Scotland. Derek Mackay, who was endorsed by several parties across the chamber, made the point that—at the other end of the educational experience—early intervention is important, as are activity agreements. Claudia Beamish was right to highlight the needs of specific groups, including students from ethnic minorities. Claire Baker talked about the importance of early years. I can only seek to reassure her that, as the Government will fund the early years task force with in excess of £250 million, we should have confidence in what the Government seeks to do on early years. [Interruption.] I am being reminded to refer to what the Government and its partners seek to do. As Ms Constance outlined, we will deliver improvement by focusing on early years. More than that, we will seek to ensure that young people have a rewarding and enjoyable education experience and that they enter their adult life ready to take full advantage of an increasing range of opportunities. We know that those who face the most difficult challenges need co-ordinated support that delivers for them as individuals. That means collaborative working by the dedicated professionals who work day in, day out to inspire, support and nurture our children and young people. We are embarking on a programme of change in early years, which will include vital work to develop a national parenting strategy, the roll-out of another phase of our play, talk, read campaign, the further expansion of early learning and childcare provision and the roll-out of work under the early years change fund. Through positive engagement with community planning partnerships and other partners, we are making progress across the country on embedding the GIRFEC principles. Through curriculum for excellence, we are supporting the development of key capacities and ensuring that our young people leave school with the skills, aptitude and ambition to fulfil their potential. In coming months, much work will be undertaken not only on engagement on and support for the development of new national qualifications but on targeted support for the implementation of new work in primary schools, engagement with parents and a focus on attainment.

I will gladly do so. We must be ambitious for all our children and young people, but we must go further. We must work to support them so that they develop their own ambitions that are nurtured through guidance, professional know-how and a commitment to continuous education for all. In conclusion, I merely say that we cannot accept Labour’s amendment due to its relentless negativity. Had the Conservative amendment not ended in two ideological words that write off many schools in Scotland, it would have been quite sensible. However, not for the first time, the Conservatives are captives of their ideology.

All apprentices in Scotland must be employed prior to commencing their apprenticeship. The modern apprenticeship programme gives us the opportunity to support young people and others into work in order to support workforce development. Information provided by Skills Development Scotland shows that in 2010-11 there was a total of 21,561 modern apprenticeship starts. Of these, 12,827 were 16 to 19-year-olds making the transition into the labour market. The remaining places were focused on upskilling individuals across a range of important economic sectors.

I cannot comment on a case I am not familiar with, but I am happy to speak to the member about it. When the Government sets ambitious targets for the number of modern apprenticeships, we are also clear about the quality of apprenticeships. For that reason, I am looking at a range of things, including technical and graduate apprenticeships, to ensure we maintain the gold standard of apprenticeships.

I cannot provide the numbers for each local authority off the top of my head, but we have committed to major targets, which we are meeting. In the most recent financial year, we have more than met our targets. Across local authority areas, an increasing number of apprentices have achieved their apprenticeships—the figure has now risen to 71 per cent. I am happy to write to the member on both counts and to provide figures on a local authority basis.

In opening the debate for the Government I will admit a rare thing in politics, which is that I care fairly deeply about whether the Parliament intends to accept the premise that I put forward today. It would be fairly uncontentious anywhere else on earth, and it is this: that it is reasonable for anyone in any country to expect that school will give them access to and knowledge of their country’s culture. I believe that premise—and I declare an interest, which my register of interests will show—as someone who is involved in various cultural organisations. I also believe it as someone who, for all the many good things about my experience of school, somehow managed to grow up in the same place as did both Sir Walter Scott and James Hogg without hearing either of their names mentioned in secondary school. The Government’s commitment to Scottish studies in schools has sparked some intemperate language in the political arena. [Interruption.] I hear some from parts of the chamber already. Things have been said about this that I earnestly hope some politicians are suitably embarrassed about now. I note that the words “indoctrination” and “brainwashing”, for instance, are absent from the Opposition amendments—that much at least is to be welcomed. Be in no doubt: the public has warmly welcomed the commitment to Scottish studies, with recent research showing a 90 per cent level of support. That is because the vast majority of people recognise that learning about Scotland’s history, languages, literature and culture should be an integral and natural part of a young person’s experiences. So we will strengthen the place of Scotland in learning through the curriculum, ensuring that all and not just some children and young people can access a distinct strand of learning about Scotland and Scottish culture. Young people have an entitlement to a broad general education as part of curriculum for excellence. That must include enabling them to develop a knowledge and understanding of Scotland and its place in the world. Understanding Scottish culture and connecting with Scotland as a place through our landscape and natural heritage are an important part of developing a sense of worth, confidence and wellbeing—all the things that enable people to flourish in learning, life and work. During the debate on the Scottish Government’s legislative programme on 8 September, Johann Lamont highlighted her experience from school as evidence that we need take no further action on Scottish studies. If Ms Lamont’s experience of the classroom, both as a pupil and as a teacher, was one where Scottish history and literature were taught, I warmly commend that. I do not doubt that over the years some young people have benefitted from first-class learning about Scotland, including Scottish literature, history and poetry. However—believe me—that simply is not the experience of everyone. The real point, which the Opposition amendments regrettably seem unwilling to accept, is that we have a duty to ensure that learning about Scotland and its culture is not a fortunate accident for some, but an expectation for all. As to other objections that Ms Lamont raised in her remarkable contribution on 8 September, most notable was the claim that the Scottish National Party is hell-bent on trying to tell children that no bad landlord has ever been Scottish or that we want to write women out of Scottish history—I hardly know where to begin on that. Let me instead leave rebuttal to Dr Wilson McLeod, a senior lecturer in Celtic and Scottish studies, who said recently about Scottish studies: “Far from giving a biased and nationalistic view of Scotland’s past, it could also pierce ‘romantic history’ about the likes of Culloden and the Clearances”. During the 2009 year of homecoming, we saw some wonderful examples of pupils learning about their country and its contribution to the world, including the winner of the homecoming Scottish education award: Iochdar primary school in my constituency. I hasten to add that it got that award before I became the Minister for Learning and Skills. At the end of it, young people in schools that had entered the competition for the homecoming award were asking why they could not have the opportunity to learn about Scotland every year. Well, we intend to ensure that such opportunities become embedded across the curriculum. There is a strong sense of necessity here. Coherence, relevance, progression and depth are key principles in the new curriculum, and providing greater structure to learn about Scotland will be enabled by Scottish studies. We know from Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education reports that since 2007 schools have been developing approaches to planning the Scottish dimension in history that are more coherent. We consider it vital that that continues to be developed, not only in terms of history but across the curriculum. Proposals will therefore be developed and implemented in a way that strengthens curriculum for excellence, providing a more relevant and connected learning experience that raises ambition and attainment for all. Earlier this month, I chaired the first meeting of the Scottish studies working group. The group has an excellent blend of experience and insight from the fields of academia, the Scots and Gaelic languages, literature, culture and, most important, teaching. We are privileged to have the Scots makar, Liz Lochhead, join the group, as well as the musician Phil Cunningham and Scottish literary authority Professor Douglas Gifford. There is a strong appreciation within the group of the value of ensuring that pupils can access learning about Scotland while avoiding any risk of marginalising Scottish subjects. In taking this work forward, it is important to appreciate that we are not starting with a blank canvas. The place of Scotland in learning has been significantly strengthened through curriculum for excellence. There are many opportunities to develop relevant and engaging learning about Scotland and Scottish culture in curricular areas including social studies, through Scottish history, geography and modern studies; expressive arts; languages; and health and wellbeing. Outdoor learning also provides an exciting opportunity to engage and inspire young people in a wide range of environments. This is not, as some commentators seem to have imagined, all about history. Schools such as Carleton primary in Glenrothes are leading the way. Scottish culture at Carleton is organised thematically with each primary following a programme. I was also impressed by the cross-curricular approach being taken in Dunfermline high, which I visited earlier this month. Let me stress one other thing: it is vital that Scottish studies underpins an international perspective as young people develop as responsible global citizens with the skills, knowledge, understanding and values to succeed in a fast-changing world. The place of learning about Scottish history has been greatly strengthened in recent years through online resources and the introduction of the mandatory Scottish history unit in higher history. During the last academic year, more than 20,000 young people throughout Scotland benefited from the heritage education travel subsidy scheme, which has opened up access to heritage education at sites including the new Robert Burns birthplace museum, New Lanark world heritage site, Bannockburn and Edinburgh and Stirling castles. I am looking to see whether Murdo Fraser is in the chamber. He objected to the scheme at the time. It gives me great pleasure to announce that the Scottish Government will continue its support for the heritage education travel subsidy scheme for 2012-13. Clearly, it is appreciated by teachers and young people alike. Among many other aspects of Scotland’s culture, Gaelic is a vital part of what we are trying to do. Gaelic is one of our national languages and we have a collective responsibility to ensure that it flourishes. The recent survey of public attitudes to Gaelic made clear the overwhelming support for Scottish studies and showed that 81 per cent of the Scottish public feel that it is important that Scotland does not lose its Gaelic language traditions. We should also recognise and value the place of Scots literature and language in Scottish culture and ensure that it has a firm place in learning. Practical steps include working with local authorities, national bodies and groups such as the Scots Language Centre, Scottish Language Dictionaries and the Robert Burns museum to support progress. We will also look at how we can take forward the recommendations of the Scots language working group and are planning to establish a network of Scots co-ordinators in schools. Clearly, the scope and range of Scottish studies is enormous throughout the journey through primary and secondary school. We therefore also expect there to be opportunities for learners to continue their studies within a Scottish context in the senior phase. That will include recognition of such learning within qualifications that incentivise progression and attainment. There is a significant number of national courses that have opportunities and aspects that can be studied and assessed within a Scottish context. Those opportunities will be strengthened within the new curriculum for excellence national qualifications, which will be implemented from 2013-14. We are also exploring the potential for a specific qualification in Scottish studies. Let me be clear—this is something that has caused much slightly ill-informed debate in the press—that the working party is keen to investigate a range of models. A qualification could, for instance, include recognising the study that young people undertake on Scottish themes across a range of subject areas and at different levels, but, as yet, the group has reached no conclusions. All young people deserve the opportunity to learn about their country, and nowhere else but here would that be questioned. Those who still do might perhaps wish to consider taking a deep breath and turning away from their own constitutional obsessions for one moment. [Interruption.] Those people obviously recognise the problem that they have. They would see that Scottish studies is healthy, normal and supported by people across the political spectrum and across the world of education—it is also supported by parents. There are good examples of embedding Scottish subjects into the curriculum in schools, but that is not being done everywhere across the country and we want all—not just some—young people to have a clearer understanding of Scotland and the world. One of the wisest comments made in the press following some of the more hysterical political reactions to my initial announcement about Scottish studies came from a Mr Hugh Reilly. In his article in The Scotsman, Mr Reilly said that, for whatever it was worth, he viewed himself as a traditional Labour voter. He also said: “I’m speculating here, but Scotland must be the only country in the world where teaching children the history of their own nation is perceived to be treason. The idea that introducing Scottish Studies to the national curriculum is brainwashing our children is farcical beyond belief.” Indeed. Let us start being serious about the issue. Let today’s debate be the start of a positive recognition by the Parliament as a whole that every young Scot has a right to learn about their country and, through that knowledge, to learn about the many other peoples of the world. Believe me: there is a world out there that regards all this stuff as pretty normal and, in Scotland’s case, long overdue. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the 90% level of support for Scottish Studies in a recent survey; agrees that it is essential that all young people should have the opportunity to learn and be better informed about their country and its place in the world, including its historical, literary, linguistic and cultural inheritance as well as its landscape and natural heritage, and that such learning provides a more relevant and connected learning experience that raises ambition and attainment for all, and supports the Scottish Government’s desire to develop a distinct strand of learning around Scottish Studies for all pupils in the context of the Curriculum for Excellence, providing greater coherence without marginalisation.

I thank the member for giving way and I welcome the tone of everything that she has said, at least up until that point. She clearly welcomes the idea of literature being an international phenomenon and agrees that people should be exposed to all sorts of literature from around the world. Does she not also acknowledge that not all children and young people in Scotland have the opportunity to study Scottish literature? The experience is not universal.

Does the member agree that one thing that would make a difference—it is certainly a theme that is beginning to emerge from the working group—is for teachers to have confidence about Scottish subjects and Scottish subject matter? An emerging theme is that continuous professional development among the teaching profession to be able to cope with those subjects would be welcome. Does she welcome that?

I thank Kezia Dugdale for making that point. I merely emphasise what I said before about the recognition of a Scottish studies qualification. One of the options that is being considered is an interdisciplinary idea in which recognition could be given to people who are studying Scottish material across a range of subjects. We are not against interdisciplinary working.

I welcome the member’s support for modern languages. Will he, likewise, welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to increasing children’s awareness of Scottish languages and to exposing them meaningfully to two modern languages in addition to their own?

Will the member take an intervention?

All the eminent members of the working group made that assertion strongly from the outset and it might be that they are right. How does the member react to that?

Will the member give way?

I hope that Jenny Marra will acknowledge that the working group is considering that matter. I ask her to acknowledge that, as I and others have said, one of the options is for people who are studying Scottish subjects across a range of disciplines to be recognised for it, rather than for there to be another higher that competes with others.

Is Jenny Marra suggesting that people such as the national poet, professors of Scottish history and eminent educationists are somehow part of an unspecified plot to corrupt the minds of Scottish youth?

We are committed to offering a range of support, through Skills Development Scotland, to make it easier for smaller local businesses to hire staff and take on one of the 25,000 apprentice opportunities available this year. The support includes access to £1,000 to support 16 to 19-year-olds who have completed pre-employment training into a job or an apprenticeship; access to £5 million to help employers recruit people aged over 18 who are struggling to find work; and, for businesses with fewer than 50 employees, £2.5 million is also available in the form of a £1,000 rebate for the additional recruitment costs small businesses incur. It may interest the member to know that last year 805 new apprentices started their training across east and west Dunbartonshire.

I acknowledge that there is a problem with youth unemployment. The Scottish Government will support 25,000 modern apprenticeship opportunities, and the majority will be targeted to help young people between the ages of 16 and 24. I will be happy to ask Skills Development Scotland to consider how it can help small businesses, in particular, to recruit apprentices in Clydebank and across west Dunbartonshire.

We certainly acknowledge that some people are further than others from the employment market, and we acknowledge that higher levels of unemployment are suffered by people who have disabilities. We seek to overcome those unfair aspects of the work market. Mr Park’s first point was about people who are far from the labour market. We carry out work through many schemes in an effort to make people ready for apprenticeships, and I am happy to look specifically at the issue of employees with disabilities.

I thank the member for raising that issue. The primary focus of our modern apprenticeship programme is, rightly, on people in younger age groups who are seeking to move into jobs, so young people account for the majority of places. However, the Government appreciates that specific problems arise for people in older age groups. We know that the programme is a good route for unemployed adults to get into jobs with training. For the first time, we have targeted a proportion of places to support unemployed people in the 20 to 24 age group. The modern apprenticeship programme is also an important tool in developing our workforce more generally, in all age groups. That is why the Government offers the programme such strong support.

Careers guidance services make an important contribution to sustainable economic growth. In March we published Scotland’s first strategy on careers services, which set out clearly our commitment to an all-ages, universal service that responds to the needs of today’s society and to people’s demands and expectations. Two weeks ago, I attended the launch of the new careers web service—my world of work. That is something that we should be excited about, because for the first time people throughout Scotland have a wealth of material—literally at their fingertips—to help them to plan their careers, whether they are starting out on their working lives or are already on that journey. There is much more to our approach than just a website. The website is part of a much more integrated approach to careers services, to offer a greater mix and balance, which includes face-to-face and online approaches and the Skills Development Scotland contact centre and partnership working.

The member might be aware that many of the concerns that emerged from the feedback were expressed at an early stage, before the engagement exercise with all concerned had been completed. The engagement was constructive. Most of the concerns that were expressed at an early stage were about technical aspects of the programme. We will not turn the clock back. There is huge demand out there for services such as the one that has been launched. I hope that I can reassure the member that I do not regard the my world of work site as a replacement for human beings. Far from that, I regard it as a much more efficient way to use the talents of careers service personnel and ensure that they are fully brought into the whole exercise.

We recognise the important role that the national health service and charitable organisations can play in visiting schools to help to give children and young people skills that could potentially save a life. The experiences and outcomes under curriculum for excellence contain a section on physical wellbeing, which includes the words: “I know and can demonstrate how to keep myself and others safe and how to respond in a range of emergency situations.” It is for schools and local authorities to decide what resources to put in place to take that learning forward. To support Scottish schools and local authorities, officials from the Scottish Government, Education Scotland and relevant charities are working in partnership to develop a case study resource on the teaching of emergency life support skills in schools.

I very much welcome the sentiments that have been expressed. I monitor the activities of local authorities and schools on the issue and I certainly welcome what they do. Margaret McCulloch mentioned the British Heart Foundation. I commend its work through its heartstart programme. I intend to keep in touch with charities and local authorities on the issue.

Following what was already a record level of funding in 2010-11, the Scottish budget in February boosted support to college students in the current year to £95.5 million, which is a real-terms increase of no less than 9.4 per cent. Of that amount, £79 million will support bursaries, with the remainder helping with childcare and cases of hardship. That is providing significant financial protection to college students at a time when many other budgets are having to be cut as a result of the £1.3 billion reduction in Scotland’s block grant by the United Kingdom Government.

I welcome that contribution to the debate—and I would welcome further contributions to it by the end of the year. As emerged in the cabinet secretary’s comments yesterday, it has become clear that there is a balancing act between the autonomy of colleges and their accountability. One element of their accountability that we must explore is the system of discretionary support to students—we must consider whether it should continue in its present form. I would welcome the member’s further contribution to that debate.

In opening today, I first offer my apologies to members for not being able to stay for the whole debate due to ministerial engagements in the course of the day. After the First Minister’s statement yesterday, few could be left in any doubt that Scotland’s economic recovery is at the heart of our programme for government. That is as it must be. Recovery is self-evidently critical to Scotland’s success and is the route to improving the lives of millions of our people. The measures that the First Minister set out have a very practical edge. They are about economic success through jobs for the people of Scotland. Capital investment, improving access to finance and restoring business and consumer confidence are all central to attracting new businesses to Scotland and supporting the businesses that are already here—particularly small and medium-sized enterprises. I want to talk about a particular group of Scots. As we look forward to the next five years, we must pay particular attention to our young people. That is why we are committed to opportunities for all—a place in education and training for all 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in a job, an apprenticeship or education. The economic downturn has meant that we cannot but take the issue seriously and do something about it. Despite the constraints placed on us by decisions taken outside Scotland, we will act decisively to provide our youngsters with an opportunity to overcome the barriers that they face. We must offer a range of high-quality provision that is underpinned by the personal and financial support that young people need to succeed. That is why we have maintained our position on higher education tuition fees, despite the scale of that undertaking, and why we are committed to delivering 25,000 modern apprenticeship opportunities a year during the parliamentary session. The Government understands the value to Scotland both culturally and economically of a new generation of Scots who feel confident about their own culture and its value to the wider world. For that reason, I would prefer not to embarrass the Opposition parties’ education spokespeople—unless they want to raise the issue themselves—by reminding members of the hysterical response with which they recently greeted my announcement on Scottish studies in schools. I am actively working to ensure that a strand of Scottish studies is embedded in the educational experience of all our young people. I am prepared to assume that Ken Macintosh does not now regard it as corrupting the young for them to be taught about Keir Hardie, and at least Murdo Fraser seems to be fully signed up to the idea of introducing a module on the Scottish Conservatives into higher history. Therefore, I trust that cross-party support will now abound. Yesterday, the First Minister spoke about our goal of ensuring that there is an inclusive education system that improves life chances for all. That is why our commitment to delivering free higher education is more than just a policy position for this Government: it is an example of how we have connected with the values of the people of Scotland and prioritised their ambition. Our belief in the people of Scotland means that we will continue to put decision making into their hands. That is exemplified by our approach to reform and the reorganisation of many other areas of public life, not least health services. The focus in the programme for government on early detection and patient-centred care places the individual at the centre of their own health service. Putting the individual at the centre of the design and implementation of the services on which they rely in all spheres is critical to the successful delivery of public services in modern Scotland. It must be said that, at a time when another Government is cutting Scotland’s resources by £1.3 billion, it is essential that we focus on delivering better outcomes from the resources that we have. That is why we will take forward significant programmes of reform in critical parts of Scotland’s public services, such as police and fire services and post-16 education. Members should be in no doubt that we believe that Scotland could do much more if the levers of economic power in Scotland had handles in Scotland. That is why other parties may rest assured that this Government will ensure that the people of Scotland decide their own constitutional future. For now, however, we will make sure that the economic argument for independence is put to the people of Scotland. We will make it firmly and we already make it with increasingly good reason for confidence. We understand that delivering on our current programme will be critical in making that case—a case that we offer today to the chamber and to the people of Scotland.

All I can ask is: does the member not accept that the many teachers, academics and experts who assembled yesterday around this issue and all of whom want to see action on it are united on the point that teaching Scottish history, for instance, does not mean ignoring its bad bits or all of our literature? It just means ensuring that every child gets to learn about these things.

Prior to the election, ministers wrote to the principal of every college in Scotland to seek an assurance that they would not make any compulsory redundancies. Nearly all colleges have now given a commitment that they will seek to avoid such a step unless as a last resort, with at least seven going further and giving an absolute guarantee. Colleges have also agreed to maintain the same level of activity as in 2010-11 in the forthcoming academic year.

The member will be aware that colleges are independent institutions. I am happy to meet him about the individuals that he mentions, but I stress that ministers have no power to direct colleges on such matters, because such powers as we had were taken away by the previous Labour Government in 2006.

The Government has already made it clear that we will take a comprehensive look at college sector governance. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning plans to say more about that next week when he makes a statement to the Parliament on 29 June. However, I understand the concern and disquiet that has resulted from college management decisions to implement a reduced budget for the 2011-12 academic year. I take seriously the concerns that some members of staff and students have raised. Only yesterday, I met a member of staff from Edinburgh’s Telford College who had such concerns. The Government intends to listen closely to all those views and particularly to those who call for improvements to the democratic accountability of college governance arrangements.

The latest available figure published on Her Majesty’s Treasury website for North Ayrshire Council’s total estimated unitary charge for its schools built under PFI is around £400 million. The schools are St Matthew’s academy, Greenwood academy, Arran high school and Stanley primary school.

It is for North Ayrshire Council to manage its budget and to determine its spending plans from the resources that are available to it. However, the sums of money that the council has committed are not trivial, particularly given that the estimated capital value of the projects is £83 million. The Government shares the member’s concerns about the practical impact of PFI—being the scale of repayments over the long term and the potential for windfall profits to the private sector. We prefer the non-profit-distributing model, whereby returns to the private sector are capped and surpluses from projects can be directed to the public sector.

9. To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers there would be any benefits to the rural economy if the Crown Estate commission was devolved. (S3O-13304) A dh’fhaighneachd do Riaghaltas na h-Alba a bheil e a’ creidsinn gun dèanadh e diofair ri eaconamaidh nan sgìrean iomallach nam biodh Oighreachd a’ Chrùin fo smachd Pàrlamaid na h-Alba.

Will the cabinet secretary likewise acknowledge that, in a coastal community such as my own, where the council pays rent of £20,000 per year on piers and the port authority pays a similar figure, the benefits of the Crown estate, in its present form, are hard to discern?

The education secretary’s commitment to maintaining free higher education is to be warmly welcomed. Is he able to say what effect free education, compared with other funding models, is likely to have on widening access to social groups that have traditionally not participated in higher education?

Does the member expect the excitement level to rise when he returns to the House of Lords?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making in negotiating a lease with the community in Barra for their planned wind turbine at Gob Sgurabhal. (S3O-13263)

There was none that I heard. I warmly welcome the fact that an offer of a lease for the land has been made. Can the minister confirm that the department will continue to negotiate with the community to agree an appropriate rent that will allow community benefit to be derived from the project?

As co-convener of the cross-party group on epilepsy, I thank Kenneth Gibson for securing a debate on this most important issue. There is no doubt that in recent years the education system’s response to epilepsy has improved greatly on the lamentable attitude that was shown 50 years ago, when it was sometimes questioned whether a child with epilepsy should be in school at all. Of course, that was at a time when the education system also sometimes suggested that epilepsy was a mental illness. However, the cross-party group often hears evidence that the teaching profession’s knowledge of epilepsy could still be much improved. I developed epilepsy when I was at secondary school, but I never had a seizure in school, so I cannot make many comparisons. For an anecdote about an inappropriate response to an epileptic seizure in an education setting, I have to turn to my time at university. I am sad to say that I recall that at a meeting of the student wing of the Scottish National Party in the University of Aberdeen, I had a seizure just as we were about to vote on some matter of internal politics that probably seemed vital at the time. I remember regaining consciousness after several minutes only to hear those at the meeting arguing earnestly about whether I could vote while unconscious, on the basis of the stance that I had taken earlier in the debate. I do not suppose that that was a textbook way to deal with the situation, but it is nonetheless an interesting question in its own right. In primary schools, one of the arguments that was once offered against including children with epilepsy in mainstream education was that it would be distressing for other children to see someone have a seizure. Of course, the reality is that children get used to almost anything very quickly if they are not given reason to panic, but that, in turn, implies that the teacher knows what to do. As Mr Gibson’s motion states, the key is to “normalise the condition” before children have a chance to stigmatise it, which requires some basic understanding on the part of teachers. Many teachers show such understanding, but it must be acknowledged that epilepsy takes many forms. Some forms of what used to be called petit mal epilepsy are easily mistaken for nothing more than very long lapses in concentration. I know of at least two children who went undiagnosed for years, because teachers just thought that they were not listening. More positively, there is clearly a willingness on the part of many teachers to learn about the basics of what to do and what not to do in the case of tonic-clonic seizures. There is a similar willingness to find out about medication and the very individual warning signals of an oncoming seizure that many children will have. Such increased awareness among teachers can only help to ensure that children with the less obvious forms of epilepsy get the early diagnosis that affords them the best possible chance of finding medication that will minimise symptoms. If teachers are able to find out about all that as a routine part of their training, it would certainly help, as would on-going awareness raising for existing staff. It will be interesting to hear from the minister what is already happening in this area. I congratulate Mr Gibson on focusing our attention on a condition that is remarkably common but still remarkably misunderstood. Following the launch in the Parliament only a few days ago of a guide for employers and employees on how to deal with epilepsy in the workplace, it makes sense to promote today a similar understanding in Scotland’s schools of the condition. I am sure that the Parliament will welcome further progress.

“Why,” the weary listener might ask, “do island MSPs keep going on about this subject?” If they tried buying petrol in the Western Isles, they might understand. As others have said, fuel prices are reaching concerning levels throughout Scotland. However, in Scotland’s islands, they are now at astronomical levels. I have yet to hear of people anywhere in the world who pay more to fill up their car. Therefore, I make no apology for concentrating on the effects of high petrol prices in Scotland’s island communities, and I welcome the fact that, contrary to what Mr Gordon said earlier, the Government motion refers to a fuel duty derogation in the islands. I have heard that in some places in the Western Isles petrol has reached 148p per litre, and I know that, in Benbecula, petrol is one tenth of a penny away from crossing the more than psychologically important £1.50 mark. I note the minister’s report that, in Shetland, that barrier has already been crossed.

I agree that this is a problem that afflicts all the islands and many other areas of rural Scotland. Despite the Western Isles being nowhere near the top of the league for household income in Scotland, we have a higher than average rate of car ownership. That tells its own story. As others have pointed out, in the islands a car is essential for practically anyone in employment and anyone with a young family. In many cases, it is even essential for pensioners who just want to get to the nearest shop. People who would not consider owning a car in the cities realise that they have to have one in the Western Isles, or in other island communities. Public transport does exist there, and it is certainly used. However, with most villages having typically half a dozen buses going through them each way a day—if that—trying to fit the needs of a job or a family around bus services is no simple matter. To ask people in the Western Isles to do without cars entirely would, if I may put it as dramatically as this, be to ask them, essentially, to accept the travel patterns of their grandparents’ generation—three or four trips a year to Stornoway, followed by one permanent journey to Canada. I say these things not as a petrolhead by any means—lest I be called that. I do not drive a car on the mainland, which is possibly just as well for people there. I did once drive a car from Inverness to Ullapool, I concede, but I have no immediate plans to repeat anything of the kind again. I fully and enthusiastically accept the need to reduce our car use. However, we must also accept that, in some parts of Scotland—not the bits that are responsible for the vast bulk of our carbon emissions—if there is an alternative to the car, it has not yet made itself known. For that reason, people in the Western Isles have not been slow to record their views about fuel prices. I wrote to my constituents on the issue some time ago and got almost 5,000 replies on the subject. A petition was raised locally and was taken to the Parliament’s Public Petitions Committee. It was signed by something like a quarter of adults in the islands. It resulted in correspondence between the Scottish and UK Governments, in which, somewhat laughably, the then Chancellor of the Exchequer, Alistair Darling, argued against a cut in fuel duty in island areas, claiming that it would create what he called “perverse incentives”—presumably for people in Glasgow to drive to the Western Isles to fill up their car. We are still waiting for the present UK Government to make good on its promise—which is very welcome, I must say—made many months ago now, of a 5p cut in island petrol duty. Notwithstanding the complications that have been described, I counsel the UK Government that a hope long deferred maketh the heart sick. As everyone knows, the price of petrol has gone up through the VAT rise, ensuring that those who already pay most for their fuel now pay most tax, too. There is as yet no sign of a fuel tax regulator and it is disappointing—indeed, somewhat incredible—that the Labour amendment seeks to remove all reference to that regulator from our motion. I hope that Labour candidates in the Highlands and Islands are well briefed on how to explain that one away. I accept that tax is not the only factor in the price of island petrol. The lack of competition among the companies that deliver and supply fuel to island petrol stations—I am not thinking internationally, but locally—is not healthy. Indeed, as other members have mentioned, the Office of Fair Trading has taken some interest in the matter. However, tax is an important factor and, regrettably, the UK Government still determines the tax on fuel and receives that tax, just as it receives tax on the companies that operate in the North Sea. My colleagues in the House of Commons are busy today tabling amendments to the Scotland Bill to put that situation right but until it is, this Parliament still has an opportunity to argue for a fairer deal for those who really do rely on the car. That means arguing that the UK Government should cut the rate of island fuel duty, abandon its planned duty increase and introduce a fuel duty regulator. Any party that does not argue for those things tonight will rightly be strongly criticised in the communities that I represent. For all those reasons, I urge members to support the Government motion and to vote against the Labour amendment.

Will the member give way?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the need for the St Brendan’s hospital building on the Isle of Barra to be replaced. (S3O-12927)

In light of recent comments by the chief executive of NHS Western Isles that the current hospital building on Barra is “completely unacceptable” and “wholly inadequate” for modern clinical standards, will the Scottish Government consider as a matter of urgency any case that the local health board makes for a new facility?

Despite its unprepossessing name and content that will never make a newspaper editor hold the front page, the Public Records (Scotland) Bill is, for good reasons that other members have alluded to, deeply important to the lives of many people in Scotland. As we know, the Shaw report into historical failures—and much worse—in some of Scotland’s children’s homes was very clear on that point. Failure to maintain adequate records meant that a generation of our most vulnerable children were failed, and failed for the rest of their lives, by the hopeless record keeping of many institutions in the past. As the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee heard in distressing evidence, that meant that many people who were formerly in the care of such institutions were, in later life, completely unable to piece together the stories of their lives, their family origins or the reasons why they ended up in care, far less to be in an adequate position to investigate any failures or abuse that may have occurred in many cases. From that evidence, the committee concluded that we have a “strong moral obligation to manage personal records effectively.” Although those very unhappy stories provided the springboard for the bill, the legislation takes the opportunity to impose standards of record keeping across a wide range of authorities. The Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee took evidence on the bill and we were convinced, despite the misgivings of some witnesses, that it provides a proportionate solution. Part 1 of the bill will require the production and implementation of a records management plan, to be approved by the keeper of the records of Scotland, by named Scottish public authorities. As other members have said, the keeper will design a model records management plan, with best practice advice and supplementary guidance, to deliver to authorities. The bill will further guarantee the keeper the ability to carry out compliance reviews of the plan’s implementation by authorities. The keeper may also issue warning notices and take related measures to ensure that the management plan’s provisions are being observed. During evidence, the keeper concluded that, from the review, an understanding had been gained that there were widespread inconsistent record-keeping practices throughout Scotland. The Scottish Information Commissioner stated during his evidence that, under current record-keeping regimes, finding many records is like “looking for a needle in a haystack.”—[Official Report, Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee,12 January 2011; c 4504.] He made it clear that many organisations, not least some of Scotland’s local authorities, could make very significant improvements in their record-keeping practices. Other witnesses were of the view that the schedule of the bill is perhaps disproportionate and covers too broad a range of organisations, and they offered the view that there should be a differentiation between high risk and low risk records management. The General Teaching Council for Scotland, for instance, argued that the bill will place significant burdens on public authorities and questioned whether the bill will deliver appropriate compliance that would be proportionate to the costs. However, others persuaded the committee of the position that organisations should keep accurate records no matter how small in scale and scope, and that organisations that keep reasonable records have little to fear from the legislation. Having said all that, I welcome the minister’s indication that at stage 2 she is willing to return to some of those concerns and to engage with them. The bill requires the public authorities that are listed in the schedule of the bill to “produce, implement and review records management plans.” Once the public authority has developed a records management plan, it must be approved by the keeper of the records of Scotland. The bill aims to ensure that records are organised and easily accessible for public review. The plan describes the arrangement of records not only by the authority but by contractors who carry out any function of the authority. That point is central to the scheme that is set out in the bill and it is why contractors’ records are to be included in an authority’s records management plan. Although the committee wants to be reassured that that will not impose new and unreasonable burdens, it was again broadly persuaded of the need for that aspect of the bill. The bill’s financial memorandum states that bodies that have credible records management plans will likely face only minimal costs as a result of the legislation, which also seems to committee members to be broadly credible. The Public Records (Scotland) Bill has been deemed important because it holds public authorities accountable for the storage of information, which is often information on individuals. I hope that a reform of the public records system will ensure that significant public records are no longer filed away in unmarked boxes in lock-up storage centres, put in skips or given away to random passers-by, as happened in the worst examples that were brought to the committee’s attention. Good records management will, as has been stressed throughout the process, give much clearer guidance to authorities on what can be thrown out and, indeed, on what must be thrown out if records are to be kept in an intelligible form. I hope that the bill will achieve not only the end of protecting Scotland’s children, but of a much wider reform that will allow sensible and proportionate record keeping by all of Scotland’s public authorities. In that spirit, I urge the Parliament to support the principles of the bill.

Will the member give way?

Does the fact that the member has been unable to identify which of the cabinet secretary’s measures he disagrees with explain why he failed to lodge any amendments to the budget?

The United Kingdom Maritime and Coastguard Agency has proposed a series of cuts to the coastguard service that can only be marvelled at for its sheer lack of logic. It is clear that in Scotland the consequences of the plans would be felt particularly acutely. By that, I mean not only that the cuts would be felt by the people who would lose their jobs—although they certainly would be—but that they would be felt by everyone who cares about safety at sea. The proposal is to cut the five current coastguard centres around Scotland to just a single full-time station, probably based in Aberdeen, with a further additional station, based in either Shetland or Stornoway, that would operate in daylight hours only. I believe that the great strength of the campaign that has been mounted against the cuts is that it has not taken the bait offered by the MCA in the proposals—the premise that one coastguard station should be pitted against another. In that spirit, I thank all members who have signed my motion or who intend to take part in this debate, particularly those, such as Tavish Scott from Shetland, who have interests in specific coastguard stations. The point of the campaign is not that Stornoway is a more necessary centre than Shetland or vice versa—both are needed. Under the MCA proposals, in hours of darkness, a call from any vessel in distress anywhere around the UK coastline and far out in the north Atlantic would be directed either to Aberdeen or to the new station at Southampton or Portsmouth. All connections between coastguards and a specific area of the coast would be lost. That might make sense to an accountant somewhere, but consider the following real incident. Some time ago, an indistinct call came in to the Stornoway coastguards. Perhaps bizarrely, it said simply, “I’m on the Chicken.” Anyone with local knowledge will understand that the call was from a vessel that had gone aground on the Chicken rock, near Stornoway. I can tell anyone who is interested afterwards about the series of mistranslations by which the rock, which has claimed lives in the past, got its unusual name. However, the material point is that, with the best will in the world, I find it difficult to believe that a centre on the other side of Scotland or on the south coast of England would readily have been able to decipher that message. Countless other such confused situations can be envisaged. Which Tarbert? Which Scalpay? Which Berneray? If we bring Orkney and Shetland into the equation, which Mainland? Come to think of it, there is a Chicken rock off the Isle of Man, too. Local knowledge is required of coastguards for a reason. That is why the MCA’s own rules for staff specifically make local knowledge subject to continuous examination. I find it difficult to see how that aim can possibly be reconciled with centralisation of staff on the drastic scale that is proposed or, indeed, with the reduction in the overall number of staff who man coastguard centres in the UK from 491 to 248. I can understand the need for economy, but I also understand what a false economy is. At its most dramatic, a false economy is trying to mop up the mammoth financial, environmental and potentially human costs of an oil tanker going aground. In case that sounds like a dramatic example, let me say that the MCA acknowledges that many of the risks of such a scenario occurring are increasing: weather patterns are more unpredictable, vessels are larger, the seas are busier and an increasing number of incidents are being reported. In my own area, in 2008, 2,095 vessels transited the Minch. By 2010, the figure had risen to 2,442. During 2010, the emergency towing vessel that is based in Stornoway was tasked with escorting shipping through the Minch 115 times—not to mention the recent occasion when she had to shove a nuclear submarine off the end of the Isle of Skye. My mention of the towing vessel is topical, because in the last few minutes I have learned that today a Tornado with two of the cabinet secretary’s constituents on board crashed into the Minch. Mercifully, the cabinet secretary’s two constituents ejected and survived, but the point is that the emergency towing vessel is currently on the scene gathering wreckage from the incident. However, at the same time as all that has happened, and at the same time as dramatic reductions to coastguard centres are proposed, we learn that the UK Government is also proposing that those self-same tugs be disposed of, which would mean that, in the future, the nearest suitable tugs for the Minch would be in the Clyde or the North Sea. I know that other parts of the country have similar concerns. There is yet another factor in all of this: the role of the volunteer coastguard rescue service, which does everything from cliff rescue to searching for missing persons. The existence of a staffed coastguard centre acts as a major factor in attracting and maintaining the large pool of volunteers who are needed for such tasks. Areas that lose coastguard centres stand in danger, over time, of losing many of their volunteers, too. In conclusion, I will not argue for the coastguard service based on the needs of the staff and families who would be most affected or on the impact that job losses might have in rural areas, because Whitehall is clearly not interested in listening to them, important though they are. Instead, I hope that I have made—and that other members will make—a case that is based on solid arguments of public safety and on what I believe is the compelling idea that the coastguard service should be comprised of staff who have local knowledge. One question that I have been asked again and again, by many of those who would be most affected, is why the coastguard service is still run by the UK Government when so many other aspects of marine policy in Scotland are Scottish run. That is a good question. For the moment, however, even if it does not run the MCA, I welcome the strong support that the Scottish Government is giving to the campaign and the representations that I hope it will now make to the UK Government. I call on Parliament as a whole to implore the MCA and the UK Government to abandon these flawed and dangerous proposals.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what infraction proceedings are associated with failure to meet European Commission policies regarding the designation of marine special areas of conservation. (S3O-12670)

Is the minister aware of my opposition to the proposed marine special area of conservation designation in east Mingulay? What representations will the Scottish Government make to the European Commission about the inadequacy of the consultation process around such designations for which European Union law provides?

When we think of the public in terms of public engagement strategies, we usually think of individuals and families, but I presume that it also includes senior business figures and large organisations. How much work will the public engagement process undertake with the business community and how much support does it already have in that group?

The lack of stage 3 amendments to the bill is, I am sure, as much a tribute to its perfection as proposed legislation as it is to the unassailable nature of the arguments that were advanced in its favour at stage 1, which I will try not to repeat too tryingly today. Maintaining historic buildings is not a simple matter and is certainly not the same as merely preserving historic ruins. The need for pragmatism and adaptation is clear, if our built heritage is to have a function in the future. Similarly, the relevant legislation needs to adapt and survive. I hope that the bill will considerably improve the protection that is given to our built environment in a way that does not place unreasonable burdens on private stakeholders. However, the bill has at its core the concept of public benefit. For instance, it will explicitly enable the Scottish ministers to recover grants in the event that specific preconditions of those grants are violated. That is one of the many examples of how the bill takes a responsible stance on public expenditure. One innovative aspect of the bill on which I would like to dwell briefly, as other members have done, is the inventory of important Scottish battlefields. There was discussion in the committee and elsewhere about vexed questions of definition and disputed locations of battlefields. I can think of one such dispute in my constituency that led ultimately to the comment by one person whom I know that, if the battle had taken place on the site that was suggested, any graves would long since have fallen victim to generations of peat cutting. Those occasional difficulties of definition aside, however, it must ultimately be a positive step to recognise formally the existence of battle sites that are of national importance. The inventory of battlefields will give formal recognition for the first time to those sites, many of which are central to Scottish history and, in some cases, to our existence as a nation. We are fortunate that some battlefields, such as the scene of King Robert the Bruce’s victory at Bannockburn during the wars of independence, have a memorial and a visitor centre and are well known to the public. Incidentally, and unsurprisingly, I do not share the well-publicised horror that some members have expressed that schools run school trips to see Bannockburn and are encouraged to do so by the Scottish Government. However, many battlefields are less well known and have been subject to various changes in land use and to uncontrolled metal detecting, which can raise archaeological as well as ethical questions. An inventory of battlefields will start to address those issues, but in a pragmatic way. If a battlefield has been ploughed or grazed since the day after the battle took place, which most of the ones in Scotland probably have been, there is no suggestion that the bill seeks to get in the way of agricultural activity continuing. It is clear that there is wide support for the bill. The Built Environment Forum Scotland, for one, has strongly endorsed it, saying that it will go “a significant way” to ensuring consistency between elements of the historic environment legislation and the planning regime, as others have pointed out. The organisation points out that even if Scotland’s built environment did not have an incalculable cultural value, it makes an enormous contribution to our country’s economy. The bill is a reasonable and sensible means of updating and clarifying in law the protection that, as a country, we rightly extend to our built heritage. In that spirit, I commend it to the chamber.

What representations has the cabinet secretary received about schools in the Western Isles, and does he agree that the decision he took yesterday to save four island schools was both necessary and welcome?

The motion that Labour has brought to the chamber today characteristically expresses little, save perhaps its on-going internal psychological struggle between SNP loathing on the one hand and self-loathing on the other. I hope that I may therefore be permitted to stray a little from the spirit of Labour's motion and talk instead about another subject, which should be of interest to us all, namely education. The Government's amendment lists some of the reasons—it is not an exhaustive list—as to why Scotland has positive reasons to be proud of its education system and its educational achievement. Of course there are many things that we can seek to improve, but much work is being done that deserves to be celebrated. Others have already touched on many of those areas—the increase in nursery entitlement, the re-establishment of free tuition at university, the extension of the entitlement to free school meals,  the promotion of Scottish literature and history in schools and, perhaps most telling of all, the fact that we have never had a higher proportion of school leavers going into work, education or training. However, I will focus on one area that means a lot to me: the future of rural schools. I declare an interest in that I went to a primary school in the Borders with a roll that fluctuated between a dozen and two dozen—a school that subsequently closed. [ Interruption .] I do not know why George Foulkes laughs—I can assure him that it was not under the current Administration. The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010—legislation that was brought forward by the current Government—recognises, without in any way minimising the importance of all schools to their communities, that another factor comes into play in rural Scotland. If a rural community loses its school, a question arises as to whether that community can survive as more than a designated retirement zone. The 2010 act is clear in giving ministers the power to call in school closure decisions by local authorities where the Government believes that material factors have not adequately been taken into account during the council's closure process. Crucially, those factors include whether the council has really considered alternatives to closure and whether attention has been given to the economic and social consequences for the affected community. Yesterday, above all the irrelevant baying and yelling of some members, we heard crucial evidence of that legislation being put to work and a clear sign of the Government's commitment to ensuring that rural schools are given a fair chance. I am pleased to say that the education secretary announced that, as well as calling in a school closure decision in Shetland, he had used his powers under the act to keep four schools in the Western Isles open. With the Parliament's forbearance, I will pay tribute to the campaigns that were run by those four communities. First, I pay tribute to all those in the west side of Harris who argued so strongly that the local council had no right to close their school without heeding the Herculean efforts that were being made there to ensure a future for their community, which deserves the description "fragile" more than any other place I can think of in Scotland. The decision to keep the school open will serve as a significant boost to all those who are seeking to bring new life to the place following a successful community buyout. Lionel and Shawbost are two schools in the north and west of Lewis where secondary 1 and 2 pupils are taught locally rather than being sent on the long journey to Stornoway. Despite two successive attempts to close those secondary  units in recent years, the communities have won their argument. I have seldom seen a larger or angrier crowd of people in the Western Isles than in Carloway recently, where people were arguing passionately for the role that their school has in ensuring that there is life in the west side of Lewis. In the Western Isles, like everywhere else, there is a recognition that schools cannot have an eternal guarantee about their future and that some schools will have to close. However, schools deserve a chance. I do not relish falling out with my local council, which I believe exercises sincerely its difficult task as an education authority in difficult times. However, I believe that the minister was right to intervene in the four cases that I have mentioned. I doubt that many people in the west side of either Harris or Lewis would disagree with me on that. We can justly be proud of Scotland's new legislation on rural schools. We should celebrate many things about our education system. We should celebrate the more than 300 school building projects that have been completed since May 2007, which have lifted about 120,000 pupils out of poor conditions. We should celebrate the new opportunities that the curriculum for excellence brings for both teachers and pupils. Above all, while some members in the chamber fail to realise that the pantomime season is generally over by the old new year, perhaps we should celebrate the fact that Scotland's Government has done something practical to show faith in some of Scotland's most rural schools.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, judging by the tone of some of the Opposition contributions, anyone could be forgiven for thinking that a candidate defending rural schools was doing a bad thing, which stands in sharp contrast to the welcome decision of the cabinet secretary to save two primaries and two secondaries in the Western Isles?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will make representations to the United Kingdom Government regarding the proposal by the Maritime and Coastguard Agency to reduce the number of coastguard stations, in light of their role in protecting Scotland's marine and coastal environment. (S3F-2809)

Does the First Minister agree that the proposals to reduce five coastguard stations in Scotland to one full-time and one part-time station imply that calls at night from any vessel in difficulty off a vast area of the Scottish coastline, and indeed far into the north Atlantic, would be taken by a single centre staffed by people who could not possibly be expected to have local knowledge? Will he acknowledge that, taken together with the intention to withdraw emergency tug services, the proposals are not just ill thought out but reckless?

What opportunities will be created for the programme-making sector in Scotland by the BBC trust's recent welcome decision? Does the Scottish Government continue to lobby for BBC Alba also to be made available on cable networks?

People who are still at school are one group who lack the effective lobby groups that are available to students and universities. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that the green paper's consultation stage will include outreach to young people who are in the midst of making the big decisions about their lives, to ensure that they, too, are consulted fully?

Is the minister able to report on Scottish Gas's progress in clearing the backlog of work in installing central heating systems? [ Interruption .]

Myself excluded, Presiding Officer. Is the minister able to report on Scottish Gas's progress in clearing the backlog in the Western Isles of work to install central heating systems under the scheme?

A dh’ fhaighneachd do Riaghaltas na h-Alba dè an sealladh a tha aige air a' mholadh gum bu chòir cùirt Albannach, seach Àrd-cùirt na Rìoghachd Aonaichte, a bhith na chùirt ath-thagraidh mu dheireadh ann an cùisean catharra agus cùisean eucoraich. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is regarding the proposal for the final court of appeal in both civil and criminal cases to be a Scottish court rather than the United Kingdom Supreme Court. (S3O-12293)

In light of the unfortunate stance taken by the UK Supreme Court on a number of issues lately, does the cabinet secretary feel that it would be of benefit for the Scotland Bill to correct that 18th century anomaly?

I welcome the debate, much as the tone of the motion rather assumes that I will not. I regret it if my open-mindedness leaves those who lodged the motion feeling cheated in any way. Judging by his tone, I am not sure that Mr Gray welcomes the debate, but I do. I welcome it first, and most important, because I want to see Scotland take more control of our own affairs. I genuinely—as opposed to just tactically—want to see our national Parliament take more legislative and fiscal responsibility away from another place. So the fact that we are discussing a bill that, however limited in its scope, talks about those ideas is something that I hope all parties can now regard positively. Margaret Mitchell might fear that the bill is a Trojan horse for Scottish independence. I can reassure her that, wary as I might be, I do not intend to spurn unionists bearing constitutional gifts, however modest those gifts might be. The fact is that this bill represents a long overdue, if grudging, recognition from certain quarters that Scotland's constitutional future matters. It matters because, without power, we cannot act to address our country’s social and economic problems. The only question is, of course, how much power do we want our country to have? Everyone knows my preferred answer to that question, and it involves, among other things, repealing schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998. However, rather than each of us reiterating our preferred party positions, our real challenge, if we choose to accept it, is to find agreement as a Parliament. That means that we have to start from the reasonable position that, just like any other, the bill is capable of constructive improvement. There is much in the bill that we can all seek to build on. There are, however, undoubted anomalies that I believe that we must correct. Some of the anomalies have been well rehearsed, but that is no reason not to repeat them. I am pleased, for instance, at the bill’s devolution of powers on speed limits. However, as Christine Grahame asked, can anyone tell me why, if I speed in my car, my crime is a devolved matter but, if I am towing a caravan at the time, my crime is a reserved one? At the level of principle, however, what is more important is the question of the various powers that the bill envisages this Parliament giving up. I know that the SNP is not the only party that, at the time of the establishment of the Scottish  Parliament 11 years ago, would have struggled to imagine us now debating the merits of handing back powers to Westminster. I therefore urge members of all parties to consider how far it might be consistent with self-respect to envisage measures that take us down that route. The bill envisages all sorts of currently devolved activities being un-devolved, such as the regulation of various medical professions, aspects of charity law and insolvency law. As many people have mentioned, it seems that the bill even envisages reserving penguins, through its references to Antarctica, which suggests a certain degree of obsession on the part of its framers. More contentious than anything else, however, is the shape of the bill’s proposed tax powers for Holyrood.

Grudgingly, yes.

I can well understand why the member and his party sought to manufacture a grievance about tax powers at a time when it was becoming clear just how poor the tax powers that are proposed by the Scotland Bill are. I suspect that it is not only SNP members who identify weaknesses in the tax proposals. If Scotland is to enjoy real freedom of economic manoeuvre, it cannot be reliant on such a narrow range of taxes as the bill envisages—essentially, income tax, landfill tax and stamp duty. No Westminster Government would contemplate trying to operate without some discretion over corporation tax, for example, not to mention some of the smaller taxes that even Calman’s tame report recommended be devolved, including air passenger duty and the aggregates levy. The bill includes none of those. There are many areas in which this welcome bill needs serious attention. Peter Peacock admitted, quite rightly, that the Scotland Act 1998 was not an everlasting work of perfection. I remind members that even that bill was subject to amendment during its passage through the House of Commons, even if the only substantive power that was transferred from reserved to devolved was the regulation of stage hypnotists. Perhaps when we or others amend the bill that is now before us, we can aim a little higher.  The fact that we are having this debate at all disproves the refrain heard in this chamber until a few years ago: “This far shalt thou go and no further.” I have a preferred constitutional position, but I can say this much in defence of those who prefer the status quo: at least in Scotland the status quo keeps shifting. I urge all parties to propose constructive improvements to the bill, and to do so in the spirit of seeking to get the maximum that they can for their country, rather than the barest minimum that they feel they can get away with. The bill will not set the heather on fire—even in Antarctica—but, if we strengthen it, address its anomalies and address the weaknesses in the way in which its tax proposals are framed, we could end up with a bill that benefits Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

There is an element of annual ritual to the EU fisheries talks. However, they are anything but a formality to Scotland's coastal communities. More than anything else, the talks speak eloquently of the dismal failure that is the EU common fisheries policy. It is a failure not only for the industry, but  for conservation, as the policy's trademark—discarded fish—bears witness. However, one thing has been changing for the better in recent years. It has been recognised that, despite the institutional failures and the reservation of key negotiating powers to Westminster, Scotland's Government has been playing a more vocal role than previously in defending the interests of Scottish fishermen. My few remarks today will display the west coast interests that befit my constituency, but I hope that they may also have wider relevance. If we are to overcome the shameful situation of discards and cope with the reality of quota cuts, we have to adopt a catch less, land more approach. The European Commission must also accept that Scottish fishermen are already leading Europe in conservation measures. Those efforts deserve recognition. West coast fishermen have particularly grave doubts about the west coast catch composition rules, although that matter may not be discussed fully until next year. I am hopeful that, in the meantime, the cabinet secretary will continue to negotiate hard for Scotland's role in the cod recovery plan not to involve an unrealistic or unfair share of the associated pain. For the nephrops sector, which is key to the fishing industry in my constituency and elsewhere on the west coast, it is also essential that the risks associated with the subdivision of the seas into functional units be assessed. Whatever happens on that point, there now seems to be a scientific rationale not to repeat the scale of last year's cuts to the nephrops total allowable catch. Although the current relatively low take-up rate of the nephrops quota on the west coast would allow any cut this year to be a paper cut to some extent, we must also start to plan for the time when the sector starts to grow again and not leave ourselves without the people and the capacity to allow that. The fisheries talks are as important this year to coastal communities as ever they were. They highlight the human cost of Scotland's relative lack of say in decisions that need to be made more locally to a far greater extent. I will say a word in support of the community in Barra, which continues to argue against another inflexible aspect of European legislation that will, potentially, have an impact on fishing—and much else—on the island: the proposed marine special areas of conservation in east Mingulay and the Sound of Barra. Barra is a powerful example of the important role that fishing can have in maintaining populations in fragile communities. It is also a good case for repatriating to Scotland, and to  fishing communities themselves, as much as we can of the decision-making process that affects those communities' livelihoods. As in every year, the next few days are essential to ensuring that Scotland's fishing communities have the future that they deserve. I commend the Scottish Government for advancing its case and look forward to the progress that we will hear from Europe over the coming weeks.

Will the Scottish Government consider implementing any recommendations of the Scots language working group that refer specifically to the use of the language by children of primary school age?

Will Andy Kerr give way?

I merely ask Andy Kerr whether he can confirm which minister decided to mothball the power.

As a Parliament, our greatest single responsibility is,  arguably, to do everything in our power to ensure—to put it rather grandly—that tomorrow is better than today and to ensure that Scotland's children have the most dynamic, memorable and mind-broadening education possible, and not just that they pass some exams. A dynamic education does far more than provide a better future for individuals: it provides an enhanced future for all Scotland. The strength of our education system impacts directly on our future prosperity, and it is essential that we do everything in our power both to maintain and to improve Scotland's education system. Strangely enough, at least three current members of this Parliament were taught by one fine teacher at Selkirk high school who managed to include in his lessons welcome digressions into fields as varied as linguistics, literature, history, etymology, modern languages, science, the guitar, English grammar, art, current affairs and the satirical songs of Tom Lehrer, including his notable 1960s hit "Poisoning Pigeons in the Park". Somehow, amid all that, he managed to find the time to get us through higher Latin and O grade Greek. That was certainly immensely memorable, but it was deliberately not in any obvious isolated silo of educational experience. I wonder how easy it would have been to teach in that way latterly in the overexamined, overmeasured and overfragmented system that many have argued Scottish education became to some extent in recent years. If we are to correct that tendency and allow teachers scope again to teach in a more natural cross-disciplinary way, we have to embrace the curriculum for excellence. The curriculum for excellence breaks down barriers in education. As it does so, it seeks to provide the children of Scotland with a better-rounded education and to help them to grow both academically and personally. The curriculum for excellence also seeks to adapt the education system to provide more meaningful academic growth to its students. By breaking down barriers between academic disciplines, the initiative creates a better-rounded, multidisciplinary approach to education, especially at primary school level. It gives teachers greater freedom to create experiences for their pupils that make lessons more interesting and effective. Such reforms create a curricular structure that allows for flexibility and adaption at classroom level. By providing that flexibility, we grant our teachers the freedom that they need. The curriculum for excellence will also provide a better environment in which the children of Scotland can experience growth on a personal level. The curriculum ensures that students are provided with the tools and opportunities that they  need to develop and grow as citizens and it seeks to provide a system that encourages that. Indeed, there is evidence that the new curriculum is having an effect in surprising ways, such as in new Edinburgh school buildings that are now physically being designed around the new curriculum. Before we descend further into party camps on the issue, I point out that the curriculum for excellence is neither the brainchild nor the burden of any single party. All parties acknowledge—or should acknowledge—that the process that led to its creation began under a Lib Dem-Labour Administration, seven years ago, and that it has fallen to an SNP Government to implement it. Nobody disputes the considerable work that implementing the new curriculum has meant for teachers; however, we have heard relentless negativity in some speeches. In fact, if it were a temperature, it would have plummeted beyond mere negativity during Mr McNulty's speech and reached absolute zero. The Government has responded to teachers' demand for a recognition that they must be allowed to teach and that the days of top-down direction on every aspect of their teaching lives must be brought to an end. The Scottish Government has also sought to address issues that the teaching unions have raised around the implementation of the new curriculum, which is reflected in the unparalleled involvement of the teaching profession in that task. That has included the funding of the implementation partnership and the creation of four new in-service days with targeted support through HMIE. Most substantially, there has been an additional implementation year: despite the siren calls, the time for implementation is now upon us. Nobody pretends that implementation is a simple task, but the wisdom of going ahead is testified to in the comments of Irene Matier, of the Association of Headteachers and Deputes in Scotland, in The Times Educational Supplement Scotland on 4 June: "We are hearing more and more accounts of the really positive impact Curriculum for Excellence (CfE) is having on schools, teachers and pupils. In particular, many teachers report that they are actually enjoying the job much more than before." Liz Cameron, of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, said in the June 2010 issue of "Business Scotland" magazine: "Curriculum for excellence's approach in nurturing successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors offers great potential for developing the kind of young people we need—both as entrepreneurs and as employees." It is now essential that we move forward and that Scotland acknowledges that we possess a dynamic cutting-edge education system that  incorporates new reforms and targets for both academic and personal growth. We live in a rapidly changing world in which we must regularly adapt our approach to education. Only through a willingness to change constantly in that way and to improve our education system can we properly prepare the children of Scotland to live and work within that ever-changing world. Unless someone in the chamber has a better idea, the curriculum for excellence presents overwhelmingly our best prospect of achieving those goals and deserves all of our support.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

As a nation that is rightly proud of its heritage and history, Scotland possesses a robust system for the protection and preservation of historic structures and landmarks. Nevertheless, it sometimes needs to be explained to visitors and, indeed, to Scots themselves that Scotland does not have all those historic buildings by mere accident; they are there because, as a nation, we have actively chosen to maintain them. Ted Brocklebank rightly mentioned the Callanish stones as an example of an outstanding historic structure. The story about the councillor in the 1960s who wanted to knock them down to make room for council houses may well be apocryphal, but it nonetheless eloquently conveys its own warning from our country's recent architectural and planning history. Maintaining historic buildings is not a simple matter, and it is certainly not the same as merely preserving ruins. The historic environments in question have often moved beyond their original purposes and evolved into repositories of local and national identity but, in general, they cannot do that very effectively unless they are also given a continuing useful purpose in the community. One of the most contentious issues is a philosophical one. Should a historic building be preserved in aspic and, if so, at what stage in its history should that happen? The example—which, this time, is not apocryphal—comes to mind of the  proposal in regard to a historic building in my constituency that the temporary Perspex sheeting over a broken window should be preserved as "part of the development of the building's recent history". Maintaining historic sites is anything but simple and it needs to be, at least in part, a pragmatic business. Just as our historic environments have evolved to serve new purposes, the legislation that has been designed to protect and preserve them must evolve as well. We must remain flexible and willing to adapt our approach to suit new developments and realities. The bill reflects such a practical approach. That much became clear during the evidence that the committee took, and it is reflected in the support for the bill that has been expressed across the political divide. Our consideration of the bill made for some of the more unusual evidence that the committee has heard, which covered subjects as varied as the disputed location of various battlefields, speculation on whether Prince William might get engaged in Fife and the need to preserve the cobblestones in Kelso square. Mercifully, the latter did not become the subject of a paving amendment. The bill will amend current processes to provide greater protection for Scotland's historic environments. By targeting weak points and gaps in existing legislation, it will allow Scotland to better safeguard and preserve its heritage while utilising the strengths of existing frameworks and institutions. One of the great strengths of such an adaptive approach is the minimisation of costs and burdens. The bill will considerably improve our historic environment protection strategy without encumbering public and private stakeholders in the historic environment sector with enormous new financial or logistical burdens. The utilisation of existing frameworks and institutions will mean that such an approach will have minimal financial cost. The bill will explicitly enable Scottish ministers to recover grants in the event that the specific preconditions of those grants are violated. Such a measure, although not entirely new, will help to ensure that expenditure on historic sites can always be demonstrated to have a public benefit. In a time of cuts to the money that is available to Scotland, that is an important consideration, and the bill exemplifies the taking of a responsible stance towards such public expenditure. Another important aspect that has been looked at is the need for the bill to be responsive to stakeholders and complementary to other on-going efforts in the sector. Thanks to the  invaluable contributions of interested parties, including the owners of historic homes and gardens and a variety of agencies such as the National Trust for Scotland and Historic Scotland, a bill now exists that is highly responsive to the concerns and needs of those who seek to preserve Scotland's historic environments. The bill strengthens and standardises enforcement measures that are intended to protect historic environments, and implementation of the new measures will ensure that historic buildings receive more comprehensive protection. Consultation also allowed the proposed legislation to be drafted in a way that complements existing non-legislative endeavours and brings Scottish policy into harmony with European initiatives on the protection of heritage sites. The bill is constructed in a manner that complements endeavours such as the welcome efforts to make Historic Scotland more accessible and adaptable as an institution. It also makes Scottish policy concordant with Council of Europe initiatives on the designation of archaeological heritage. By ensuring that the proposed legislation remains complementary to existing work, we are able to ensure that it will form part of a cohesive approach to the preservation of historic environments that gives serious thought to the future. That will ensure the survival of our historic sites for future generations. In the years to come, the new practical considerations might force us to fine-tune our approach again. However, with the bill, we have taken an important practical step. Our wealth of historic treasures is an irreplaceable asset, but it carries a burden of responsibility. As a country, we neither shirk nor resent that burden; indeed, we proudly accept it. The Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill is our instrument to act on that responsibility, and I commend it to the chamber.

One key step in addressing literacy in secondary schools has been the introduction of the Scottish Government's new foundational national literacy qualification. Will the cabinet secretary provide an update on progress on the qualification and say how he sees it fitting into the overall literacy strategy?

In that case, I shall be brief. First, I apologise that I will  have to miss some of the debate due to a meeting that I must have on behalf of some constituents who have been in touch with me about a pressing local issue. I intend, however, to be back for the closing speeches. The refreshed skills strategy is, first and foremost, a recognition of reality. The original 2007 strategy is useful and wide-ranging. Needless to say, however, the economic climate has changed so dramatically since then that it would be remiss not to return to it in light of the circumstances. We have a pressing responsibility to ensure that Scotland's real and present skills needs are met. As the report says, the purpose of the strategy has not changed in the past three years, but the scale of the challenge has increased as a result of the economic depression. In any case, there could scarcely be a more important subject for us to revisit than this. The strategy is about accelerating economic recovery in Scotland. More to the point, it is about improving the life chances of thousands of individual Scots. The commitment to 20,000 modern apprenticeships and a total of 40,000 training opportunities this year is impressive. As well as 15,000 modern apprenticeship starts there will be, among other opportunities, 5,000 all-age modern apprenticeships. That will be particularly appreciated in my part of Scotland, among many others, because in those areas it is often people in a slightly older age group in the workforce who need new skills, rather than those who are in the age groups that are covered by more traditional apprenticeships. In marked contrast to all that stands the gap between the rhetoric and the reality of Labour's record in government on apprenticeships. Between 2004-05 and 2007-08, Labour presided over a year-on-year reduction in the number of new apprenticeship starts, which declined from 21,349 to 15,772 over that period. The Scottish Government is now, however, devoting real attention to upskilling the Scottish workforce, recognising that the only way for Scotland to make a speedy exit from the economic downturn is for us to be globally competitive. That is reflected in the fact that, despite the pressure on Scotland's budget, the Government has devoted an extra £75.5 million to lifelong learning in this year's budget. That investment is paying off. By anybody's measure, Scotland's skills position has strengthened since 2007. Just as the percentage of the population with a degree has increased, so has the percentage with mid-level qualifications. Perhaps even more significant, the percentage of the population with no qualifications has decreased. That trend will have to continue if we  are serious about changing the kind of economy that Scotland is, even within the limitations of the fairly short economic levers that presently are at Scotland's disposal. It is likely that ours will increasingly be an economy in which it will not be easy to get a job without qualifications of some kind. People who have become unemployed in, perhaps, semi-skilled work will struggle to find such work available to them in future. The needs of people in that situation, whatever their age, must not be overlooked. That means that there is a constant need to provide training, skills and qualifications. To achieve that continuous improvement, the strategy places an emphasis on four areas: empowering people, to ensure that they have the opportunity to access the right advice, support and opportunities; supporting employers, by better understanding and assessing the skills that they need for future success, and ensuring that the supply of skills, training and qualifications can be responsive to that; simplifying the skills system, to ensure that it is more coherent and easy to understand; and strengthening partnerships and collective responsibility between the public, private and third sectors. Broad though those headings sound in themselves, it is clear that the strategy points to specific measures that are, in turn, aligned towards addressing a problem that Scotland has not yet solved: translating the increase in the skills base into higher productivity and economic growth. If that tells us anything, it is that, despite progress, we still have a long way to go. Scotland will be looking closely at the UK Government's 2010 spending review for many reasons, one of which is that Scotland needs to know what impact decisions that are made at Westminster will have in the longer term on what Scotland has to spend on skills and training. The false economy of cutting too deep and too quickly would be illustrated if the Westminster Government created more pressure on the budgets that we allocate to the very activities—the provision of skills and training—that are most likely to bring our economy out of recession. The Scottish Government has produced a reinvigorated skills strategy that is designed to take account of Scotland's changed economic circumstances. It is a blueprint for proactive Government action. It deserves the support of this Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Government what consideration it is giving to bringing about closer working between local authorities and national health service boards and other public authorities in island areas. (S3O-11617)

The cabinet secretary is clearly aware of the arguments for still closer working between health boards and local authorities. Does he agree that there is a particularly strong case for that among island authorities, where the replication of bureaucracy between two bodies with coterminous boundaries is often not in the interest of service users?

Anns a' chiad dol a-mach, bheir mise taing mhòr do Ted Brocklebank airson an deasbaid seo a chumail.  Tha ùidh làidir agus eòlas farsaing aig Mgr Brocklebank ann an craoladh na Gàidhlig, agus tha sin a' nochdadh an-diugh. Tha cothrom againn a-nochd "meallaibh-ur-naidheachd" a ràdh ri BBC Alba às dèidh dà bhliadhna a' craoladh. Is math a rinn e, gu dearbh. A' coimhead air ais dha na ciad prògraman aig BBC Alba, tha e doirbh a chreidsinn gur e dà bhliadhna bhon oidhche ainmeil sin nuair a chuir iad am prògram mu dheidhinn Elvis air. Ma tha BBC Alba a' dearbhadh aon rud, 's e sin gu bheil a' Ghàidhlig freagarrach airson cuspair sam bith fon ghrèin—eadar ball-coise no rugbaidh, drama no Russell Brand a dhèanamh is dòcha. Seo "exclusive" dha Mgr Brocklebank: an sreath phrògraman mu na daoine ruadh air an robh e a' bruidhinn - tha mise ann. Air sgath 's nach eil BBC Alba air Freeview fhathast, chan eil BBC Alba ri fhaotainn ach air aon a-mach à gach trì telebhiseanan ann an Alba. Tha sin na chnap-starra mòr dhan stèisean, ach a dh'aindeoin sin, ge-tà, tha sluagh mòr a' coimhead air BBC Alba, le cairteal de mhillean neach-coimhead aig an t-sianal. Ach gun àite sam bith air Freeview, tha an sianal a' crochadh air ff reesat agus Sky. Mar a tha an t-seanfhacal a' ruith, tha Sky TV aig cuid ann am Barraigh, ach chan eil Barra TV aig mac màthar anns an Eilean Sgitheanach. Tha rudeigin air chall bho sin anns an eadar-theangachadh, tha mi ag aideachadh. Dà bhliadhna air ais, bha dòchas làidir againn gum biodh Urras a' BhBC a' dèanamh co-dhùnadh air a' cheist mu Freeview ro dheireadh 2010. Tha mi deònach a chreidsinn gu bheil deagh thoil aig an Urras airson BBC Alba, ach tha sinn a' feitheamh fhathast. Tha dùil gum bi an t-Urras a' tighinn gu co-dhùnadh a dh'aithghearr mun cheist a bha iad a' faighneachd mun "public benefit" aig BBC Alba. Cha bhi mi a' ruith tro na h-argamaidean a-rithist airson BBC Alba, bhon taobh chultarach neo eaconamach. Ach feumaidh sinn dèiligeadh gu luath leis na h-argamaidean an aghaidh Freeview. Cùm do shocair, TaxPayers Alliance. Bha an t-Urras a' moladh aon rud mu dheidhinn seo a tha air nochdadh anns na phàipearan. 'S e sin nach biodh na stèiseanan rèidio aig a' BhBC a leanas air Freeview nuair a bhiodh BBC Alba air an adhar. Dhèilig Mgr Brocklebank ris an argamaid sin glè mhath. Bha pàipear-naidheachd neo dhà a' dèanamh ùpraid mhòr a-mach à seo ach chan eil duine sam bith ag ràdh gum biodh na stèiseanan seo a' dol a mach à bith. Dìreach gum biodh iad a' craoladh air rèidio traidiseanta, rèidio digiteach agus air-loidhne a-mhàin, seach troimh an telebhisean. Chan eil fianais sam bith ann gu bheil àireamhan mòr ag èisdeachd troimh an  telebhisean dha na stèiseanan seo. Bhiodh a' chuid a bu mhotha ag aontachadh gu bheil Freeview ann airson telebhisean anns a' chiad àite, seach rèidio. Nam biodh Freeview airson rèidio, cha bhiodh an t-ainm Freeview air. Taing do Ted Brocklebank airson an deasbaid seo. Meallaibh-a-naidheachd BBC Alba air an dàrna co-latha-breith aige agus tha mi'n dòchas gum bitheamaid gur faicinn a dh'aithghearr air Freeview.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  In the first place, I would like to thank Ted Brocklebank for holding the debate. He has a great interest and wide knowledge in Gaelic broadcasting, and that was evident today. We have an opportunity tonight to say congratulations to BBC Alba after two years of broadcasting. It has performed very well indeed. Looking back to the first programmes of BBC Alba, it is hard to believe that it is two years from that memorable night when it put that programme about Elvis on. If BBC Alba proves one thing, it is that Gaelic is suitable for any subject under the sun, from football to drama—and perhaps Russell Brand. This is an exclusive for Mr Brocklebank: the programme that he mentioned will include me. Because BBC Alba is not on Freeview yet, it can be seen on only one out of three Scottish TVs. That is a big obstacle for the station but, despite that, many people are watching BBC Alba. A quarter of a million people regularly watch the channel. However, without a place on Freeview the channel depends on freesat and Sky. As the Gaelic proverb goes, people in Barra have Sky TV, but nobody at all in Sky has Barra TV—something is lost from that in the translation, I admit. Two years ago, there was great hope that the BBC trust would rule on the Freeview question before the end of 2010. I am willing to believe that the trust has good intentions for BBC Alba, but we are still waiting. I hope that the trust will come to a conclusion shortly about the question, following its consultation on the public benefit of BBC Alba. I will not run through the cultural and economic arguments in favour of BBC Alba. However, we need quickly to deal with the arguments against Freeview. Calm down, TaxPayers Alliance. The trust has one piece of advice about that, which has appeared in the papers. That is that the BBC network radio stations should not broadcast on Freeview while BBC Alba is on air. Mr Brocklebank dealt with that argument well. One or two newspapers made quite a big deal out of the issue, but nobody is saying that the radio stations will cease to exist; they are just saying that they  will be broadcast only on traditional radio, DAB digital radio and online, instead of through television. There is no evidence that big numbers of people listen to those stations through the television. The majority of people will agree that Freeview is there for television in the first place, not radio. If Freeview was for radio, it would have a different name. I congratulate BBC Alba on its second birthday and I hope that we will see it shortly on Freeview.

To ask the Scottish Government what consultation it will have with people in Lewis and Harris concerning whether there should be one or two replacement vessels on the Stornoway to Ullapool ferry route in the future. (S3O-11521)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the community's on-going interest in this question and of the debate around whether two vessels rather than one might allow better breakdown cover for all island routes. The current cargo vessel, MV Muirneag, is approaching the end of her useful life. Will the minister commit to ensuring a direct voice for the population of the islands in any consultation on the shape of future vessel provision on the route?

Will the member give way?

On the member's comment about weasel words, I have to say that I really do not know how much clearer she wants the Scottish Government to be when it says that it will not privatise Scottish Water.

Will the member give way?

I note the member's interest in trashing all our European neighbours. Will he please acknowledge that Norway has been recognised internationally as  having one of the highest, if not the highest, standards of living in the world?

Will the member give way?

It is a statement of the obvious but, as other members have said, legislation alone will not be sufficient to guarantee that crofting survives as a way of life. Legislation is a necessary condition, but it is not sufficient. It seems a long time since the previous Scottish Executive appointed Professor Shucksmith's committee of inquiry into crofting. Much in the Shucksmith report was of value, but the report and the draft crofting reform (Scotland) bill that followed it contained some proposals that were unworkable. I am not alone in having spent much of the past year lobbying for many provisions in the draft bill to be changed. Forthright public meetings and conversations with innumerable individual crofters in my community reinforced to me the point that large sections of the draft bill were—if I may put it like this—of little use to man or beast. The substantial response to the Government's consultation did not offer a unanimous view, but it is clear that it influenced the Government's decision to alter the bill substantially before it was introduced. The most contentious proposed sections—those on area committees, residency requirements and standard securities—were not in the bill as introduced. After much amendment, the bill as it stands concentrates on addressing speculation and dereliction, keeping inby land in crofting and ensuring that the crofting commission is more democratic and effective. I take the opportunity to seek assurances from the minister on two points that constituents still raise with me. In the light of this morning's debate, what is the Government doing to bring down further any costs and fees that crofters might incur in relation to the register of crofts? Will the Government say more about its re-examination of the support that is provided for crofter housing?  Having an inadequate house continues to be a major obstacle to many crofters. I am sure that, for my urban colleagues, the vast number of amendments to the bill today had all the appeal of a large cloud of midges, but they were important to my constituents and they all made substantial contributions to the debate. We might not agree with all the amendments that were made today but, after the marathon that the bill process has been, it should come as little surprise to hear the minister say that the chances of any Government legislating on crofting in the foreseeable future are slim. Let us all be honest with ourselves as we approach decision time. Another crofting reform bill is not just around the next corner. If we do not pass the bill at 5 o'clock, no elections to the crofting commission will take place. Without the bill, no action will be taken to protect crofting land from the worst effects of speculation; no measures will be taken to reverse the infamous Taynuilt or Whitbread precedents, which have done much to take inby land out of crofting use; and the commission's role in dealing with absenteeism and neglect will not be clarified. Of course the bill will not please everyone in every respect. I have mentioned issues on which the Government has still some way to go to reassure crofters. However, now that all the studies, the reports, the consultation and the amendments are over, the Parliament has a duty to act tonight. Some of our differences have been genuine; some have—no doubt—been manufactured. Regardless of that, we have a duty quietly to lay those differences aside and to get on with the task in hand. The task, which will require much more than legislation, is giving crofting a future.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

With the greatest respect to the chair, Presiding Officer, we are not responsible if the only person in the chamber who did not hear was you. [ Interruption .]

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I ask for the record whether it is the Presiding Officer's view that the clerk who heard those words imagined them. [ Interruption .]

I speak in support of amendment 135 in the name of the minister, an amendment that goes a long way to reassure constituents and clarify points that they have raised with me about the role of sub-tenants in the bill. Many crofts are, of course, worked under long-standing and, at times, fairly informal arrangements in which a sub-tenant puts the croft to what the bill defines as "purposeful use". One of the early misconceptions about the bill was that it was hostile to the continuation of such arrangements. It has to be said that some of the language in the Shucksmith report made it understandable why such ideas took hold. In a sense, amendment 135 simply restates a provision that it is contained elsewhere in the bill and in other contexts, but it clarifies that the commission must regard the crofter, wherever he or she lives, as complying with the legislation if he or she has a sub-tenant in place who is putting the croft to good use or if the crofter has permission from the commission to be absent for a legitimate reason. Amendment 135 highlights an important principle of the bill, and I commend it to Parliament.

I support Karen Gillon's amendment 144. Although it is at one level symbolic, it is also more than that. From the beginning of the bill, it will remind the commission that part of its statutory function is to have regard to "the desirability of supporting population retention ... in the crofting counties". Ms Gillon's amendment is useful in that it will remind the commission that it is there not only to serve individual crofters, but ensure the future of the wider communities around them and to take decisions that benefit not only individuals but the wider community. It will also serve to give crofting the status that it deserves in our wider economic strategy for the Highlands and Islands.

As well as encouraging small Scottish publishers, will the procurement process that is used by local authorities and others give recognition to subject matter that specifically relates to Scottish culture?

As other members have rightly observed, Scotland is justly proud of its children's hearings system, which was founded in the belief that the primary purpose of the law as it relates to children is to ensure that they are protected and given a fair start in life. One of the experiences that has taught me something as an MSP was the opportunity to sit in on and observe a children's panel hear a case. I could not fail to be impressed by the time that the panel gave to ensuring that the needs of the young person were listened to, understood and acted on. It makes me wonder with a sense of dread what we did before we had children's panels. I do not think that any of us in the chamber, least of all those of us who are on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, take lightly the task of legislating anew in such a sensitive area of Scots law. However, the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill has the significant purpose of strengthening and modernising that unique system to ensure that the needs of children remain central. It is important to remember who the bill will affect: it will improve the level of support to our most vulnerable children, of whom 47,000 were referred to the children's reporter in 2008-09. The bill aims to strengthen the children's hearings system by providing improved support for professionals and panel members and by introducing national standards. Combined with the quality assurance and the accountability that the bill creates, that approach will ensure that the system can deliver national consistency in approach and practice. The Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee took evidence on the central aims of the bill and, although it made recommendations on a number of detailed areas of the proposed legislation, it supports the bill's principles. Through the creation of the new national organisation, children's hearings Scotland, and its post of national convener, the bill will create new national standards for the statutory work of the  children's hearings system. It is appropriate that the new organisation, which is designed to support the work of local children's panels, should be created when we consider that the children's hearings system is the biggest tribunal in Scotland, but is the only one without a national body to support its work. Given that the system is largely delivered by volunteers, it becomes apparent why a body such as children's hearings Scotland is necessary. The committee has made clear its view that further discussion is needed of the exact role of the national convener, and the Government has clearly indicated its willingness to engage on that question. The bill also seeks to streamline processes and procedures in order to improve understanding and use of the system throughout Scotland under the oversight of children's hearings Scotland. That includes aspects such as the recruitment, selection, training and continuing support of panel members using nationally agreed standards. The establishment of children's hearings Scotland will help to deliver the change that is needed to create the standardised approaches. I am pleased that the submission to the committee from the children's panel chairs group during the committee's consideration of the bill said convincingly that 86 per cent of panel chairs support the new body's establishment. I note that the bill provides for the establishment of area support teams by the national convener of children's hearings Scotland in consultation with local authorities, which will ensure that local government is wholly involved in the delivery of the system. The bill also introduces a permanent legal representation scheme that will enable legal representation to be made available to children through the normal legal aid system. That scheme will ensure that children have access to supportive state-funded legal representation. There was discussion in committee and outside about the need to avoid undue intrusion of the adversarial side of the legal system into hearings, but the committee agreed that sufficient safeguards are in place and that the times when legal advice is sought will be relatively rare, notwithstanding the important distinction that Elizabeth Smith makes between legal advice and legal representation. The fact is that some attention to the current legislation is needed to avoid issues arising from the European convention on human rights. Our system in Scotland has to stand up to the various tests that the ECHR applies to such questions as conflicts of interest and the separation of roles. Finally, the bill will, I hope, improve the flow of information. There has been some discussion about that point this afternoon, but it is important that the bill improve the flow of information not  only to children but back to panels. The so-called feedback loop that is proposed will, I hope, address the complaint that I have heard from many panel members that, at present, they often do not get to know in detail whether their findings have been implemented in full and whether the interventions that have been made have actually helped the child. The bill has been the subject of significant consultation. As others have observed, what it proposes is certainly not the same as what was proposed in the draft bill in June last year. Indeed, discussions at a Scottish Executive level about reform go back to at least 2003, and the process of parliamentary scrutiny is not over. I believe that, if we are to support children's panels more fully in their work of ensuring a better chance in life for Scotland's children, the bill deserves our support.

Does the member believe that the particular problem that Scotland evidently has with domestic abuse may have something to do in part with the problem that Scotland has with alcohol?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to assist crofting communities that are facing large increases in their local rabbit population. (S3O-10889)

I will be. I thank the minister for her reply, but she will be aware that many communities, such as Ness in my constituency, have seen the rabbit population grow to a ridiculous extent and would be grateful for any clarification of the legal options for dealing with the problem.

A dh'fhaighneachd do Riaghaltas na h-Alba dè bhios e a' dèanamh a dh'obair le comhairlean a tha ag iarraidh, no tha deònach, sùil a thoirt air siostam anns am biodh foghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig na roghainn àbhaisteach anns na ciad bhliadhnaichean anns a' bhun-sgoil. To ask the Scottish Government what it will do to work with local authorities willing to consider making Gaelic the default medium of education in  the early years of mainstream primary education. (S3O-10789)

The aspiration of my council—Comhairle nan Eilean Siar—is that, as far as possible, every child in the future should start their education in Gaelic. That aspiration is welcome, but does the minister agree that unless it becomes reality, it is difficult to see how Gaelic can survive as a community language in the islands?

I congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing this evening's debate. Scotland has an enduring and obvious relationship with the sea. I will not rehearse all the reasons of geography and history that have made that the case, but it is worth giving one single illustration of the economic importance of the sea to Scotland: our shipbuilding industry, which could once boast that a third of the ships afloat in the world had been built on the Clyde. I represent 13 inhabited islands and it is only too obvious to me what the sea means to Scotland. A high proportion of my constituents have either served across the globe in the merchant navy or are fishermen, or they work in fish processing, on ferries, or in the tourism industry in and around the sea. Conversely, as in many other coastal communities, people in the islands are only too aware of the terrible power of the sea. Taking one famous and terrible example, His Majesty's yacht Iolaire sank barely a couple of miles from Stornoway harbour in the early hours of new year's day, 1919. With the loss of more than 200 men, most of them soldiers returning home from the trenches of the first world war, the tragedy remained for many decades an event so painful in Lewis and Harris that it was barely discussed. I mention that because it goes a long way to explain why people in places such as the Western Isles often have a realistic, rather than romantic, view of the sea. I also mention it to stress that the sea is not just an ecosystem that is vital to life on earth—I apologise for the word "just" in that  sentence, now that I read it, considering the enormity of what it says—we need also to recognise the importance of the sea to human cultures all over the world. World oceans day provides an opportunity every year to do just that. It provides a chance to honour the world's oceans and to celebrate the products that the oceans provide. It also gives us time to appreciate the sea's intrinsic value and the need to protect it. Pollution of the sea is a global problem, but one with intensely local manifestations in the form of the tonnes of plastic that wash up on Scotland's beaches every year. Indeed—this does not bear much thinking about—there is evidence that many beaches around the world contain almost as much ground-up plastic as they do sand. World oceans day provides an opportunity to get hands on in protecting our future with a new mindset, through personal and community action and involvement. Beach clean-ups, education programmes, art contests, film festivals, sustainable seafood events and other planned activities help to raise consciousness of how our lives depend on the oceans. Sustaining the natural marine environment while supporting Scotland's vital oil and gas and fishing industries is a major challenge, but I am intensely optimistic, as I am sure are other members, that the sea provides the key to many of Scotland's most immediate needs. The heavy Atlantic swell and some of the world's strongest tides are to be harnessed by a breakthrough scheme to generate clean marine energy off northern Scotland. The scheme's output is predicted to rival that of a nuclear power station—that is before we consider the contribution of smaller wave-powered projects and offshore wind. World oceans day offers a fitting moment for Scotland to look ahead and think about what we can do for our oceans and what our oceans do for us. There is wider and wider recognition that communities that have traditionally made their living from the sea and people who are concerned about the wider ecological role of the world's oceans can, and increasingly do, work together in pursuit of a shared goal. For that reason, I support world oceans day and commend the aims of the motion.

The debate will serve little purpose if it merely revisits the past—we have heard a little of that—or restates each of our well-known positions in the debate on Scotland's constitution. Those positions may well be heartfelt, vocal and even, in some cases, right, but their mere rehearsal will not suffice. It will be of much more interest to the people of Scotland if we each show some willingness to listen to a debate on which there is, surprisingly, at least some common ground. If members will allow me a Hebridean analogy, our common ground is perhaps like the apocryphal disputed peat bank: it has been the subject of a tense stand-off for decades; it is the object of deeply entrenched positions; and it is narrow. However, it is in everyone's interests that the Scottish and UK Governments speak to each other constructively now that proposals for constitutional change in Scotland are on the table once more. The challenge is to come up with legislative measures that will work. The Queen's speech talks about implementing the Calman commission recommendations, and there is evidently willingness on the part of both Governments to continue a dialogue about what that might mean in practical terms. There is no doubt that for those of us who see Scotland's destination as independence, the Calman proposals do not take the political temperature in Scotland anywhere close to the flash-point of heather. However, although, as I and other nationalists have said before in Parliament, we recognise that there are elements of the Calman  proposals that are good and worthy of implementation, the proposals are neither indivisible nor sacrosanct. I suspect that mine is not the only party in Scotland that takes that practical point of view. The fact that the UK Government is prepared to repatriate to Scotland legislative competence in areas such as drink-driving, speed limits and air-guns is to be welcomed. In as far as those issues go, those are highly reasonable proposals. My colleague Dave Thompson has been active among members of all parties in his support for the Scottish Parliament to have control over drink-driving law. Likewise, many have campaigned hard for Holyrood to legislate on air-guns. Further, it seems strange for a country with its own legal and criminal justice systems not to be able to legislate on something as everyday as speed limits. However, Calman is more problematic when he talks about fiscal powers. If I thought that Calman was proposing fiscal autonomy or anything resembling it, I would have no such reservations, but I am afraid that in his fiscal proposals, Calman has simply not presented a coherent picture. It is for all parties in Scotland to engage rationally on how to provide genuine fiscal responsibility for Parliament.

The member uses the word "appropriate" in relation to fiscal responsibilities. When Calman talks about fiscal responsibilities, he is not coherent. For instance, Calman's proposal to reduce UK income tax to 10p in Scotland, leaving Scotland to levy the rest herself, sounds radical only until we consider that income tax is but one tax. Under those proposals, 80 per cent of tax revenue generated in Scotland would continue to go to the UK Treasury. The Scottish Parliament would have roughly the same scope for fiscal manoeuvre as Clackmannanshire Council has—less, probably, as we would have no borrowing powers. Valuable as much in Calman is, scepticism about his fiscal proposals is far from confined to the SNP benches. The existing fiscal proposals are undermined, even from out of the mouths of members of Calman's advisory panel. Professor Andrew Hughes-Hallett—who has already been referred to—has described the fiscal proposals as "seriously flawed—if not illiterate".  Others have pointed to the fact that Calman's system, which assigns revenues to Scotland based on UK Treasury forecasts, ensures that when growth is forecast the UK Treasury gains, and when decline is forecast Scotland loses.

The member will not be surprised to hear that I would like Scotland to do all those things. However, there is a wider debate to be had. When other studies in this area, ranging from the Scottish Government's national conversation to the Lib Dem Steel commission, have all identified far more fiscally autonomous solutions for our country, I find it surprising that some cannot get beyond our previous debate on Calman and still view it as indivisible. If Scotland is to be economically competitive in future, there has to be some relationship between what Scottish Governments plough into the country's economic development and what they are able to reap from that activity through a stronger tax base. Despite the manifold differences between them, there is a clear willingness among the UK and Scottish Governments to talk sensibly about these issues together. I contend that talking sensibly can lead us only to the conclusion that not all in the Calman report can go through without further debate. By all means, let us implement the report's uncontentious measures. However, if there is a respect agenda, we should acknowledge the demand from all political quarters in Scotland that we take more responsibility for raising the money that Scotland spends.

The convener of the Local Government and Communities Committee has comprehensively set out the scope of the committee's inquiry into local government finance and the findings of our report. It is worth saying that our report to the Finance Committee during the budget strategy phase for 2011-12 will inevitably reflect some of the same themes. On behalf of the committee, I add my thanks to those that were offered by the convener to the committee clerk and her staff, as well as to the Scottish Parliament information centre and the official report for ensuring the production of such a comprehensive report. As I am speaking on behalf of the committee, I will try to be circumspect and will merely say that, as members and parties, we start from different articles of faith about the funding situation for local government. There is little point in rehearsing those differences; indeed, the report manages to sidestep them to some extent. As has been obvious from the debate, different members will, depending on their political standpoints, make greater or lesser allowance for the role of the UK Government in determining what Scotland has available to spend on its local authorities. In a sense, it would be more interesting to be having this debate after rather than before the UK Government's budget statement next month, to see what that leaves us to divide up, but we will let that be. I wish to concentrate instead on two areas—first, the impact of the local government financial situation on the voluntary sector and, secondly, the opportunity for local government to carry out its economic development role. The voluntary sector was the subject of a number of the committee's evidence sessions, firstly on the issue of voluntary sector pay. We  were prompted by petition PE1231, which called for a national framework for public service contracts to ensure equitable wages and conditions for front-line workers in the local government and voluntary sectors. There was acknowledgment from all sides that it was difficult to foresee how complete parity could be achieved in the current financial climate, but the Scottish Government indicated that it was committed to improving the situation. Incidentally, the issue of the voluntary sector featured in the committee's work a year ago when we undertook the evidence sessions that have been mentioned on home care services for the elderly. Perhaps one of the most important outcomes that the committee has achieved this year was an undertaking from the Scottish Government that the use of so-called reverse e-auctions would be banned in the future when it came to procuring services for such vulnerable people. More generally, the inquiry provided a chance for the committee to examine the impact of the current economic situation on the voluntary sector. The committee heard evidence on the issue and recommended that there should be better information on the comparison between the services provided by the third sector and those provided by the public sector; again, the Scottish Government responded to that positively. Other evidence that the committee heard revealed the difficulties that are faced by a number of major charitable trusts, such as the Lloyds TSB Foundation for Scotland. It pointed towards the possibility of what members have referred to as a "perfect storm" for the voluntary sector, in which both public and charitable sources of funding come under pressure. It is worth focusing on the impact of the current economic situation on local authorities' ability to perform their important role in promoting economic development. In the round-table discussions, some witnesses cast doubt on the ability of local authorities beyond our biggest cities to undertake that role adequately. The Scottish Government responded by indicating its willingness to listen to further arguments and to review the current business gateway contract. Following further examination of the contracts that were let in 2007, the business gateway Scotland board is now considering the arguments for refocusing the business gateway advisory and specialist support services. The Scottish Government is also considering other options in that area. Other members have picked up on a wide range of themes in the committee's report. The cabinet secretary mentioned the need for a long-term  strategic view, and responded to the important point that was made in the report and in evidence to the committee about the need to concentrate more firmly on benchmarking than on minimum standards. Michael McMahon indicated, in a revealing contribution, that he is perhaps not yet fully committed to joining any progressive coalition of forces against UK cuts to the Parliament.

As I indicated, I intend to rise above the fray, but I remind Mr McMahon who the bad guys are when it comes to cuts. Derek Brownlee made a case for stability, and pressed for detail on the council tax freeze. Jim Tolson discussed the distribution formula for local authorities and the council tax freeze, and subtracted the number he first thought of. Bob Doris gave some context to the report, particularly regarding the pitfalls of shared services and the need to build a united front on the issue of cuts. Mary Mulligan, in a considered speech, talked about the whole purpose of local government and the costs that redundancies can bring for local authorities. John Wilson indicated the importance of 22 June as the date for the emergency budget statement, and raised issues around the Arbuthnott report. Ross Finnie asked us to consider the boundary between local and national Government, and pursued the comparisons that were often made to the committee in relation to Scottish Water. Ian McKee talked about the desire for control over a local authority by its citizens, and Sarah Boyack spoke about the City of Edinburgh Council, the curriculum for excellence, motorways and trams. Today's debate has been insightful, and the report has engaged the Parliament and the Scottish Government in an entirely helpful way. Nobody underestimates the financial pressures that local government is under, but nobody should doubt the external financial pressures that apply to this Parliament—and which will continue to apply for as long as its overall budget is determined elsewhere. I thank the committee, its convener and staff for all their work during the past three years. I wish my successor as deputy convener of the committee every joy in the future—or at least every joy that it is possible for any well-adjusted person to derive from a subject such as local government finance.

Will the member give way?

Much has been said about the need for renewal in Scotland's crofting communities, and quite rightly so. It is vital that we ensure that a new generation enters crofting, that crofting is adequately supported and that it is allowed to develop and diversify. Let us be honest. A bill is not a sufficient condition for bringing in anything like all that renewal—no one is suggesting that it is; the point has been well made by other members—but it is a necessary condition for beginning such progress. In a sense, the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill is a tale of two bills: the draft bill and the bill as introduced. The bill that we are debating this morning is emphatically not the draft bill, which, for very good reasons, caused some anxiety in crofting communities such as my own. The Government has consulted extensively and clearly listened to what crofters have had to say and the bill before us is significantly different in scope and content from that originally proposed. As members will know, the bill no longer talks about standard securities or proposes that crofters take out loans against their tenancies; no longer asks local authorities to police decrofted houses to ensure that people are residing in them for more than a specific number of nights in a year; and no longer contains contentious proposals for area committees to take on much of the Crofters Commission's work. The costs associated with the proposed crofting register have been significantly reduced from £250 per crofter to perhaps half that—or potentially more than half that, if some of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's  suggestions on community-based mapping are pursued. I welcome the committee's report on the bill. Although in many areas members were far from unanimous in their views, the report provides a starting point for further rational debate. In my view, that means a bill that democratises the commission and puts crofters themselves in the majority. It also means a commission that can sensitively but authoritatively handle instances of croft neglect. The bill must ensure that, in all cases, land is being put to what the bill calls "purposeful use", either by the crofter or a subtenant. The committee's report will help to guide debate in many specific areas. For instance, the committee's welcome for the principle of elections is a positive step in itself to increasing participation in and engagement with the commission, something that the committee has also advocated. On the crofting register and the mapping that will be required to achieve it, anything that can be done to minimise costs in this area is to be welcomed. In that regard, the committee's proposals for encouraging community-based mapping are worthy of further consideration and the minister's comments about delaying the trigger-based system for a year to facilitate and encourage community-based mapping exercises are very positive. However, if the bill is to achieve anything, it must empower the commission to deal both with speculation and neglect, and I am glad that the committee has recognised those points. With regard to speculation, the willingness of the Government and the committee to empower the commission effectively to overrule planning decisions that sanction the unnecessary removal of good inby land from crofting use is a positive development and deals with the infamous Taynuilt precedent. The committee's report seeks further detail on how the Government intends the crofting commission to distinguish various types of absenteeism in future. That information might further reassure many crofters about what the measures on absenteeism mean for them, particularly those who have had subtenants working their land for a long period. In at least some areas, there is unmet demand for land from would-be crofters, although the situation differs from area to area. The committee's suggestion that local lists of such people be kept is certainly of interest, although an assessment would have to be made of whether everyone on the list was fully committed to what they were potentially taking on. However, that is another useful idea.  Finally, like the committee, I believe that there is a need to close the so-called Whitbread loophole—or the Cunningham-Whitbread loophole, as it was referred to earlier—which relates to the sale by nominee of croft land. The Parliament will be relieved to hear that I do not intend to take up the challenge to elaborate on that fully, beyond saying that I intend to lodge an amendment to close the loophole. Many crofters have mentioned to me that that would be an important way of dealing with the unnecessary removal of land from crofting use. I welcome Mr Scott's comments about such an amendment, although I should clarify that, rather than deal with clawback periods per se, my intention is to frame an amendment that limits the rights of crofters to appoint nominees from outwith their family. I believe that that is a good way of dealing with some of the problems that the loophole has created. The bill deserves to proceed to stage 2, as there is now a clear wish for legislation among crofters. We can identify improvements, amend the bill and debate the issues further. However, the need for a crofting reform bill is now clear and, if the Parliament continues to engage with the crofting community, it stands a chance of providing legislation that I strongly believe will command broad support.

What contact has the cabinet secretary had with the offshore industry about the difficulties that workers in that sector currently face in leaving rigs? Why does the Norwegian sector seem to be getting people home by ship more successfully than the UK sector? In particular, people who are now over their specified 21 days offshore are anxious to know whether there are contingency plans to ensure that they are replaced soon.

Representing, as I do, a constituency that regularly, and not without some reason, boasts some of the best waves and wind in Europe, I often find myself speaking to people who are trying to set up community wind turbines, and in one case a community-owned wave power project. The obstacles that the people behind such projects face are numerous, but they are universally of the view that the transmission charging system that applies to Scotland does not help matters.  Scotland's natural resource base for renewables is extraordinary by European and even global standards. In addition to an existing installed capacity of 1.3GW of hydroelectric schemes, Scotland has an estimated potential of 36.5GW of wind power and 7.5GW of tidal power, which is 25 per cent of the estimated total capacity for the European Union, and—I can go on—up to 14GW of wave power potential, which is 10 per cent of EU capacity. Scotland on Sunday reported in March 2010 that Scotland's renewable electricity generating capacity may be 60GW or more, which is considerably greater than the existing 10.3GW capacity from all Scottish fuel sources. Much of that potential remains untapped, but continuing improvements in engineering are enabling more of the renewable resource to be utilised. However, as many members have said, the current transmission charging regime is not helping us to get there. The system was designed for another time and another set of problems. Locational signals mean that generators in southern England, including, rather surprisingly, coal and gas plants, are subsidised to connect to the grid when renewable energy installations in Scotland face heavy charges. I hear what members say about the multiple facets to this debate, but consider some concrete examples, some of which members have mentioned. In 2010-11, Whitelee, a wind farm in the south of Scotland, will pay £4 million in charges, whereas Langage, a 905MW gas power station in the south-west of England, will receive a £5.3 million subsidy. Meanwhile, Scottish Renewables has calculated that marine energy projects in waters off the coast of Scotland face paying as much as £50 million a year to connect to the national grid, while some energy schemes in the south-west of England could receive, as members have said, an annual grant. Under the UK's current transmission charging scheme, which is calculated according to location, projects in areas such as Orkney face paying as much as £42 per kilowatt for the privilege of connecting to the grid, while others could be subsidised. I could go on with such examples, but let me confine myself to saying that Scottish Renewables has calculated that Langage, which is a 905MW combined cycle gas turbine plant, is entitled to an annual subsidy of £5.3 million under the current system, while marine energy projects located in the Pentland Firth and Orkney may have to pay for the privilege of transporting electricity to UK households. Niall Stuart, chief executive of Scottish Renewables, is on record as saying: "Marine energy offers massive environmental and economic opportunities for Scotland. We should be doing  everything we can to support and nurture this new industry rather than putting hurdles in their way." He went so far as to say that the national grid's location-based model is inconsistent with the UK Government's drive to source a greater share of the UK's energy from renewable sources: "These figures show that transmission charging is swimming against the tide of every other government policy designed to support the growth of renewables ... Fossil fuel plants in the south of England are receiving heavy subsidies from the current system." The point is not only that the system is obviously unfair to Scotland and to a lesser extent to the north of England, but that, because so many of the renewable opportunities in the UK are in Scotland, it is bad for renewables at a UK level, too.

I recognise that, but I also recognise the fact that the vast bulk of the renewable potential exists in Scotland and, as others have said, that the system creates a perverse disincentive at a UK level to invest in renewables technology. Martin McAdam, chief executive of Edinburgh-based marine energy company Aquamarine Power, said the charging structure "fundamentally makes no sense" if the UK Government wants to encourage renewable energy projects. Scotland already makes the strongest contribution to our renewables output, accounting for 42 per cent of the UK's renewable electricity generation. Harvesting the country's renewable resources is essential if the UK is to hit its target of sourcing 15 per cent of its energy from renewables by 2020. We really can choose our argument—environmental, economic or political—as they all tend in one direction, but perhaps, as ever, the most significant argument is one of fairness. It simply is not fair to penalise renewable energy the further north it is generated. The UK authorities would do well to consider at least the spirit of European directive 2001/77/EC, which states: "Member States shall ensure that the charging of transmission and distribution fees does not discriminate against electricity from renewable energy sources, including in particular electricity from renewable energy sources produced in peripheral regions, such as island regions and regions of low population density." Locational transmission charging harms jobs, does not help us to meet our environmental targets, penalises innovation and hampers developments in the most fragile of our rural communities. There is little to be said for it.  The Scottish Government has already exerted some influence over the debate for the better—plans to extend locational pricing to charges for balancing the network have been dropped. However, the experience of transmission charging in the UK must lead us to the conclusion that, if there is an example out there somewhere of a reserved legislative power that is best exercised over Scotland from Westminster, it certainly is not on energy policy.

I congratulate Nigel Don on securing what is an important debate. Perhaps the best place to start is by saying what, in my view, the debate is not about. I need to do that because Scots have traditionally learned abnormally little about their  history at school. A friend of mine recently questioned with me the wisdom of the Parliament marking something as bloody and divisive as the Scottish reformation. It became clear that he was thinking not of the Scottish reformation, but of the English one and of events in Ireland some 100 years later. It would be utterly wrong of us to overlook the fact that, as has been mentioned, people lost their lives in the Scottish reformation, too, and there were martyrs on both sides. However, that does not make it wrong for us to remember or to consider the motivations for the reform at the time. I am sure that other members will talk about the profound effect of the reformation on Scotland's spiritual life, its democratic instincts and its extraordinary literacy rate—which, as others have mentioned, was at 75 per cent by 1750—and the impact that all that had on a generation of thinkers from Robert Burns to David Hume. However, it is worth saying how completely different the reformation was in Scotland from the story in Ireland or England. In Scotland, one religious group was not planted in the midst of another by Government policy and nor did the monarch take over the church. In Scotland, arguably, the church was taken over by the laity and then the church took over the state, for good or ill. We should certainly not mark all that in the bombastic way that I suspect we did on the 350th or 300th anniversaries, but we should pause and think. If we do not mark the reformation for what it was, others will mark it for what they would like it to have been. If I may, let me reassure Mr McMahon, who made a very considered speech, that as far as I am concerned marking the reformation is certainly not the same as celebrating the battle of the Boyne. In few parts of Scotland do people hold such profound yet varied Christian beliefs as in the Western Isles, which I represent. In Barra, Vatersay, Eriskay and South Uist, it would be fair to say that, compared with in the rest of Scotland, the reformation hardly happened at all. Benbecula is mixed in religious tradition, whereas North Uist, Harris and Lewis underwent not one but, arguably, several reformations. Recently, I visited a constituent in Benbecula whom I know to be a devout Catholic, as evinced by a portrait of the Pope on his kitchen wall. On the same wall, there is also a Rangers calendar. That may surprise colleagues from some other parts of Scotland, but happy religious co-existence of that kind is not, or should not be, such a big deal—and not just in the Western Isles. I come originally from the Borders. It never even crossed my mind that there was anything unusual about my grandfather being both a kirk elder and a lifelong Celtic fan. In fact, such things—or their  equivalents—can, and regularly do, happen across Europe. I mention all that because it is only possible to explain to an outsider why people from different religious traditions on the whole get along very well in the Western Isles if they are first led through 450 years of religious history. It will probably be possible to sort out situations in Scotland in which people do not get on only if we likewise untangle misconceptions on both sides about the past 450 years. With that in mind, it is right that the Parliament marks this important anniversary. In conclusion, in the words of Edwin Morgan, we should "Deplore what is to be deplored, and then find out the rest", because the rest, it should be said, is worth finding out about.

Can the cabinet secretary provide any more information on what measures might be taken in the islands of Scotland to mitigate disruption to island life? He mentioned the situation with regard to medical emergencies, but can he say more about the economic importance of lifeline flights to island communities?

I am in a Gaelic choir, and I think that the member's wife is in one as well. I am slightly puzzled about where he is going. I am not aware that An Comunn Gàidhealach forces people to take qualifications. I understand that choirs as a whole have to have a certain number of people who are reasonably proficient, but individuals are not forced to take any courses, as far as I am aware.

Tha mi toilichte gu bheil cothrom eile againn an-diugh a bhith a' bruidhinn anns a' Ghàidhlig anns an t-seòmar, ge bith dè tha an Daily Mail a' smaoineachadh mu dheidhinn sin. Ach, tòrr nas cudromaiche na sin, tha mi toilichte gu bheil rudeigin cho susbainteach againn airson cuspair deasbaid—am plana seo aig Bòrd na Gàidhlig. Tha e furasta a ràdh "Bha tòrr phlanaichean ann airson na Gàidhlig roimhe. Dè tha eadar-dhealaichte mun fhear ùr?" Ach tha rudeigin  eadar-dhealaichte ann gu dearbh. Tha mi toilichte a ràdh gu bheil na ceuman anns a' phlana seo soilleir agus practaigeach, agus tha iad a' tòiseachadh leis a' phrionnsapal seo: chan eil fad an latha againn. Is dòcha gur e seo an teans mu dheireadh againn airson na Gàidhlig. Tha e tòrr nas soilleire a-nis far a bheil Bòrd na Gàidhlig a' dol, a chionn 's gu bheil amas làidir aige. Bho seo a-mach, mus tòisich am bòrd air pròiseact sam bith ùr, faighnichidh e a' cheist seo: ciamar a bhiodh am pròiseact seo a' cumail suas nan àireamhan a tha a' bruidhinn na Gàidhlig ann an Alba? Tha Mgr Brocklebank ceart gum feum sinn a bhith ag ionnsachadh bho eisimpleir nam Maori ann an New Zealand. Nam biodh Jim Mather a' stiùireadh Bòrd na Gàidhlig, tha mi cinnteach gum biodh e a' cleachdadh an fhacail "alignment" airson feallsanachd den t-seòrsa sin. Bidh e inntinneach a leantainn mar a bhios am plana air a leasachadh agus a' fàs, ach tha rud no dhà gu sònraichte a' leum a-mach às an duilleig an-dràsta. Airson aon rud, tha am plana a' toirt taic mhòr gu pàrantan a tha a' smaoineachadh mu fhoghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig airson an cloinne. Carson a tha misneachd den t-seòrsa sin feumail fhathast? Uill, cho fad 's a tha sgoiltean a' bruidhinn mu "foghlam Gàidhlig" agus "foghlam mainstream", bidh cuid de phàrantan a' fàs eagalach dè seòrsa mì-àbhàisteachd 's a tha ann ann am oghlam Gàidhlig. Chan e a' Ghàidhlig an roghainn "default". Mar sin, feumaidh cuideigin a bhith a' soisgeulachadh air a son. Sin an iomairt nàiseanta anns a' phlana, tha mi an dòchas. Tha e cudromach gu bheil am bòrd a-nis airson a bhith a' bruidhinn le teaghlaichean cho luath 's a tha an leanabh air a bhreith, agus a' mìneachadh dè seòrsa cothroman a tha a' tighinn le foghlam Gàidhlig. Tha e gu tric a' cur iongnadh air daoine a chluinntinn nach eil ach aon sgoilear a-mach à ceathrar a' dol tro fhoghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig anns na h-Eileanan an Iar, mar eisimpleir. Tha e inntinneach gu bheil am plana ag aideachadh gu bheil cnapan-starra ann fhathast airson tòrr phàrantan—cnapan-starra a tha stèidhichte ann an seann "hang-ups" mòra mun chànan. Tha e inntinneach cuideachd gu bheil am bòrd den bheachd gum biodh ceartas ùr fon lagh a' briseadh sìos cuid de na beachdan seo co-dhiù—ceartas gu foghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig far a bheil iarrtas reusanta ann. Airson inbhich a tha a' feuchainn ri Gàidhlig ionnsachadh, tha am plana misneachail cuideachd. Canaidh mi seo gu h-onarach: cha robh e furasta dhòmhsa Gàidhlig ionnsachadh agus tha mi ga h-ionnsachadh fhathast. Chan eil mi airson dragh a chur air duine sam bith a tha ag èisteachd a tha ag ionnsachadh na Gàidhlig. Chan eil mi a' ciallachadh gur e cànan doirbh a tha anns a' Ghàidhlig fhèin—ged nach eil facal ann  airson "Yes" no "No", agus nach eil an t-iolra ag obair ach le trì nithean ann, agus gu bheil am facal "boireannach" fireann agus am facal "feusag" boireann. Tha mi dìreach a' ciallachadh nach eil cothrom furasta ann gus an cànan a chleachdadh nuair a tha duine a' tòiseachadh, fiù 's air a' Ghaidhealtachd, air sgath 's nach eil mòran Ghàidheal—gu traidiseanta co-dhiu—a' creidsinn nuair a chanas cuideigin gu bheil e ag ionnsachadh na Gàidhlig agus ag iarraidh a' Ghàidhlig a chleachdadh mura bheil e fileanta mar-thà. Tha a h-uile duine ro mhodhail. Bidh mòran luchd-ionnsachaidh anns an t-suidheachadh seo a' toirt fàilte dhan taic anns a' phlana airson cùrsaichean ulpan agus a leithid. Bha mise a' tadhail air clas den t-seòrsa sin ann an Steòrnabhagh o chionn ghoirid, agus bha e gu math inntinneach a bhith a' faicinn cho nàdarrach 's gun robh daoine ag ionnsachadh—gun fhacal gràmair agus gun fhacal Beurla air a chleachdadh. Tha am plana ag iarraidh gum biodh 2,000 neach air cùrsaichean den t-seòrsa seo a dhèanamh taobh a-staigh dà bhliadhna. Tha am plana làidir a thaobh foghlaim san fharsaingeachd. A-rithist, tha amas gu math sònraichte ann: gum bi an àireamh de chloinn a' dol gu "early years Gaelic groups" a' dol suas 20 às a' cheud taobh a-staigh dà bhliadhna, agus gum bi na h-àireamhan dhiubhsan a tha a' dol a-steach do dh'ionadan Gàidhlig anns na sgoiltean a' dol suas 15 às a' cheud aig an aon àm. Tha am plana deònach sùil a thoirt air dòighean obrach ùra—mar eisimpleir, mar a thuirt buill eile, tidsearan fhaighinn à Èirinn. Tha am plana a' feuchainn a bhith a' dèanamh cinnteach gu bheil clann a' cumail am fileantais an dèidh dhaibh am bun-sgoil fhàgail, agus gu bheil iad a' tuigsinn nach eil a' Ghàidhlig dìreach airson na sgoile aca fhèin. Is toiseach tòiseachaidh a h-uile rud, gun teagamh, ach gu pearsanta tha earbsa agam gu bheil Bòrd na Gàidhlig ann an staid tòrr nas fhallainne agus nas làidire airson na h-obrach mòire a tha roimhe. Tha mi a' cur fàilte chridheil air a' phlana agus a' toirt taic don mholadh ann an ainm a' mhinisteir.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  I am pleased to be able to speak about Gaelic in the chamber today, notwithstanding the comments of the Daily Mail . Much more important, I am pleased that we have something so substantial to debate today: this new plan of Bòrd na Gàidhlig. Because there have already been a lot of plans for Gaelic, it is easy to ask what is so different about this one. But there is something different about it. I am pleased to say that the steps in the plan are clear and practical. They start with this  principle: we do not have all day; this may be our last chance. It is now much clearer where Bòrd na Gàidhlig is going, because it has a much stronger aim. From here on in, before the board starts any project, it will ask how the project will maintain the number of people who speak Gaelic in Scotland. Ted Brocklebank is right to say that we need to learn from the Maori example. If Jim Mather were leading Bòrd na Gàidhlig, I am sure that he would use the word "alignment" for this sort of philosophy. It will be interesting to follow how the plan will develop and grow. However, a few particular points leap off the page. For example, the plan gives a lot of support to parents who are thinking about Gaelic-medium education for their children. Why is that sort of encouragement still required? It is required because, as long as schools still talk about Gaelic-medium education as being different from mainstream education, some parents will still be frightened about the unusualness of Gaelic education. Gaelic is not the default choice, so people must act as advocates for it. That is the function of the national initiative in the plan. It is also important that the board wants to speak to families as soon as a child is born to explain what sort of Gaelic education opportunities are available. It often surprises people when they hear that, in the Western Isles, only one pupil in four goes through Gaelic-medium education. It is interesting that, as the plan recognises, the old hang-ups around the language still act as a stumbling block for many parents. It is also interesting that the board believes that a new legal right to education in the medium of Gaelic, where reasonable demand exists, would overcome at least some of those negative opinions. For adults who are trying to learn Gaelic, the plan is encouraging as well. I will say this honestly: it was not easy for me to learn Gaelic, and I am still learning. I do not mean to worry anyone who is learning Gaelic at the moment—I do not mean to suggest that Gaelic is a complicated language, even though there are no words for "yes" or "no", nothing is plural unless there are three or more things, the word for a woman is masculine and the word for a beard is feminine. I simply mean that there is no easy opportunity to use the language when one starts to learn it, even in the Gaelic heartland. That is partly because many Gaelic speakers do not understand when someone who is learning Gaelic but is not already fluent asks them to speak Gaelic to them—everyone is too polite to do so. Many learners in that situation will welcome the support in the plan for open courses and the like. I visited one such course in Stornoway a while ago, and was interested to see how naturally people were learning, without a word  of grammar or English being used. The plan wants 2,000 people to be on such courses within two years. The plan is strong on education in a wider sense. Again, there is a specific aim to increase the number of children going to Gaelic-medium early years education by 20 per cent within two years, and for the number of children going into Gaelic units to increase by 15 per cent at the same time. The plan is willing to consider new ways of working, such as the example of attracting teachers from Ireland. The plan tries to ensure that children remain fluent when they leave primary school and ensure that they understand that Gaelic is not to be used only when they are in school. Without a doubt, a start has been made. I believe that Bòrd na Gàidhlig is in a much stronger and healthier state than previously to tackle the work that is ahead of it. I give a warm welcome to the plan, and support the motion in the name of the minister.

The First Minister will be aware of the announcement this morning that Highland Airways Ltd has gone into administration. Will he give an undertaking that the Scottish Government will work urgently to ensure that lifeline services to Scotland's island communities are continued? Will the Government engage with the Highland Airways workforce, who have obvious concerns about the future?

The cabinet secretary will be aware of—indeed, she has mentioned—some of the issues around recruiting doctors to some of Scotland's smallest and most remote practices. Those include island practices such as that in Pairc on Lewis. What will the Scottish Government do to ensure that the particular issues that face island practices are addressed?

To ask the Scottish Government what representations it will be making to the relevant agencies, including Scottish and Southern Energy, regarding repeated power failures at the Western Isles hospital. (S3O-9934)

Although the power failures did not pose a risk to patients' health, they raised serious questions about the fragility of the electricity infrastructure in the islands. Will the Government keep up a dialogue with SSE and other agencies to ensure that such problems do not occur again?

This is not a hostile intervention. I am sure that Mary Scanlon will agree that, if there were more official campsites between Stornoway and Barra—something that the Government is encouraging—tourists might have a happier experience.

Others have rightly said how important an industry aquaculture is to Scotland as a whole, but I had not considered how important it is to shinty, too. It is worth commenting that, in the Western Isles, aquaculture provides much of the population with a source of income. It supports about 350 full-time-equivalent jobs on dozens of farm sites in the islands, and the industry has an annual production income of around £60 million. As other members have mentioned, Scotland accounts for 90 per cent of the United Kingdom's farmed fish—to which figure the Western Isles makes a significant contribution—and is one of the largest producers of farmed salmon in the world. Most of the fish farms in the Western Isles that contribute so valuably to the local economy are involved in farming salmon, although there are also cockle, mussel and scallop farms. Vital as fish farming jobs are to coastal communities such as my own, the real prize in additional employment comes with the related processing work. I am sorry to say that, for the moment, the number of farmed fish processing jobs in the Western Isles has declined with the closure of the Lighthouse Caledonia Ltd factory at Marybank in Lewis a year ago. I will not lightly forget the unhappy experience of meeting the workforce  there on the days when activity in the plant was grinding to a halt. With the loss of well over a hundred jobs directly and many more indirectly, the closure was a huge blow for a small island economy, but there are now hopes once more that the Western Isles will in the near future reap at least some of the employment potential from fish farming. There are increasingly hopeful signs of the creation of a new Lighthouse Caledonia fish processing factory at Arnish in Lewis, as well as for major fish farming programmes by other companies in Barra. There is little doubt that those schemes have the potential to be of significant economic importance to the Western Isles. I am sure that other members will make similar points about their constituencies. Salmon farming represents 95 per cent of the Scottish aquaculture industry. Exports have increased enormously in the past 20 years and the sector is now worth £200 million to the Scottish economy. Many people in remote areas such as the one that I represent rely on the industry and, according to a Scottish Government multiplier, their wages represent a value of around £165 million to the Scottish economy, and more income is retained in the economy by fish farming than is retained by the majority of other sectors in the Scottish economy, perhaps because of the remote location of much of the employment. However, it is perhaps globally that the figures are most daunting. Around the world, fish farming accounts for half of people's seafood consumption—a huge increase from only 9 per cent in 1980. Impressive as those statistics are, there is a recognition on the part of all stakeholders that growth must be sustainable, to use an overused phrase. One of the previous Administration's last acts, which received unanimous support in Parliament, was the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Act 2007. It sought to ensure that the development of aquaculture took place in the context of increased inspection and enforcement in order to ensure that adequate measures are in place to deal with problems including parasites. The Scottish Government is now seeking to build on that act by developing its principles further through the proposals in "A Fresh Start: The renewed Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture". The themes that were identified by respondents during the consultation on the document were not surprising: sea lice, escapes and licensing. What is perhaps new is the willingness to tackle issues in respect of the planning system. As has been publicised in the past few days, the Scottish Government wants to reform the planning system in aquaculture to allow for a much more  streamlined aquaculture planning process and to attract further investment by improving on decision making. Undoubtedly there is a growing global demand for what Scottish aquaculture produces. There is also recognition that in the face of significant competition from other countries, Scottish farmed salmon must continue to trade on its justified image of good quality and environmental standards. The proposed changes to the planning system should be seen in that light: they will make much clearer what is required by way of information to support a planning application. After some debate on this point, the Parliament recently passed the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010, which makes it clear that planning matters in this area should be in the hands of local authorities. I hope that we will also now have a planning system that is more streamlined and which achieves a more transparent relationship between the role of public bodies that make recommendations and the interests of the public. The Government's approach on that has received broad backing from the Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation and the Association of Scottish Shellfish Growers. I believe that what is being put forward is a reasoned set of proposals that will ensure a long-term future for the industry. The measures will secure for aquaculture more protection against disease and parasites. Equally important is that the measures acknowledge the needs of the wider environment to be protected from escapes and pollution. The willingness of all who are involved to engage in reconciling those objectives and to come forward with plans that make sense for this vitally important sector of my local economy, and the economy of Scotland, is to be welcomed warmly.

The minister will be aware of the considerable efforts that are being made to put the tweed industry back on its feet. However, an outstanding issue is how to make weaving an attractive occupation in terms of providing a steady and rewarding income. What plans does the Government have to support the retention of weaving skills in the islands?

With all European budgets under pressure, there is little doubt that the common agriculture policy will have to change. As members have said, the CAP comprises 41 per cent of Europe's budget, so it is obvious that it cannot be immune to change and scrutiny. Brian Pack's report is therefore an extremely welcome contribution to the debate about how to direct and cope with changes in the years to come. As Brian Pack does, I make the case unashamedly that we must in the future continue to offer some sort of European assistance to  agriculture. A host of reasons, which members have mentioned, can reasonably be given for such investment. The environmental and social reasons in Scotland include the need to avoid land abandonment, the need to develop our agriculture to cope with our own food needs, and the need to cut down on our food miles. If, for instance, the landscape of my constituency had not been grazed, it would have been almost entirely abandoned many decades ago, not just by its native bird species, but by its human population. It is not fashionable to make the case for subsidies: perhaps the harshest criticism of agricultural subsidies has come from international aid agencies, which point to the advantage that the CAP arguably gives to some wealthy European farmers over small farmers in developing nations. However, there is probably more common ground to be found on that than is thought, at least if we take the perspective of Scotland's hill farmers and crofters, to whom the imbalance in how European moneys are distributed remains a source of continuing unhappiness. I do not wish to enter a dispute with Scotland's wealthier arable landowners, but it must be said that crofters and hill farmers look with surprise at the levels of support that a relatively small number of Scotland's farmers receive under the system that Europe operates. For that reason, I will concentrate on elements of the Pack inquiry interim report that consider less favoured area status. As members would expect, the recommendations relating to that most interest my constituents. I urge all crofters and farmers in the Highlands and Islands to engage in the consultation on the report before the closing date. One instance of the unease that hill farmers and crofters feel about the present system is understood when we look at the map of less favoured areas in Scotland. On one level, we should be pleased by the recognition of Scotland's terrain. Apart from one or two small pockets, the only land that is not under less favoured area status is a relatively thin coastal strip from the Black Isle to Berwickshire. The remaining bulk of Scotland's land is classed as less favoured, with virtually all of it earning the severely disadvantaged, rather than the disadvantaged, classification. As ever, I appreciate the risks of special pleading and I understand that there is a limit to the number of classifications that we can have, but it strikes me that the agricultural disadvantages that are faced in places such as Wester Ross or Harris are of an entirely different magnitude from those that are faced in West Lothian or East Ayrshire, but all those places currently have the same classification. I say that not to diminish the needs of agriculture in lowland Scotland, but to point to the dramatically different travel costs,  distances to markets and fuel prices, and the sheer physical difficulty of the landscape in many remoter parts of the country. I believe that those issues will emerge in the consultation. I believe also that Pack's analysis of the situation is fair. The system of historic payments, through which, as others have said, payments are in some cases based on what land was used for 10 years ago, will not be tolerated for much longer. Agriculture that, shall we say, reaps where it does not sow will not enjoy public support. I welcome the Scottish Government's evident determination to fight Scotland's corner in Europe to ensure that the future shape of the single farm payment reflects Scotland's needs. I am happy that the Government recognises the importance of the relationship between the single farm payment and the LFASS. Farmers and crofters in Scotland are conscious of the risks that are posed by the likely decline of the single farm payment budget after 2013. There is a growing understanding that historic payments will not be around for ever. The options that are set out in Brian Pack's interim report are not without controversy. They are based on a four-strand option: area-based direct payments, a top-up fund, SRDP funding and less favoured area funding in some shape or form. The interim report's suggestions on how a top-up fund could be spent will doubtless attract debate. However, the fact that reviews of the SRDP and LFASS are taking place in another context does not mean that they can be divorced entirely from the debate. Brian Pack's interim report has sparked a necessary and valuable debate and I look forward to it developing further in a way that sets out clearer solutions to the problems that he has so perceptively diagnosed.

Does the Scottish Government agree that crofters and farmers in most of the Highlands and Islands operate in an unusually harsh environment, and that that deserves to be recognised in any changes to the existing subsidy regime?

I apologise that I cannot stay to the end of the debate because of another engagement, but I thank Liam McArthur for bringing the matter to the Parliament. I realise that the arguments that could be marshalled against the principle of free parking, let alone free parking at an airport, are legion—pace the Scottish Green Party. Doubtless, some people will see special pleading at work in this debate, but I do not. I should declare an interest as someone whose decrepit car presently sits for three days a week rusting further outside Stornoway airport, but the issue is particularly significant to island communities, therefore I welcome the opportunity to discuss it. As Liam McArthur said, a number of factors make the island airports different. First, they are not primarily used by tourists. Yes, some islanders leave their cars at the airport when they are on holiday, but my understanding is that the overwhelming majority of people who leave their cars at Stornoway airport do so because they have to travel off island with work or, in a large number of cases, they are going to hospital or visiting someone in hospital.  As the airports provide lifeline services that are essential for the islands to function as modern economies, another special factor is worth bearing in mind: the money that many islanders have to pay to get to the mainland unless they book many weeks in advance is the kind of money with which one could have a foreign holiday. For that reason, the threat to introduce car parking charges at island airports has a knock-on effect on economic development in the islands. I recognise the harsh realities under which HIAL operates and the constraints that are upon it, like the rest of the country. I also recognise its willingness to consider, in many cases, the option of paying for better bus services to its airports to connect with flights. However, I would be lying if I said that a bus between Stornoway and Stornoway airport would be likely to tempt me out of my car unless it could be shown that there was a convincing way of getting the 8 miles from my house to Stornoway by public transport in time to connect with that bus. I live relatively close to an airport, but the situation for many other islanders—who live further afield and have two or three buses a day to choose from—is unpromising. Alternatively, if the proposal is that I should drive to town and then get the bus from town to the airport, I hope that a new park and ride-sized car park is being built somewhere in Stornoway to facilitate that. Those are the realities of transport in all island communities. For all those reasons, although I recognise the difficulties that HIAL faces, I share Liam McArthur's hope that consultation on the matter will be genuine and far reaching and that the issues that I and others have mentioned will be to the fore in HIAL's mind. I hope that the daily challenges that islanders face—whether they be in Orkney, Shetland or the Western Isles—are acknowledged. I have made my own views on the matter known to HIAL, as have other island members. I thank Liam McArthur again for bringing the matter to the Parliament and trust that other islanders will now engage actively with the consultation and make their views known.

Thairis air na pàrtaidhean, agus ann an Alba air fad, bha daoine a' toirt fàilte air BBC Alba nuair a thòisich e o chionn bliadhna gu leth. A-nis, tha e inntinneach fhaicinn dè cho dìleas 's a tha na daoine a tha a' coimhead air BBC Alba a' fàs. Tha clann a-nis a' fàs cleachdte ris an smuain gu bheil e àbhaisteach cartùnaichean a chluinntinn anns a' Ghàidhlig. Tha daoine gun fhacal Gàidhlig a' fàs cleachdte ris an smuain gu bheil e àbhaisteach a bhith a' coimhead air ball-coise anns a' Ghàidhlig no air prògraman mu nàdar ann an Afraga no ge b' e càite. Ma tha sinn ag iarraidh aon rud ann an saoghal na Gàidhlig, 's e normalisation, mar a chanas iad, den t-seòrsa sin. Tha cànan sam bith gun telebhisean mì-àbhaisteach, agus cha bhi ùidh sam bith aig na daoine òga ann an cànan mì-àbhaisteach, ge b' e cho innteannach 's a bhios i dha na h-anthropologists. Trì fichead bliadhna air ais, bha cuid ann an Israel ag ràdh gun robh cànan nan sgriobtar ro naomh airson prògraman còcaireachd air an rèidio agus a leithid. Anns an aon seòrsa dòigh, tha sinn air rathad fada a shiubhal bho na làithean nuair a bhiodh daoine a' sgrìobhadh a-steach dha na pàipearan a ghearan gun robh Gàidhlig mìorbhaileach math aig a' Mhòd ach nach robh i freagarrach airson prògraman còcaireachd. Gus a' phuing sin a dhearbhadh, bidh BBC Alba a' bruidhinn rium fhèin an ath mhìos mu na recipes as fheàrr leam. Coimhead a-mach airson na fish fingers agus an Creamola Foam. Mar a bha Ted Brocklebank a' dèanamh soilleir, tha BBC Alba a' tuigsinn gu bheil e fìor  chudromach gu bheil e a' craoladh a h-uile seòrsa prògram, agus gu bheil iad tarraingeach dhan a h-uile seòrsa neach-coimhead. Ach bhiodh an obair sin tòrr na b' fhasa nam biodh BBC Alba ri fhaicinn air Freeview. Chan eil mi a' cantainn sin dìreach air sgàth 's nach b' urrainn dhòmhsa BBC Alba fhaicinn ann an Leòdhas airson sia mìosan—bha mi a' feitheamh ri Sky dish agus bha sreath a' feitheamh còmhla rium. Chan eil mi eadhon a' gearan dìreach air sgàth 's nach urrainn dhomh fhathast an t-sianal fhaicinn anns a' Phàrlamaid, a tha a' cleachdadh càbal; ach is sin sgeul eile, ged a bha Pauline NicNèill a' bruidhinn mu dheidhinn anns an òraid aice. Nam biodh BBC Alba ri fhaicinn saor is an-asgaidh leis na sianalan Freeview eile, bhiodh sin a' toirt misneachd mhòr gu craoladh tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig. Mar sin, bhiodh barrachd taighean ann far am biodh daoine ag èisteachd ris, ag ionnsachadh agus a' fàs eòlach air a' Ghàidhlig. Bhiodh beagan fois aig Urras a' BhBC cuideachd. Nach eil e neònach gur ann le Westminster fhathast a tha an smachd air craoladh na Gàidhlig? Ach sin mar a tha cùisean fhathast. Bidh 220,000 neach a' coimhead air BBC Alba gach seachdain mar-thà. Cia mheud eile a bhiodh a' coimhead air, nam biodh e ri fhaotainn air Freeview? Ma bhios an t-urras a' gearradh sianalan rèidio a-mach à Freeview airson beàrn a dhèanamh airson BBC Alba, tha mi an dòchas gum bi e a' mìneachadh carson, agus nach bi an t-urras a' leigeil le sabaid gun phuing a bhith a' fàs anns an Daily Mail mun ghnothach. Tha mi a' tuigsinn a' phuing a bha Iain Mac a' Ghobhainn a' dèanamh mu dheidhinn a' chuspair seo, ach tha e cudromach aig an aon àm a bhith a' mìneachadh gum biodh na sianalan eile sin ri fhaotainn fhathast air-loidhne agus air an rèidio fhèin. Chan fhaodadh mòran ge-tà—air a' Ghàidhealtachd co-dhiù—prògraman fhaicinn air loidhne.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  People welcomed BBC Alba across party lines and throughout Scotland when it began to broadcast a year and a half ago. It is interesting to see the growth in loyalty of BBC Alba viewers. Children are now accustomed to the view that it is normal to hear cartoons in Gaelic, and people who are without a word of Gaelic are getting accustomed to the view that it is normal to see football or nature programmes about Africa or other areas in Gaelic. If there is anything that we in the Gaelic world want, it is normalisation of that kind. Any language without television is unusual. Youths have no interest in an unusual language, no matter how interesting it may be to anthropologists.  Sixty years ago, some people in Israel said that the language of scripture was too sacred to be used for cookery programmes on the radio and the like. We have travelled down a long road since the days when people used to write to the newspapers to complain that, although wonderfully good Gaelic could be heard at the Mod, it was not suitable for use in cookery programmes. In order to prove that point, BBC Alba will speak to me next month about my favourite recipes. Members should look out for fish fingers and Creamola Foam. As Ted Brocklebank said, BBC Alba appreciates that it is vital for it to broadcast every kind of programme and for its programmes to be attractive to all viewers. However, its work would be much easier if it could be seen on Freeview. I am not saying that simply because I could not access BBC Alba in Lewis for six months. I was waiting for a Sky dish; several others were also waiting. I am not even complaining because I cannot access the channel in Parliament, which uses cable television, to which Pauline McNeill referred. If BBC Alba could be viewed at no cost with other Freeview channels, that would give tremendous encouragement to broadcasting through the medium of Gaelic. If that were the case, there would be more homes in which people could listen to, learn and become familiar with Gaelic, and the BBC trust would get a bit of peace. Is it not strange that Westminster still has control of Gaelic broadcasting? However, that situation remains. Already, 220,000 people watch BBC Alba every week, but how many more could watch it if it were available on Freeview? If the trust plans to remove radio channels from Freeview in order to make space for BBC Alba, I hope that it will explain why and that it will not let a needless fight about the issue arise in the Daily Mail . I understand the point that Iain Smith made, but it is important to explain that those channels will still be available online and on the radio. Not many, especially in the Highlands, are able to view television programmes online.

Chan eil mi ag argumaid an-aghaidh a' phuing sin no an-aghaidh an leasachaidh aig Iain Mac a' Ghobhainn. Tha mi direach ag ràdh gum biodh e feumail nam biodh an deasbad mu dheidhinn a' chuspair reusanta agus gum bu chòir fios a bhith aig daoine gu bheil na sianalan sin ri fhaotainn air loidhne cuideachd.  Tha BBC Alba a' dèanamh a h-uile rud a bha Urras a' BhBC ag iarraidh. Tha ceum eile ri ghabhail a dhearbhadh ann an saoghal craolaidh gur e cànan àbhaisteach a tha anns a' Ghàidhlig ge-tà, agus 's e sin Freeview. Tha mi a' cantainn ri Urras a' BhBC, "Siuthadaibh, ma-thà." Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  I am not arguing against the point that Iain Smith makes; I am just pointing out that it would be useful if the debate were reasonable and people knew that those channels are also available online. BBC Alba is doing everything that the trust has asked it to do. There is another step to be taken in order to prove in the broadcasting world that Gaelic is a normal language: Freeview. I say to the BBC trust, "Go for it."

Do the Liberal Democrats in Aberdeenshire Council support Aberdeen City Council's complaint in that respect?

The Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2010 allows local councils around Scotland to pass their budgets. Local services cannot be planned and we cannot pave the way for the funding that is needed for the council tax freeze unless the order is approved. I do not know what stance parties will take on the order when we vote on it at 5 pm. Parties have a perfect right to block the order, if they are prepared to explain their position to apoplectic local authorities up and down the country. They might of course try to justify a delay by pointing to amendments to the budget that they still hope will be made, but no amendments have been proposed that would actually reallocate money in the budget. It is to be hoped that the  sweet voice of reason has prevailed and that any discordant voices in the Parliament have been smothered under the burden of John Swinney's reasonableness. However much some members argue that black is white, night is day and Scotland's budget is going up and up, everyone knows that the Scottish Government has more than £800 million less to work with than was initially advised. That makes the commitments on local government in Mr Swinney's budget all the more significant. Despite Mr Swinney having significantly less money at his disposal this year than was originally intimated by the London Government, and despite undertaking to protect the health budget, the Scottish Government has devoted a greater share of its resources to local government than was allocated last year. As we heard, the previous Executive cut the share of the budget that went to councils year on year, whereas the Scottish Government has increased the share every year. As others have pointed out, the allocation for local government for 2008 to 2011 is 12.9 per cent up on that for 2005 to 2008. However, perhaps a more significant point than all those figures is the fact that the Government has brought to an end a generation of micromanagement of council finances. Ring fencing in its old form is passing into history. When even Mr McMahon acknowledges in Holyrood Magazine that Labour has "lost the argument on ring fencing", we know that it has finally been accepted that a healthier balance of power must exist—and does now exist—between Scotland's local and national Government. The Local Government and Communities Committee, on which I serve, acknowledged that fact in its report on local government finance. As is right, the report makes no attempt to minimise the serious strains under which local government, like national Government, in Scotland finds itself or the difficult choices that councils will face in determining what they can do over and above their statutory duties in the lean budget settlement years that lie ahead for Scotland. The report, which followed an inquiry that took evidence from councils throughout Scotland, calls for a fundamental review of the expectations of local government. It calls for local government to be ambitious in spite of the pressures and talks about benchmarking rather than just achieving minimum standards. It also examines the issues around the sharing of services. The obvious way to share services in remote and rural parts of Scotland such as my constituency is surely not for councils to get bigger, but to share some of the  parallel bureaucracies that exist with, perhaps, health boards in the same small place. The order, like the committee report, acknowledges that councils deserve support. Despite Scotland's declining budget and the pressures from another place that face Scotland, it seeks to give councils that support and I support its approval.

If I understand the member correctly, he is saying that the Scottish budget has gone up. In that case, as it is indisputable that the share of the Scottish budget that is being allocated to local government has also gone up, how can he accuse the Scottish Government of meanness in that respect?

I thank Peter Peacock for securing this members' business debate on what is an important issue, not least, as he mentioned, for my constituency. I strongly agree with Mr Peacock's view that broadband is essential to the economic and social wellbeing of Scotland's rural areas, and in particular its island communities. In some senses, that statement is testimony to the sheer scale of change that Scotland's islands have seen in recent decades. It is worth calling to mind the fact that a good few parts of my constituency did not have electricity, far less television, until as late as 1970. Why, the metropolitan cynic might ask, is it reasonable for the islands to expect broadband now? It is reasonable for a number of reasons to do with fairness and for simple reasons of survival. For Scotland's remote communities not to have broadband is to cut them off from a whole range of opportunities. It prevents people from working from home or pretty much anywhere else in the community, it impedes business start-up and survival, and it prevents schools from accessing the benefits of large areas of the curriculum as it is delivered elsewhere. Without overly rehearsing the history of the situation, I believe that there is no doubt that a serious error was made some years ago when just over 20 areas in my constituency were left without exchanges that were capable of delivering broadband. The previous Scottish Executive tried, and the current Scottish Government is trying, to address that injustice through the provision of wireless broadband, delivered by connected communities. I understand that the previous Executive pursued the wireless option because even if the exchanges had been upgraded, a substantial number of people would still have been unable to access broadband because their homes are too far from the exchange for the technology to work. Let there be no doubt that in some parts of the Western Isles a wireless or satellite solution  will remain the only feasible option, but a much smaller minority of households would have had to rely on those options if fairness had been exercised when exchanges were enabled elsewhere. Mr Peacock's motion implies the frailties of connected communities, some of which are borne out in my mailbag as the local MSP. However, judging from the evidence of my mailbag, I venture that the picture is a little more complex than it might at first appear. First, the complaints that I get about broadband come from at least three distinct groups. The first group is people who are impatient for connected communities—the wireless option—to put up masts in their community. Some people may hate wireless broadband but, in the interests of a complete picture, I should say that I have also been grilled by a hall full of people in Harris imploring me to get connected communities to come to their part of the islands immediately. The second group is people who want improvements to connected communities' service, whether by making it more reliable or cheaper, or by ensuring that someone is on the end of the phone to fix things when they go wrong. The third group is people who are calling for a boycott of connected communities and, by implication, a boycott of broadband altogether until exchanges are upgraded. That is the smallest group. However, let there be no doubt that a serious mistake was made when the exchanges were not upgraded. I agree that there are many potentially positive aspects in the "Digital Britain" report. I merely say that, if Lord Carter's review rights the wrongs that exist, it will find a welcome in the Highlands and Islands, but if, to meet the universal broadband obligation, it seeks to impose a levy on the very households that do not enjoy such an entitlement, it will struggle to be taken to people's hearts. I thank Mr Peacock for bringing the debate to Parliament and for highlighting an issue that is of concern to my constituents.

Has the Scottish Government made any representations to the United Kingdom Government on the inclusion of wind-chill factors in the calculation of entitlement to cold weather payments? Is the minister aware that, after a month of snow and ice in the Western Isles, it was officially "not cold enough" for such payments to be triggered?

I thank the Tories for bringing this debate to Parliament. It is always a deeply reassuring sensation to have one's deepest prejudices and suspicions confirmed and vindicated. I am sad that it is necessary to have this debate at all and that some in the Conservative party evidently still do not appreciate the central and fundamental aim of the national health service. As others have said, the NHS exists to treat all those who ask for assistance, irrespective of their ability to pay, whether for health care or prescriptions. As of this week, the Tory stance on health care might be one vote more popular in the United States Senate, but I doubt whether it is one vote more popular in Scotland.  I will meet the Tory argument head on. If, as the Tories argue, people with a decent income should not get free prescriptions, where does that argument end? Should such people be debarred from receiving surgery, too? If so, what kind of surgery and what kind of incomes are we talking about? The NHS is not founded on the principle of there being a deserving poor; it is founded on the idea that everyone should contribute according to their ability to pay and benefit according to their degree of need. I had understood that the Tories had previously reassured us that that principle was safe in their hands, although I am not quite sure how to read Nanette Milne's comment that the Tories "have not changed." It is simply untrue to suggest that, as things are, everyone who really needs a free prescription can get one.

I can only observe the example of my small constituency, where, under the previous Government, a dental waiting list of 4,000 emerged and where the current Government is providing a new dental centre. It is worth saying that a significant number of people with chronic conditions still continue to pay for medication—a problem that particularly affects people who need multiple prescriptions. In my constituency, 2,623 prescription prepayment certificates were purchased in 2008-09. Given the small population, that is a huge number of people who still have to pay for essential medication. Perhaps the Conservatives would like to explain their position to those people directly. One has to wonder whether the Tories are planning to campaign up and down the land for their constituents' right to pay for prescriptions. As the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has indicated, around 600,000 adults who live in families with an annual income of less than £16,000 will benefit from the abolition of prescription charges. The Minister for Public Health and Sport provided that figure in response to a written question from Johann Lamont on 28 October 2008. By no stretch of the imagination are those 600,000 families well off. Overwhelmingly, they are ordinary Scots who are working to earn a living. If there is any suggestion—and there is—that some families in that situation are deterred from buying what their doctor has prescribed for them, how can we say that we are serious about improving Scotland's health? In fact, there is more than a suggestion of that. The purchase of prescription prepayment certificates has more than doubled since April 2008, when the process of reducing charges began.  As regards health visitors, who the Tories have arbitrarily decided are somehow the victims of the Scottish Government's decision to abolish prescription charges, I know of few who would advocate our continuing with a system that creates a disincentive for a patient to get the prescription that he or she needs. In fact, we still have more doctors, nurses and other health professionals working in Scotland than ever before. All that is at a time when the Scottish budget is under more pressure than ever before from unprecedented budget cuts from the London Government. The Scottish Government has committed to protecting NHS budgets, even under that strain. Meanwhile, the Scottish Tories dropped a hint to the Scottish Government last week to prepare a stand-by budget "in case they have to make further cuts after the election." The Conservative party says that it wants to look at saving money to be reinvested in front-line services, which might well be a laudable aim. If that is the case, rather than cutting a measure that is aimed at helping everyone in society, including those who need help most, it should look at some of its own UK fiscal policies, which, in true Tory style, are aimed solely at helping the very wealthiest in society. Such policies include increasing the threshold of inheritance tax, which it is estimated would cost £1.5 billion, and abolishing the top rate of income tax for all those who earn more than £150,000. While Labour and the Conservatives vie with each other about who can cut most from Scotland's budget, Scotland's Government will get on with the task of making health care free at the point of need. As long as the Conservatives in Scotland argue against free prescriptions, they will struggle to be taken into the hearts of the people of Scotland. Perhaps, as an election approaches, we have further evidence that the Conservatives in Scotland are once more ruthlessly courting unpopularity.

No one would dispute the importance of ensuring that cancer patients receive proper treatment, but is the member really saying that people with other chronic conditions would be better served by having to continue to pay for prescriptions?

Will the member give way?

A dh'fhaighneachd do Riaghaltas na h-Alba an daingnich e gum bi seirbheisean adhar Bharraigh seasmhach anns an fhad-ùine. To ask the Scottish Government whether it can confirm the long-term future of air services to the isle of Barra. (S3O-9070)

I thank the minister for his categorical reply. Can he further lay to rest press  speculation that Loganair has let it be known that it is "not prepared to bid" for the Glasgow to Barra and Barra to Benbecula public service obligations when they are renegotiated in 2013? Can he confirm that the Government is actively considering at least the option of replacing the present aircraft?

I thank the minister for bringing this long-standing question to a conclusion. Will he say any more about what form any future connection from Beauly to Ullapool might take?

As other members have said, there has been pressure from across the political spectrum for legislation to deal with some of the human consequences of the economic downturn. The Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill forms at least part of that response. The two parts of the bill deal with distinct issues. However, in its report, the Local Government and Communities Committee endorsed the general principles of both part 1 and part 2. Essentially, those principles are to strengthen the existing provision in Scots law to protect home owners and to build on the experience of how the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Act 2001 has worked in practice. The need for action is clear. Citizens Advice Scotland is one of many organisations that strongly support the bill. It was represented on the debt action forum and is only too aware of what debt means for families around Scotland. One  theme of evidence was the need to obtain reliable Scottish figures for repossession. I understand that the Scottish Government has been in dialogue with the Financial Services Authority about requiring lenders to provide separate Scottish data in order better to inform policy making in the distinct Scottish housing market. The issue is highlighted in the Local Government and Communities Committee's report. However, the figures at UK level present a concerning picture, with 53,000 repossessions forecast for 2010 and repossession orders granted by courts at their highest for at least a decade. In the present climate, none of that comes as any great surprise. The Scottish Government has responded to the need in ways other than legislation. In January 2008, an additional £35 million was provided to the home owners support fund to help with mortgage to rent and the new mortgage to shared equity scheme, which was launched in March that year. Between January and August 2009, almost 150 families benefited from the scheme. The Government has also increased funding for debt advice, with an additional £1 million for Citizens Advice Scotland in 2009-10 and a further £250,000 to support accreditation towards the national standards for information and advice. Funding for relevant legal advice has increased by £3 million over two years. However, there was a widely shared feeling that further action at legislative level was necessary as a matter of urgency. That urgency necessitated a reasonable attitude towards the length of the consultation period for the bill, but interested parties were engaged extensively. As other members have mentioned, initially there were calls from some quarters for emergency legislation, which would have restricted engagement severely. That route was rejected. Part 1 makes extensive changes to the extent to which home owners and other residents can apply to court to delay repossession under the 2001 act. That facility has been extended to include almost all instances in which a lender seeks to repossess a property as a result of debts or mortgage arrears. Crucially, a lender will no longer be able to sell a domestic home that is used as a security without recourse to court action. Lenders will have to show that they have considered reasonable alternatives to repossession. The bill codifies industry best practice guidance and goes further than the England and Wales pre-action protocol in the area—with good reason, as others have observed. It is worth clarifying one issue that was raised in evidence—the protection of the family home in the process. The bill does not provide absolute protection of the family home from bankruptcy or repossession. The fear that it would do that lay  behind some, although not all, of the criticisms that were made of the bill in committee. As others have mentioned, part 2 deals with issues relating to bankruptcy and trust deeds, removing the requirement for the creditor to give consent before a person enters bankruptcy by creating an alternative route that involves their being assessed by an authorised person, such as a solicitor, as being unable to pay debts. Much of the evidence on part 2 was, declaredly, from people who make a living—in some cases, a substantial living—from the existing system. That notwithstanding, it would be fair to reflect a variety of views among the committee on part 2. The issue around the Accountant in Bankruptcy automatically becoming the trustee in certificate for sequestration cases caused continuing debate in the committee. Some of the other concerns that were raised by insolvency practitioners about part 2 were not shared by organisations such as Shelter, which believed that the provisions help people who currently do not have debt solutions available to them. In any event, evidence from ministers indicated their willingness to consider amending the bill at stage 2 if outstanding areas of concern remain. Discussions between ministers and stakeholders continue. Despite there being various areas, particularly in part 2, in which the committee identified a need for further parliamentary scrutiny and debate, the committee was able to endorse the general principles of the bill. I hope that Parliament will be willing to do likewise at 5 o'clock.

To ask the Scottish Government what it sees as the priorities for the Crofters Commission in the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill. (S3O-8822)

Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that the bill, which was published today, represents a significant improvement on the draft bill? Will he comment on that with particular reference to the fact that provisions on three areas—area committees, standard securities and residency requirements—have been dropped from the bill? Will he undertake to engage further with crofters on the bill, which is a much more rational way forward?

I like to think that, in the factory where elves toil through  the year to manufacture aspiring Scottish Labour MSPs—it is obviously not situated in any of the small independent countries that encompass Lapland or, even, in devolved Greenland—a mission statement is somewhere on a wall. I am sure that it reads, "Do you want to fight for the right to keep things in Scotland pretty much the same as they are now, with potentially the right to alter speed limits—but not the associated penalties—at an undetermined date after the next UK election? If so, come and join us."

I am sure that such a clarion call is, as we speak, stirring to the unionist cause the most selfless, idealistic and likeable young people. I give way to one such.

Wendy Alexander knows that all of us in the SNP would like to fight for the right to determine all taxation in Scotland and not just for the Calman proposals, which would offer the Scottish Government little flexibility on taxation. In the spirit of the season, I will concentrate on areas in which there is consensus. We will not all agree at any time of the year about the great articles of political faith that divide us, but we should at least admit to what we agree on. Regardless of whether we see Scotland's ultimate destination as being as an independent country or as part of the UK, none of us—not even Lord Foulkes—genuinely envisages Scotland sticking with its current constitutional set-up. If nationalists and unionists are to have a meaningful conversation about that, we must at least read each other's positions before we reach for the stock epithets of condemnation. Like many members, I have read the Opposition's Calman report and the Scottish Government's white paper. It will come as little surprise to hear that a referendum on independence stirs me more deeply than anything in the Calman report. However, I acknowledge that Calman contains things that are of worth, as far as they go—even if it is not very far—so we should agree to act on the Calman proposals that attract broad agreement. As others have said, we could all agree to devolve immediately responsibility for air-guns, speed limits and drink-driving. If I—an incorrigible nationalist—am prepared to see the good bits in the Calman recommendations, the Opposition parties have a duty to react rationally rather than irrationally to the Scottish Government's white paper. We cannot hang about for ever. If we voted for the Labour amendment, what would we vote for? We would vote for nothing whatever, because the  amendment does not call on anyone to do anything at all about anything.

If we were to draw up a list of the things on which Jeremy Purvis and I disagree, it would be quite long. However, I do not think that the fact that the SNP has a reasonable position on transitional arrangements after independence is a reason not to talk about what we can act upon in the here and now. What are we supposed to make of Labour's amendment? Are its proponents preparing to fight to the end to prevent Holyrood, rather than Westminster, from regulating Scottish cinemas? Are they going to die in a ditch to prevent Scots from ever legislating on vitamins A and D, B and C, which are, of course, already devolved? If that is not their stance, what is? Labour says that it wants to enact the Calman recommendations, but not until after the election. I do not know whether it is possible for tumbleweed to blow through long grass, but that is the sound that comes to mind. Perhaps it has discovered what we might call the St Augustine stance on the Scottish question: "Lord, give us self-respect, but not yet". It certainly all goes to explain why the Labour amendment is an almost delphic work of calculated meaninglessness. Those who instinctively oppose the ideas in the Government's white paper—but who have at least read them—might have been surprised to find that the paper is actually very open to ideas other than independence, however much independence is our favoured option. Indeed, the white paper lays down a challenge to all thinking unionists, who—one hopes—are made of marginally sterner stuff than Calman. If they do not support independence or fiscal autonomy, and if they do not want to implement the parts of their own Calman report that enjoy broad cross-party support, what option do they support? What do they want to make a reality now? Whether we be nationalists or unionists, we must agree that the argument for the Parliament's taking on more responsibility is simply unanswerable. Whether we say it privately or in the open air, and in whatever shape or form we say it, we all recognise that the status quo does not deserve to last.  Finally, I will point out one more thing. We should remember that we are talking not just about more powers for this Parliament, but about more powers for Scotland. After all, the best people to run Scotland are the people who live here, and the evidence of history is that any argument against that position cannot be indefinitely propped up in Scotland.

The member criticises the motion and refers to what we are not debating.  However, her party's amendment recognises many things and makes a number of platitudes, but does not call for anyone to do anything.

Will the member give way?

What principle lies behind the revaluation of business rates? How many businesses are expected to benefit from that? Can the cabinet secretary tell us more about the contribution that it might make to Scotland's wider economy?

As others have said, we are now, finally, meeting to vote on a bill that many in rural Scotland and in Scotland more generally have worked long and hard to achieve. The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill is crucial to offering a greater degree of protection to all school communities, but I believe that it is particularly relevant to remote and rural constituencies such as mine, where schools are often—to use an overused but underappreciated phrase—the focal point of the community. Indeed, rural schools are integral to the sustainability of many remote regions. It is clear that the main purpose of the bill is to revise and strengthen the statutory consultation process that is required when education authorities consider changes to the school estate, particularly school closures. I want to focus on rural schools not to belittle the importance of schools in urban areas—that importance is recognised in the bill—but because a crucial distinction must be understood. A school closure in an urban community is damaging—we have seen that in Glasgow and other places—but a  school closure in a rural area can effectively close down an entire community economically. Rural school closures can render huge tracts of Scotland out of bounds, in effect, for young families, which can result in huge economic and social impacts, as well as educational impacts. There are around 1,000 schools in rural areas, which includes 41 per cent of Scottish primary schools and 23 per cent of Scottish secondary schools. The number includes 39 schools in my constituency, the smallest of which has a roll of eight. However, there are 552 fewer schools in Scotland than there were four decades ago. Since I was in primary 1—I hasten to add that that was not quite four decades ago—the total number of publicly funded schools in Scotland has dropped by nearly 17 per cent, and there are 357 fewer primary schools. My school was among the casualties. It is undeniable that that decline is partly due to falling school rolls, but the trend has often been so steep because local councils have had to do relatively little to shut down local schools when they have decided that they want to do so. The bill aims to redress the balance. It sets out a much more vigorous set of procedures for consultations on school closures, which local authorities must adhere to. The intention is to establish, in effect, a presumption against the closure of schools unless certain prescribed factors have been taken into account. That will help to safeguard in particular rural schools in my constituency and schools like them, which can be fundamental to safeguarding small and fragile local economies. The bill does not say that no school should ever close—members have made that point—but it means that local authorities will have to publish and advertise clear educational benefits statements that set out why a school closure might be justified on educational grounds specifically. Parents, teachers and pupils are among the mandatory consultees in the process. In addition, rural school closure will not take place without the council examining alternatives to closure. I am delighted that the Scottish Government is determined to ensure that rural communities on the islands and elsewhere are much more meaningfully listened to when school closures are proposed. Specifically, local authorities will have to take into account the impact that any school closure would have on the rural community concerned. The bill has been improved as it has gone through the parliamentary process, specifically at stage 2. For example, amendments have introduced community councils as statutory consultees. Following amendments that I lodged, the bill will require local authorities to take into account and to consult on the impact that any  school closure would have on Gaelic language provision in the local community where that is relevant. Gaelic education is growing, but it could fall victim to school closures if it is not one of the factors that are taken into account when decisions are being made on school closure proposals. I went to a one-teacher school and I am only too aware that closing a school can take the heart out of a community. We should be clear that there will always be circumstances in which schools have to close, but we should seek to make rural and remote communities more, not less, attractive to young families. The bill will go a long way towards ensuring that that is the case. The bill has achieved broad support from local authorities, parent councils and community councils. I hope that members will vote to pass it and support schools throughout Scotland.

It is that time of year again. As politicians we often talk about fishing from warm, dry land, using the opaque language of the common fisheries policy that can obscure the immense human consequences of the decisions that are made about fishing at this time every year. Once in a while we get a reality check, as I am pleased to say that I did recently, when I spent a day lifting creels with the crew of the fishing vessel Wakeful, from the isle of Grimsay. Let me confirm, with some respect in my voice, that nobody does a day's work quite like fishermen. Between now and December, the Scottish Government also faces a daunting task: negotiating with Europe over the proposed cuts in total allowable catches recommended by European scientists. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment said: "This year has been a tough one for many fishermen, with the recession and low fish prices combined with existing restrictions imposed on our fleets ... Crazy EU rules mean that our fishermen have little choice but to throw away much of the fish they catch." Scotland, which has one fifth of the European Union's seas, is responsible for some of Europe's richest fishing. The fact that Scottish landings are worth almost £400 million to the economy is important, not least in my constituency. In the Western Isles, the fishing industry provides much of the population with a source of income and, in one shape or another, supports more than 800 jobs. In 2008, 3,800 tonnes of seafood, valued at £11.3 million, was landed in the outer Hebrides, 90 per cent of which was shellfish. All that points to the unavoidable conclusion that the fishing  industry deserves to be protected from the most insane excesses of the European common fisheries policy. I am heartened to hear that the cabinet secretary is going about the negotiations in exactly that spirit and that he is seeking to mitigate what European officials are proposing. The proposals on nephrops concern me most. European Commission scientists have recommended that the total allowable catch for prawns be cut by 15 per cent. That would represent a significant cut in both the prospective catch and in income for fishermen in my constituency at an economically tough time when they are struggling to make ends meet, particularly given that overheads are being driven up by continuing high fuel prices. John Hermse, secretary of the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association, said: "The system as it is now really is a lot of nonsense and it's been like this for a number of years ... the way it is now is absolute madness." Instead of taking the drastic measures of quota cuts, at least in the form proposed by the European Commission, the Scottish Government is endeavouring to ensure that a more sensible way forward is found. I hope that that means that in future we might perhaps catch fewer fish but land more of what we catch. That would help to ensure the long-term future of our valuable fish stocks and cut dramatically the number of fish that are discarded, which would allow the fish populations to regenerate and become more sustainable. The main goal of the European Commission's fishing policy—or, at least, its stated aim—is to create and maintain sustainable fish populations. However, Scotland has already played a leading role in meeting those objectives through good management of sustainable fishing. We now have the opportunity to make up for previous inactivity on this front. Throughout these years—certainly the past eight years—there has been little discernible effort to maintain or protect the fishing industry in Scotland from European policies or to find a sustainable future for our seas on the basis of meaningful science, as opposed to the basest of European political considerations.

I am afraid that I am just about to conclude. Like most members who represent fishing communities, I hear whole communities rightly bristling with offence at a certain Labour MEP who said:  "we have to realise that fishing is a declining industry. We should be looking to the future not wrapping ourselves in nostalgia." The Scottish Government is looking to the future—I am sure that that view is shared throughout the chamber—and, unlike the previous Administration did at times, it sees that the fishing industry is crucial to maintaining a healthy national economy. The chief executive of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, Bertie Armstrong, said: "Never before has it been more imperative for the Scottish industry and government to work together in partnership to reduce by as much as possible the scope, severity and speed of implementation of these"— European— "measures. ... With the SNP in government Scottish fishing finally has an administration that will stand up for the national interest and a successful industry." That is where the quotation closes—those were Bertie Armstrong's words, not mine. All of us who claim to have the interests of fishing communities at heart must now back the efforts of Scotland's Government to improve the deal on the table for our fishermen. That is the very least that we can do, this side of having our own seat on the European fisheries council or a replacement for the common fisheries policy.

Will the member give way?

Appalling cases such as the ones that we are discussing, which often involve people who have previous convictions, understandably cause the public alarm. Will the cabinet secretary provide some perspective on the reoffending rates of registered sex offenders and how they compare to reoffending rates in general?

A dh'fhaighneachd don mhinistear an tèid am buidseat airson na Gàidhlig a ghearradh a chionn 's gun tèid buidseat na h-Alba a ghearradh an da-rìribh ann an 2010-11.  To ask the minister if the Gaelic language will suffer as a result of the real-terms cut in Scotland's budget for 2010-11.

The member rightly says that we should listen to scientists. Does he concede that we should also listen to communities and that one reason why the European Commission's proposals in Barra are so unpopular is that there is no obvious opportunity for the community to have a voice in the consultation process?

The Scottish Government has already started to improve our civil justice system. Scotland rightly prides itself on the institutions of its distinctive justice system—institutions that remarkably survived the long adjournment of this Parliament—but there is wide and, as is obvious, cross-party acknowledgement that those institutions are now creaking under the weight of their work and are in need of serious reform. That is clearly Lord Gill's view. I will not perjure myself by claiming to have read all 700 pages of the report. Even the executive summary runs to more than 35 pages, which stretches the shameful attention span of most politicians. It is clear that his recommendations form a comprehensive whole and, rather than cherry pick from the report now, we should consider it as a whole before we go any further. I thank Lord Gill and his team for dedicating two and a half years to the project and for producing a report that will, I hope, be used to effect the changes that need to be made in our civil justice system. The report covers the cost of litigation, the role of mediation, the development of modern methods of communication and the proposed specialisation of courts. Paul McBride QC—not someone whom I often find myself quoting—was reported in The Scotsman as saying: "There is no downside to Lord Gill's report. The idea is it will improve access to justice for civil litigants and save them a great deal of money and time. ... Lord Gill is doing something that is long overdue." The need for such reform is brought home to me as a layman by one simple fact that sheds light on the ridiculous nature of the present situation: in more than half of cases before the Court of Session, it costs more to sue than the sum that is being sued for. That fact, taken together with the long delays that arise from the pressures of criminal business, leads in Lord Gill's view to a need for greater judicial specialisation. In his view, judicial resources are being used inefficiently and there is an over-reliance on temporary judicial resources. He states that there is a need for effective case management, reformed procedures and investment in information technology. He also identifies a problem with the current costs and funding for litigation. If one thing in Lord Gill's report is perhaps worth concentrating on as a potential remedy to some of the problems, it is his proposal for the new office of district judge. The proposal merits considerable parliamentary time for consideration, but it is an attractive idea that a district judge might sit in the sheriff court to hear criminal cases and civil cases that have a value of less than £5,000. Those courts should have, in the report's words,  "a problem solving or interventionist approach in which the court should identify the issues and specify what it wishes to see or hear by way of evidence or argument", with—significantly—rules that are "drafted for party litigants rather than practitioners." If the court agreed, litigants could be represented by suitable lay representatives. Those proposals would significantly reduce the complexity and expense for litigants and reduce the pressure on sheriffs. The Scottish Government has shown some commitment to reform in those areas through reform of the summary criminal justice system and the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008, which has given the courts modern governance arrangements for the first time. The Government has also introduced an Arbitration (Scotland) Bill to strengthen the protection of home owners, and will soon implement the EU directive on mediation. Lord Gill has made some proposals that the Parliament needs to take seriously, particularly his thoughts on district judges, a new civil justice council, a major shift in judicial procedure and the creation of a non-geographical personal injury court based in Edinburgh. If we are to improve our justice system and implement any of the changes that he recommends, the report should be carefully considered in Parliament and through public scrutiny and evaluated further to determine which measures might be adopted. The proposed changes are major reforms that will take time to put into action. Although it might be a slow and painful process—especially given the present need for reduced public spending—the end result will help to create a civil justice system that is less costly in time and money to those who utilise it. Before we get ahead of ourselves, the intention behind the motion, as I read it, is that we produce proposals that will be subject to detailed public consultation. After that process, we can proceed with restructuring our civil justice system, as determined by the public and Parliament. Having sounded that cautionary note, I say that we would, as a Parliament, do well to heed Lord Gill's call for radicalism and his acceptance of the need for radical change that, as he concludes, remains true to the values and distinctiveness of Scots law and our separate legal system. I believe that that might well be achieved by, among many other measures, removing the role of the UK Supreme Court from the civil appeals process in Scotland.

A dh'fhaighneachd do Riaghaltas na h-Alba airson na naidheachd as ùire mu staid nan còmhraidhean Eòrpach air iasgaich.  To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the state of negotiations with regard to the forthcoming round of EU fisheries talks. (S3O-7978)

Tha mi taingeil dhan rùnaire airson na freagairt sin. Does the cabinet secretary acknowledge that the initial proposals from the Commission apparently took little account of the conservation measures that Scottish fishermen are taking? Will he ensure that the Commission takes Scottish conservation measures more fully into account during the forthcoming negotiations?

I thank members for all the positive contributions that have been made to this important discussion. As the convener of the Local Government and Communities Committee did, I thank everyone who gave evidence to the committee during its inquiry. I also thank the committee members for their contribution, the committee clerks for all their hard work and the staff of SPICe for their dedication and invaluable assistance.  The committee wants its report to help to find resolutions to the many outstanding equal pay cases in Scottish local government. As members have observed, the inquiry was the third time that a parliamentary committee had considered the issue. The committee wants to ensure that no further inquiries into the issue are needed. A fairer distribution of wealth is key to economic growth and equal pay is an important part of that. As many members have said, equal pay in local authorities is an historical issue going back many years. Although it continues to pose a challenge for councils, it must be resolved without further undue delay. I hope that the report will help in that process. It suggests solutions to several of the issues. The committee received evidence from all the main stakeholders in local government pay and rights issues—local authorities, COSLA, trade unions and lawyers. Unfortunately, it was clear that trust no longer seems to be part of the process. I hope that the committee's recommendations on working together go some way to helping to restore some of that lost trust. As members know, the single status agreement between local authorities and unions was made in 1999, to harmonise manual and non-manual workers' terms and conditions. Each local authority had to implement it individually, but to date not all of them have done so. In the intervening period, several legal rulings have impacted on equal pay. Together with the delays, those have led to a large number of individual employees lodging equal pay cases with employment tribunals. The committee did not seek to completely reopen the discussions about the reasons for those lengthy delays, particularly given that the Finance Committee in the second session of Parliament covered that in a report on the same subject. However, about 35,000 equal pay claims have been lodged with employment tribunals, a number that has increased considerably since the Finance Committee published its report. I will mention a number of observations that were made to the committee on the situation that local authorities currently face. The first is that it might have been better if equal pay had been implemented nationally rather than leaving it to 32 local authorities. The second is that such a long time has passed that there have been court rulings and changes to the law that have had an impact. The final one is that the issues could have been resolved in what was a time of financial growth. The committee made a number of recommendations relevant to that in its report. The first is that the Scottish Government could facilitate further talks between all the relevant parties: local authorities, COSLA, trade unions and lawyers. There are strong cases in the system, in which the  main issue might not be over whether discrimination has occurred but over the level of compensation; the committee was of the view that those cases should be settled without further delay. Discussions should also focus on whether there could be staged payments to ease the financial burden on local authorities, although it is also worth noting that the Scottish Government is investing record levels of funding in local government. Work should now be done to help to prevent more cases from arising in the future, for example by having an independent assessment of local authority pay and grading arrangements and annual equal pay audits in local authorities. The committee has sought clarification from the Scottish Government and others on the timescale for and operation of any scheme to help local authorities to meet their equal pay liabilities. The cabinet secretary has said that he is in negotiation with the Treasury in that regard. I will refer to and thank several speakers—in fact, given my innate politeness, probably all of them. The cabinet secretary recognised the problems and said that borrowing in itself might not be the solution. We await with interest the outcomes of his negotiations with the Treasury. David Whitton rightly reminded us of the important principle of equal pay and why it should exercise us in the first place. David McLetchie's forensic skills were not lost on the committee and they came to the fore again today in his reference to the Bainbridge decision and other related implications. In a Freudian slip, he also sought 37 council settlements for the benefit of the people of Edinburgh. Jim Tolson spoke about the level of outstanding compensation and the dangers in the current litigious atmosphere. John Wilson referred to the failure to settle early in the process and the consequences of that with which we are now living. Sarah Boyack referred to pay audits and the need to measure the progress of any future solution. Margaret Mitchell highlighted the problems with using taxpayers' money to defend the legal claims of litigants. As others have mentioned, Tricia Marwick spoke powerfully first about the problem of justice delayed being justice denied and then about the hazards of certain no-win, no-fee lawyers for people who are often in straitened circumstances. Mary Mulligan reminded us of the need to avoid prevarication on the matter and of the scope for Government and councils to work together. Jeremy Purvis referred to on-going liability and the implications for councils' budgets. Michael McMahon cited the outstanding problem of home care workers as a concrete example of  inequality. Bob Doris mentioned the sheer scale of tribunal claims and the urgency with which local authorities need to deal with them. He also mentioned that COSLA could have dealt with such claims on a national basis. Marlyn Glen gave more detail on the capitalisation issue. Alison McInnes summarised much in the report and referred to the need to monitor equality proofing in future. Gavin Brown mentioned the unresolved issues to do with the Scottish Government's potential role as a facilitator. David Whitton wondered what some people in local government do for a living and left each of us to wonder how he might be thinking of. He also said that no-brainer cases need to be dealt with quickly. The committee does not want just to publish its report; it wants to speak about equal pay in Parliament and continue to discuss the issue, which it does not consider to be closed. We have come up with potential solutions in our report and we will keep monitoring the progress that we hope will be made towards them. I commend the committee's report to Parliament.

In light of the recent comments by STV about the editorial need—in its view—for an evening news bulletin combining Scottish with international stories, does the minister believe that the argument for such a bulletin on the BBC and STV has been strengthened rather than weakened?

Will the First Minister join me in congratulating the community on Uist on its successful campaign to maintain jobs at the Hebrides range? [ Interruption. ]

The people have done so in the face of proposals by the Ministry of Defence's contractor that would have been logistically impractical and would have had devastating consequences for the islands. Does the First Minister share my regret that the community was put through the trauma of the whole episode in the first place?

I echo other members' thanks to the members and staff of the Finance Committee who have produced such a comprehensive report. Any report invites multiple readings, but one point is pretty clear. The report contains evidence that was received about the overall size of Scotland's budget. The much-quoted Stella Manzie, the director general of finance and corporate services in the Scottish Government, stated that "the net result of the 2008 Pre-Budget Report and the 2009 UK Budget is that the Scottish DEL total for 2010-11 is 'reduced below original plans by £496 million'." Before we go any further, let us put the matter to rest. However it is spun or explained away, Scotland is getting £0.5 billion less than everyone—Opposition parties included—expected or was able to plan for. That has consequences for every area of Government plans. Were it not so, why would other parties be telling Scotland to tighten its belt? Even for a party that is well used to holding two—sometimes three—contradictory positions simultaneously and devoutly, Labour surely stretches credulity in saying that the budget settlement from Westminster is anything other than a cut in what we all expected and planned for. The injunction from Labour for the Scottish Government to live within reduced means also sits ill with any assertion that Scotland is being given a handsome pay rise by Westminster. Then again, it is lacking in credibility for Westminster to tell us that we should tighten our belts while it tells other countries around the world that they cannot cut their way out of a recession. It seems that the belt-tightening advice applies uniquely to Scotland. There is a further inconsistency—very much in evidence today—whereby, perhaps increasingly comfortable on the Opposition benches, Labour members provide lists of planned spending projects that they believe that the Scottish Government should undertake while in no way attempting to relate them to the cuts that the Scottish budget faces. Nobody denies the severity of the international situation or the difficult choices that all governments face this year. However, in the words of the report, Scotland's block grant may have "peaked" as the result of political decisions that have been made elsewhere. As the cabinet  secretary has just indicated, we can expect a further dip of several billion pounds, in real terms, by 2013. Even before the cut was made, Scotland faced the smallest percentage budget increase in some time. Other members have pointed to that fact. However, when the Scottish Government asks local authorities to make efficiency savings, the councils concerned get to make them. The novel form of efficiency savings that Westminster has introduced in Scotland amounts to a direct cut from our annual budget. Putting that debate aside, it is abundantly clear, as is recognised by at least some other parties in this chamber, that part of Scotland's unique predicament is its unique inability to borrow. Scotland, as other speakers have observed, is unable to spread the cost of major capital projects over a period of years because of the restrictions in the Scotland Act 1998. Before the usual suspects complain about that statement, I ask them to say which bit of it is not true. As presently constituted, the Parliament has no borrowing powers. In February, in acknowledgment of the situation, the Liberal Democrats lodged a motion that stated: "That the Parliament believes that the acquisition of borrowing powers would enhance the autonomy and accountability of the Scottish Parliament and improve the Scottish Government's ability to respond to changing economic circumstances". At present, Northern Ireland has such a power, but Scotland does not. Clackmannanshire has such as power, but Scotland does not. English parish councils have such a power, but Scotland does not. In fact, it is difficult to find an example of a Parliament anywhere in the world that is constrained in this way—let alone the many other ways in which we are constrained. Many bad arguments are offered against Scotland taking more control of our own financial affairs, whether that control means borrowing powers, genuine fiscal autonomy or independence. However, the most craven as well as the most logically inconsistent argument is that now is not the time. If this is not the time for Scotland to acquire such powers, when is? When the UK Government is further in debt? It is already the most indebted state in Europe. When we are on the other side of the recession? At that point, the argument will no doubt be offered that, at a time of economic strength, we should not rock a stable boat. For those who oppose such powers, the time has never been right, and never will be. For the rest of us, the time is now.

Let me complete the quote regarding what Stella Manzie said. The committee's report confirms that she stated that "applying the deflator gives a real terms reduction of 1%."

I appreciate that the member acknowledges the importance of the work that retained firefighters do. In that light, can he explain why the only Lib Dem member of the European Parliament from Scotland voted to end the flexibility available to retained firefighters?

Talking of wisdom, Nelson Mandela said recently that he sincerely appreciates the decision that Kenny MacAskill made—a view that, we now learn, appears to be not dissimilar to the view of the UK Government. Does the member believe that Mr Mandela is mistaken?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The Treasury and Whitehall mandarins, whom the member so demonises, are accountable to Labour ministers. Do Labour ministers share the scepticism of which she speaks about Scottish autonomy?

Aside from the Edinburgh festival, I am sure that there will be healthy competition among us all today to get in the most references to the local festivals in our respective constituencies. Strangely enough, I was anxious to get into the debate before Jim Hume—who is now not here—who represents the other end of Scotland. I have the twin advantages not only of representing the Western Isles, but of being—as a certain Labour  publication tirelessly reminds my constituents, although apparently without the desired effect—a borderer. In the Borders, local festivals are both enjoyed and taken very seriously. Selkirk common riding is the classic example of a local festival that exists for a reason. It has not been concocted for tourists but is held by and for the benefit of a community that wants to celebrate its identity. Selkirk common riding provokes a powerful response in souters—the natives of Selkirk, of whom there are three in the Parliament. Like all genuine festivals, it has things about it the reasons for which are lost in the mists of time or which are pleasantly incomprehensible to anyone who might stumble on it. I am thinking of the fact that it begins at 4 am—or, rather, that it is unclear at what point on the nicht afore the morn it begins—and the fact that the standard bearer must be unmarried. The sight of the casting of the colours is impressive, as the town eerily remembers its fallen at the battle of Flodden. The fact that any town—without prompting from historians or politicians—genuinely seems collectively to recall something that happened in 1513 is profoundly impressive. The most impressive festivals in Scotland take place, as in Selkirk, not because someone has decided that there is a benefit to the local tourist economy, however welcome that benefit may be—I do not detract from the important point that the motion makes about that—but because people in a community feel that they are important to the community. In many cases, the reasons for the festivals go back so far that no one can remember them and that is what makes them interesting. People in Selkirk ride around the marches of the burgh because they have to—some neighbouring landlord might pinch a bit of the town if they did not. Likewise, in my constituency, there are a variety of local festivals, the best known of which are connected to the Gaelic musical tradition. Each year, boat-loads of singers take off for the Mod, a test of social as well as musical stamina. I declare an interest as a member of Back district choir. In 2011, the Mod will come home to the Western Isles. The Mod is a national rather than local festival, which has done as much as any other event or organisation to maintain the Gaelic language and promote a truly unique musical tradition. However, there are many other local musical festivals, from Ceolas, in South Uist and Eriskay, to the local mods in Lewis and Harris as well as all the informal ceilidhs—in the original sense of that word—that still take place around the islands. At the risk of missing out many community festivals, I also mention the Grimsay boat festival, the fishermen's mass in Barra, the Vatersay Boys on tour somewhere, Tattoo Hebrides, the MacNeil  clan gathering, several highland games, Stornoway carnival and the massively popular Hebridean Celtic Festival, which now draws almost 20,000 people in a single week to the Isle of Lewis—a festival that truly has social, economic and cultural impacts on its community. I might even include the annual guga hunt on Sulasgeir among the islands' annual festivals, albeit a very private one. It is an astonishing, ancient and impressive feat, and one that is deeply ingrained in the life of the community of Ness. I will say no more about it than that, though. Previously, my high praise for the guga hunt has earned me a permanent place in the demonology of certain militant, London-based supporters of gannet rights. I could go on, but my point is this: the things that tourists want to see when they come to Scotland are, to a large extent, things that have some basis and support within the community. That is not a case against innovation—far from it. The more communities with festivals, the better. However, the strongest and most enduring festivals always focus on something in the community—be it urban or rural—that is specific to that place and celebrates it. Tourists like our festivals and, despite what we may imagine, the more mysterious and incomprehensible they are—the more inscrutably local they are—the better they like them.

The First Minister will be aware of the devastating effect on my constituents of yesterday's announcement that the 120 people who work for QinetiQ, the Ministry of Defence's contractor in Uist, will lose their jobs. What representations will the Scottish Government make to the United Kingdom Government about that body blow by UK ministers to an already fragile island economy?

What action will be taken in Scotland to address the needs of the people who are most directly affected by the announcement?

Members on all sides of the chamber and many people outside it have welcomed the new certificates in literacy and numeracy. Will the cabinet secretary explain whether the teaching of those units will form part of English and maths or run alongside those subjects?

Will the member give way?

We cannot talk about the prospect of dissolving the Westminster Parliament without talking about the European elections and their impact on the present political climate. Where should I begin? When I relate the story of the European elections, should I heed all the wisest political advice and keep my comments consensual, measured and free from any taint of triumphalism, or should I just unleash my inner Kenneth Gibson? Are there things that it would be more decent not to mention about the circumstances that have brought each member present today to the subject of a UK election, such as the fact that, in my constituency—a seat that was held by Labour two years ago—the Scottish National Party got its highest share of the vote in any local authority area in Scotland? Perhaps, in the interest of balance, I should even that up by saying that Labour did not suffer in the Western Isles the fate that it suffered nationally; it did not get its worst result since the first world war. In the interest of fairness, I should say that Labour had one worse election in the Western Isles in 1924. However, I will avert my eyes from all that and concentrate on the reasons why so many people in the Commons argued for dissolution or struggled lamely to argue against it and, more important, why all politicians would do well to understand that the public's patience with the current United Kingdom Parliament is now at an end. The reason for that is certainly the expenses scandal: not only the transgressions of individual MPs and peers—spectacular as some of those have been—but the fact that the present United  Kingdom Parliament spent four years fighting tooth and nail through the courts and elsewhere to conceal the scandal rather than address it. Eighty per cent of those polled by the BBC and Ipsos MORI on 31 May agreed that not only MPs but the whole Westminster system were to blame.

No. We would struggle to find many people who would trust the current Parliament to reform itself.

Well, okay. If Johann Lamont wants to intervene, I am happy enough for her to do so.

We should all commend people who, for example, give their second salaries to charity and are prepared to call for a general election and bring on a contest. Perhaps we should call for a general election in the House of Lords and get rid of our other dual-mandate member in the Parliament. We would struggle to find many people who would not be impatient with the United Kingdom Government for another reason as well. However long that Government may stagger on for, it knows that it is now kept in office solely by the personal terror with which its back benchers view a general election or anything that might rock the boat in the direction of one. Can we any longer be said to have a United Kingdom Government to speak of? We have seen 11—or is it 12?—ministers resign in a fortnight, few of them with good grace. If a Prime Minister finds that nobody will work for him except those whom he does not want to be there in the first place, his Government has surely long since lost its authority. In the words of one of the speakers in another place last night—not someone in my party—the present House of Commons is "dead on its feet". Some members here talk with horror about bringing down Governments, but perhaps they should wake up and realise what everyone outside this Parliament has already realised: the present United Kingdom Government is already over. In Scotland, people want a UK general election but, if the European election results are to be believed, not for the reasons for which those who lodged the motion might hope. We should not allow the idea to take root in fanciful Tory minds or  paranoid Labour ones that Scots want a UK election because they want a chance to elect a Tory Prime Minister. Scots realise that, as ever under the present constitutional dispensation—as ever without independence—whether they get a Tory Prime Minister, with all the undoubted misgovernment that that implies, will not be a decision of Scotland's making. People in Scotland want a UK election because Scotland clearly faces a choice. Do we want to send to the House of Commons MPs who will represent Scotland's interests and aspirations, or MPs who will not do so? For all of us who on hearing the words "dissolution of the House of Commons" have the mental image of something permanent and conceivably acidic involuntarily brought into our minds, an election cannot come soon enough. Scotland has outgrown the debate about which UK party might be worst at ignoring Scotland, because we now have a Parliament of our own in Scotland. As the European election results prove, we have minds of our own, too. Bring it on.

Thank you, Presiding Officer—I will give way to Scott John in a moment. I thank Liam McArthur for bringing forward this pertinent topic for discussion and for ensuring that there were sheep at the door of the Parliament this morning to illustrate the point of tonight's debate. I cannot help feeling that, if we were in the legislature of France, the animals would have been driven into the chamber to make that point.

Well, there are sheep. Only this morning I was contacted by a crofting family, who made it plain that the system of electronic tagging—certainly as originally agreed by Europe—would be the final straw for him and some of his neighbours. In island constituencies such as mine, crofters practise a highly marginal form of agriculture. In general, the number of animals is small when compared with a commercial sheep farm; many of my constituents have only 40 or 50 sheep. Proposals to bring in, from January 2010 onwards, the compulsory  electronic identification of sheep will therefore have a huge practical impact. The delay in introducing the electronic identification of sheep allows the Scottish Government to continue to work with the European Commission and with the Scottish agricultural industry to try to find workable solutions. I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment and the Minister for Environment have already made significant representations on this issue, pressing for a workable interpretation of the ruling to be found. In the community where I live, people have rightly not been slow to let me know their views. They are simply not convinced of any practical benefits from electronically identifying sheep. The cost burden might be easier to bear if crofters could see some point to the exercise in their setting. The task facing an elderly crofter in a place such as Harris to gather and tag sheep electronically is not to be underestimated—especially when that task might follow in the wake of weeks of associated form filling. I believe that similar examples are being cited from around Europe—or at least from places such as the Pyrenees. That makes the case for geography and culture to have at least some bearing on how European directives are implemented. The stated aim of the sheep identification proposals is the more effective monitoring of individual animals, for disease control in particular. As others have said, part of the criticism levelled at the proposals stems from real doubts about the effectiveness of the technology. However, as well as the cost implications, there will be a negative effect on the general morale of small-scale crofters.

I have no difficulty at all in agreeing with that point. I have been speaking about my constituency, but the points stand for other parts of Scotland too. As I was saying, there will be an impact on morale, especially at a time when sheep and lamb prices in island and other communities have been slow to recover from the catastrophic low points of recent years. Electronic identification and individual movement recording far exceed what is genuinely needed, and the implementation of EU regulation 21/2004 will not, in many cases, achieve the Commission's aims. Instead, the regulation will add cost and  inconvenience to an already fragile way of life. Worse, it will dispirit potential new entrants if they are faced with yet another level of bureaucracy. After considerable lobbying by the cabinet secretary and the minister, high-level meetings have been held with the Commission and with Commissioner Vassiliou to discuss an alternative interpretation of the regulation or perhaps even an opt-out for Scotland. I hope that sense will prevail and that the European Commission will acknowledge that the scheme cannot be made mandatory. It cannot be forced on crofters and farmers against their will and better judgment.

To ask the Scottish Government what it considers the  benefits of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill will be to island communities. (S3O-7045)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the role of schools in rural areas in general is inextricably linked to their communities' economic activity, with supply very much leading demand?

People's faith in individual politicians can be undermined by many things—indeed, the potential in that respect is almost limitless—but their faith in the whole democratic process can be undermined by only a relatively small number of doubts. One fear is that all politicians are on the take, and the other is that their vote has not been counted. As far as the first fear is concerned, I do not need to elaborate on the disaster movie that is unfolding elsewhere. As  for the second, the experience of 2007 is certainly instructive. We have rehearsed many times both here and in committee the huge organisational problems that occurred in May 2007, when the local government elections took place on the same day as the Scottish Parliament elections. The bill seeks to restore public confidence in the electoral system by making the crucial simplification of decoupling local and national elections and ensuring that they take place on different days. Although the bill's primary concern is local government elections, I believe that, given what happened on May 2007, it will have a significant impact on the running of parliamentary elections. For example, in my Western Isles constituency, 446 of the more than 13,000 parliamentary votes that were cast were spoiled; in other words, 3.27 per cent of those who tried to vote had their votes disallowed. For the local government elections, the figure was 310. As in other areas, the amount of votes rejected in 2003 was, in comparison, tiny. For example, in 2003, only 74 ballot papers were rejected in the Scottish Parliament elections and only 78 in the council elections. The Local Government and Communities Committee took a lot of evidence on the very significant discrepancy between the 2003 and 2007 elections. Although the coincidence of council and national elections on the same day does not explain the whole problem, it certainly explains part of it. In 2007, many votes were disallowed because those who were casting them simply did not understand the difference between the two voting systems. That said, it is interesting to note that the 4.25 per cent figure for rejected constituency parliamentary ballot papers in Scotland as a whole was significantly greater than the percentage in the Western Isles, which perhaps confirms that, as many of us already knew, the people of the Western Isles constitute an unusually politically sophisticated electorate. I am therefore happy to support these moves to decouple local and parliamentary elections and to move back local elections until, eventually, they are held at the midpoint of the parliamentary term. To those who fear that, cut loose from national elections, council elections will suffer from low turnout, I have to say that I do not accept the argument that election turnout should be boosted at all costs. We desperately need to revive our local economy, and that cannot be achieved without a genuine public debate about local rather than merely national political issues. Holding elections on the same day simply to inflate turnout artificially creates a democratic deficit as local issues are crowded out by the coverage of parliamentary elections. I believe that there is a consensus on that view; indeed, I am glad to see  that Mr Tolson has become part of that happy consensus, no matter which tortuous and convoluted route he has taken to get there. The current coupling of local and Scottish parliamentary elections means that local elections receive almost no media coverage in their own right and the record of local councils goes almost undiscussed. I welcome proposals to publish voting information from local government elections in more detail. Under the proposed measure, individual votes will remain anonymous and extremely useful information will be made public. I hope that members will endorse the bill's principles in order to simplify the process and make Scotland's local government elections more transparent. If the experience of 2007 is not enough of a reason for decoupling elections, I do not know what is. However, it should be said that the picture in 2007 was not one of universal chaos. In fact, the greatest immediate problem that arose in the Western Isles as the votes were being counted was that the helicopter that was due to pick up the ballot boxes from Barra and Uist did not leave Inverness because of erroneous reports of fog, delaying the result by 12 hours. We can and should constantly strive for the perfect electoral system—and we shall have reached perfection if we can devise a system that also provides accurate weather forecasts. Until then, the bill provides a very valuable start; I support its principles.

In the light of what has been said about the necessity for those who normally receive the seasonal vaccine to obtain the new one, what information campaigns are likely to be put in place to explain the effect of the H1N1 vaccine on the seasonal flu vaccine?

rose—

Will the member give way?

The member has outlined some of the pressures on fuel prices in rural areas. Does he believe that Greece, France and Portugal are wrong to think that the effect of fuel duty on pricing is relevant? Are they wrong to think that fuel tax needs to be adjusted in rural areas?

I welcome the support of the member's colleagues at Westminster for the plight of rural car users, but could he explain why some of his colleagues at Westminster—at least Ming Campbell, Jo Swinson and Willie Rennie—all voted to increase the price of fuel in the recent budget?

The member paints a picture of local authorities that have been starved of the necessary cash to employ teachers. If that is the case, why, at the concordat's launch, did COSLA president and Labour councillor Pat Watters say: "The package has been agreed within a tight financial context but the role that local government plays in the governance of Scotland has been substantially enhanced and the decline in local government's share of total expenditure has been halted"?

There is no doubting the scale of the task that faces us in tackling Scotland's housing problems. I am sure that other speakers will cite the problems that historical underinvestment has wrought in their constituencies. I could certainly cite plenty of cases in the Western Isles, where fuel poverty affects half the population. That is not unconnected with the state of the housing stock. Only this week, I visited an elderly man whose house must have some of the most stunning views in Europe but who has not been in a position to carry out the most basic repairs to the house for many decades. With that in mind, I welcome the Scottish Government's draft housing bill, which seeks to rejuvenate and build on recent efforts and investment to kick-start new social house building in Scotland. Although there is still a long way to go, the Scottish Government's refreshing progress and speed in that area certainly cast a telling light on the abject failure to address the chronic housing shortage in the last four years of the Labour-Lib Dem Executive. I know that those parties do not like this statistic being quoted, but only six council houses were built in the whole of Scotland in those years.

As the Minister for Housing and Communities said, the figures are due to be published shortly. His comments indicated that we have reason to be optimistic, not only about council housing but about other areas of the social housing sector. In fact, in the Scottish National Party Government's first year, 420 council homes were started. The minister recently announced a massive funding boost of £6.6 million to enable work to begin on new and improved homes for  rent or low-cost ownership in the isles. The Scottish Government also recently provided funding to the Hebridean Housing Partnership in the Western Isles to purchase land for new housing units in Stornoway and Vatersay. One of the major advantages of such initiatives in the Western Isles is that they will provide a much-needed incentive to support the local building trade at a time when serious challenges face the construction industry. Those challenges are a feature throughout the country. The various funding packages provide from one small part of Scotland an example of the Government's commitment to help tide the construction and housing sectors over during the recession. I doubt that I will be the last person today to point out that decades of Labour mismanagement have meant that far too many people in Scotland either have a home that is unsuitable or do not have a home at all. Let us consider the scale of the problem that the Scottish Government has inherited. It is worth remembering that, in Scotland as a whole, more than 200,000 people are on local authority waiting lists. When the SNP Government came into office, it made it clear that addressing that situation was one of its priorities. That is why, last year, the Government launched a £25 million fund to enable councils to build new council houses, and it is why Nicola Sturgeon recently announced that that fund would be doubled to £50 million. Local authorities have applied keenly for a share of that money, and the first £17 million has been allocated among 14 councils. It allowed 5,700 social sector homes to be started in 2007-08; in 2008-09, an even greater number—6,200 completions—is projected throughout Scotland. In response to the economic downturn, the Scottish Government—as was referred to by the minister—has accelerated £120 million, I think, of capital expenditure on affordable homes to help the Scottish construction industry. This year, the significant sum of £644 million is being invested in affordable housing. In the current economic climate, the draft housing bill is a vital step to ensure that we have a thriving social housing sector that meets the needs of new and existing tenants. One of the most welcome measures in the draft bill is surely the scrapping of the right to buy in relation to new-build social housing. At last, social landlords and local authorities will have the incentive and freedom to build new houses without the fear that they will be lost to tenants who exercise their right to buy. Even the Government's most hard-hearted political opponents must be able to find it in those hardened hearts to welcome the ending of that perverse situation, although after listening to Mr McGrigor, I fear that I may be being overoptimistic.  It is estimated that between 2012 and 2022, the reforms to the right to buy would retain between 10,000 and 18,000 homes for low-cost rent that would otherwise be lost to private ownership. That demonstrates the huge advantage to Scotland's social housing stock of changing the way in which the right to buy operates. That was proposed in the Scottish Government's "Firm Foundations" consultation in October 2007, when 94 per cent of those responding to the question agreed that the right to buy should be suspended in relation to new-build homes.

Far be it from me to strain the Presiding Officer's patience. All I will say is that councils will wish to take that issue into account. The proposals in the draft bill are a refreshing alternative to cutting Scotland's budget for spending on housing and other matters.

I apologise that I cannot stay for the closing  speeches because of a matter that has arisen in my constituency. The price of reducing waiting lists is constant vigilance, but it is a price worth paying. There is now serious evidence that waiting lists in a range of key services are reducing, and the motion recognises the achievements of the previous and current Administrations in that. Waiting times are important not just because punctuality is popular but because, as we all know from our respective constituency mailbags, every patient understands the clinical importance of speedy treatment, which is key to providing the best outcomes. Reducing waiting lists is worth the effort because, in the long run, it saves time, energy and resources by cutting out the bureaucracy of managing and administering queues and backlogs for treatment. It reduces inequalities by addressing variations in waiting times between NHS boards and hospitals, and it wipes out the postcode lottery in health care that prevailed under the previous Executive's stewardship. More important is that decent waiting times have a clear human benefit. They reduce unnecessary uncertainty, concern and sleepless nights for patients and—most important—they lead to earlier diagnosis and treatment. The Scottish Government has invested £270 million in Scotland's health boards to ensure that waiting times are at their lowest since the relevant records began. It is significant that the Government has abolished the availability status codes that were established simply to doctor the figures. We are fostering a new relationship with patients by providing them with a legally binding waiting time guarantee. Although others have already alluded to the fact, it is worth mentioning again that, when the Government came into office, it inherited 30,000 patients who had been kept off waiting lists. The vision is for a truly mutual NHS, in which patients have a say in how their health service is run and organised and a direct say in how they are treated. If we are serious about that, patients have a moral right to know exactly what treatment they will receive and when it will be carried out. Health care should not be something that is simply done to them. In July last year, the NHS celebrated its 60 th birthday. One of the many ways in which the event was marked was by a visit by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to the Uist and Barra hospital in my constituency, where she initiated a variety of new services. The point was made then—and holds now—that the agenda to reduce waiting times is inseparable from the  agenda to reduce, where possible, the distances that patients have to travel for treatment. I will not rehearse the distances that are involved for patients in the Western Isles. Suffice it to say that cancer patients in Uist and Barra were relieved to get a chemotherapy service up and running locally in recent weeks, to save them the exhaustion and distress of a regular two-day round trip for treatment. I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will be concerned that, in recent days, Highland Airways has unexpectedly refused to transfer the materials that are necessary for the chemotherapy service, citing a gap in its safety certification—despite the willingness of NHS Western Isles to pay at least part of the cost of certification and to provide necessary training. I know that NHS Western Isles is working actively to persuade the airline to adopt a more sensible position. I hope that we now recognise more fully that, just as people have a right not to be subjected to unreasonable travelling times, they have a right to be treated within a reasonable time. With that in mind and with, I would like to think, at least some support across the chamber, the Government has published a consultation on a patients' rights bill. It is vital that patients should see themselves as active partners in life-changing decisions. We want to ensure that they are respected and have entitlements set in statute to ensure that their access, safety and participation are valued and delivered. As other speakers have mentioned, from December 2011, 18 weeks will be the guaranteed maximum wait for treatment of non-urgent patients following referral by a GP, although most patients will be seen more quickly. The 18-week guarantee is distinct from previous waiting time targets in that, rather than focus on a single stage of care, it focuses on what will be termed an 18-week referral-to-treatment standard. Rather than there being a target time from the GP referral to the first out-patient appointment and then a time from someone being put on a waiting list until treatment is delivered, the RTT standard will address the whole patient care pathway, from receipt of a GP referral up to the point at which each patient is admitted to hospital for treatment. That approach has the advantage of introducing a uniform standard for access that is less complex and should, therefore, be better understood by patients and health professionals alike. The referral-to-treatment standard will be delivered through a service transformation programme that will engage with NHS boards and look at best practice. The employees of NHS Scotland will play a crucial role and, thanks to the increased investment that we have provided, the  overall number of staff who are employed by NHS Scotland has increased and the number of clinical nurse specialists is at an all-time high. Although all the steps that I have described will make a real difference to reducing waiting times in the short term, Scotland is clearly taking a longer-term and more holistic view of health, of which waiting times are only a single but important part.

Bidh saoghal na Gàidhlig gu math toilichte leis an naidheachd gum bi oifigear ealain Gàidhlig ùr ann. Ciamar a bhios an neach seo ag obair leis na sgoiltean agus saoghal an fhoghlaim? Mòran taing. The world of Gaelic will be very pleased by the news that there is to be a Gaelic arts officer. How will that post work with the schools and the world of education? Thank you.

Like other members, I can readily list the hardships that my constituents have suffered as a result of the credit crunch and economic downturn. I do not want to enter into a bleak game of top trumps with other members, but I will mention some of the problems that have beset the islands since it first became obvious how poorly the UK's banking sector had been regulated over the years. Some losses, like the closure of the Woolworths store in Stornoway—ironically, virtually the company's most profitable branch in Scotland—are common experiences to many towns throughout Scotland, but they leave a particularly large hole in an island town centre. One shopper recently commented to me that there is now nowhere to buy a DVD in a 100-mile radius, although I have yet to test the accuracy of that assertion. Perhaps most painfully, the islands lost their single largest private employer when Lighthouse Caledonia ceased operations at its fish processing plant in Marybank, with the loss of more than 100 jobs. That closure came at the same time as a convoluted situation emerged at the Kenneth Mackenzie tweed mill, in which the new owner made a welcome investment in plant but adopted the bold business strategy of not actually selling tweed—a long story for another day. The islands do not have the highest unemployment in Scotland, but the statistics mask two underlying problems: the low wages of many islanders who are in work and the ever-present threat that the jobless will simply leave. I am not stupid enough to talk to anyone about green shoots of recovery, but there is a lot of evidence in the islands and elsewhere to back up the Scottish Government's belief that, at a time like this, Government needs to invest in the economy, not cut it back. With Government support, much can be achieved for Scotland's economy. I will give members a local example. The Arnish construction yard, which for so many years had struggled to find orders, now has a new tenant—one with a healthy order book. After many months of patient negotiation by Highlands and Islands Enterprise, BiFab construction is taking on 60 skilled workers. HIE continues to work with Lighthouse Caledonia and others to seek a long-term future for the fish processing sector in the islands and, despite the problems, there is overwhelming evidence of a demand for tweed, borne out by the fact that two smaller mills in  Carloway and Shawbost have been able to start to take up from where Mackenzie's has for the moment left off. The tweed industry was given further support this week when the Scottish Government levered in £92,000 from the European regional development fund and £82,000 from the European social fund to set up an industry fund and training programmes for the industry respectively. That came the same day as the First Minister announced more than £1 million of funding for the creative industries.

I will indeed—although I think I know what the member is going to say.

Anyone who has seen the banking sector regulation that has been on offer from the UK in recent years will conclude that it has been one of the most disastrous pieces of misregulation and under-regulation in our history. I do not think that anyone needs to take any lessons on that one, because the evidence is easy to see. As I was saying, the First Minister has announced that more than £1 million has been allocated to the creative industries in the islands to assist the development of the growing media industry. Aside from the few businesses that I have mentioned, virtually all the industries on the islands are made up of small businesses. Therefore, on the islands as elsewhere, it is important to create the environment for wider economic growth—whether by cutting the cost of transport, as the Scottish Government has done, or by cutting the cost of fuel, which the UK Government has not done. Fuel duty comes within the remit of the UK Government. All the encouraging examples from the islands have a common theme, and it is a theme with a wider application. For a country such as Scotland to come out of a downturn such as this one, its Government must play a proactive role. That means front-loading investment to aid the construction and other industries, as Scotland's  Government is doing. That is why the £293 million of capital spending accelerated into 2009-10, on top of the £30 million in 2008-09, will support an estimated 8,500 jobs. I could go on, but suffice it to say that I hope that there is now consensus, among at least a large part of this Parliament, that no Government can cut its way out of a recession. Constrained as we are in the Scottish Parliament without borrowing powers, I believe that Scotland is nonetheless showing a clear understanding of that point. To those who call on the Scottish Government to make still further investment in specific areas, I can conclude only by saying this: their enthusiasm is commendable but, as I hardly need remind them, the size of Scotland's budget is not, bizarre as it may seem to most of us now, determined in this place. They should take their argument to the London Government that is seemingly hellbent on cutting £1 billion from Scotland's budget in the teeth of a recession.

As the minister knows, productivity in the most marginal part of Scotland's agricultural sector—crofting—faces an enormous practical challenge from European proposals for the electronic tagging of sheep. What is the Scottish Government doing to ensure that those proposals do not make crofting impractical altogether in the view of many crofters?

It is clear from what the minister and the Scottish Broadcasting Commission have said that there is untapped potential for broadcasting activity in Scotland. Will the minister say more about how he envisages broadcasting activity being part of the work of creative Scotland?

The subject matter of today's debate presents problems for the person summing up. The opportunities that it presents for anecdote and stand-up comedy are slight—although I am sure that Jamie Stone might be up to even such a challenge—but the more substantial issue is that the debate has emphatically not been on the kind of planning questions about which our constituents generally write to us. Although constituents sometimes write to us about national projects, local planning matters are generally what grip people's attention in our respective communities. That said, I know that I have received e-mails from organisations as varied as RSPB Scotland and licensed trade bodies about the issues that are raised in the Local Government and Communities Committee's report. For instance, I have been given arguments for a framework to deliver a landscape-scale ecosystem that would link the urban areas of the central belt in a green corridor. Although the evidence that we took inevitably strayed at times into discussions on the merits of individual projects, the remit of the report—and the remit of my remarks—is very much about process. Therefore, I welcome today's opportunity to debate the committee's report on the "National Planning Framework for Scotland 2: Proposed Framework", which is a significant document that maps out Scotland's development as far into the future as 2030. Although 21 years might not represent a long time to a giant turtle or to the House of Lords, for elected politicians whose horizons are notoriously short such a timescale  represents a welcome degree of foresight. Moreover, the decisions that are reached on the projects in NPF 2 will be with us for much longer than 21 years. The committee's experience of considering the national planning framework was generally positive, although there are certainly lessons to be learned, given that this was the first time that the Parliament has gone through the process. The report states clearly: "The Committee welcomes the production of the second National Planning Framework. It acknowledges that the NPF2 will play a key role in co-ordinating policies with a spatial dimension and aligning strategic investment priorities." This is the first time that a national planning framework has been subject to consideration by Parliament and its committees. The Local Government and Communities Committee is grateful to both the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee for their detailed consideration of the issues in their reports and for their important contribution to the process. The committee would also like to thank all those who made written submissions. As I said, the committee's report is generally positive. The committee "welcomes the fact that the National Planning Framework is now on a statutory footing and is subject therefore to scrutiny by the Scottish Parliament and others. As an evolving document, the Committee acknowledges that it will be open to further scrutiny and monitoring and the Committee will take the opportunity to do so through continuing dialogue with the Scottish Government, the public and with stakeholders." An extensive consultation programme was undertaken by the Scottish Government to engage with stakeholders and the general public. While recognising that point, the committee also acknowledges that it was perhaps inevitable that, given the subject matter, the consultation was not likely to engage community groups in quite the same way that a local development plan might. However, the committee's report is clear on the importance of engagement, despite the relatively low level of response from the public. The report also stresses the need to make such material comprehensible if public consultation is to be meaningful—necessarily difficult though much of that material is. Another lesson that the committee felt could be learned for the future relates to developing the list of national developments. As has been said, the committee felt that the Scottish Government should engage with those who suggested national developments whose inclusion in the framework was ultimately rejected. I note that the minister has indicated that he is open to that idea. Indeed, one  of the report's recommendations is that the Scottish Government should continue to "publish in future an Assessment Matrix of Candidate National Developments against the National Development Criteria , but that this should provide more detailed analysis and reasons why candidate national developments were accepted or rejected". The committee looks forward to hearing how the Scottish Government intends to improve the consultation process and public awareness more generally. As I said, rather than consider the specific national developments—we are grateful to the other committees that reported on those—the committee has indicated ways in which the process of selection might evolve. For instance, our report recommends that more information be provided on the status of individual national developments in terms of their relative priority. In his opening speech, the convener emphasised the committee's view that, when possible, publicly funded infrastructure projects might be brought forward. I know that that reflects much of the Government's thinking. I also draw attention to the contributions of other committee members. David McLetchie pressed the nuclear button, but I will resist the temptation to respond to that, as I am speaking on behalf of the committee. Malcolm Chisholm made a plea for projects in his constituency and created the opportunity for the minister to refer to his ancestors. Alex Johnstone raised questions about consultation and about high-speed rail and nuclear issues. Rob Gibson responded to some of the criticisms of the consultation, especially those from Clare Symonds. Peter Peacock highlighted Scapa Flow and subsea connections in Argyll and elsewhere. Jim Tolson nursed some metaphors about report cards and fast tracks. Shirley-Anne Somerville highlighted transport issues relating to Edinburgh airport and opposed the nuclear option as a solution for altering Scotland's carbon footprint. Cathy Peattie made the case for transport improvements in Grangemouth. Patrick Harvie called for more intensive parliamentary scrutiny of the framework in future and opposed aspects of the report.

I can only say that I have summarised Patrick Harvie's concerns and there  is an opportunity for the committee and the Government to respond to them. The committee will consider the final framework when it is laid before Parliament. Likewise, we look forward to a continuing dialogue with the Scottish Government on NPF 2 and other improvements to the planning system that seek to make it more streamlined and proportionate. As did the convener, I commend the report to Parliament.

I am sorry to interrupt the member's flow, but I cannot help but recall that the last time my friend John Farquhar Munro had leave of absence it was to bury a cow. What reason has been given for his absence today, which has denied him the opportunity to talk some sense on the issue of a referendum?

It will come as little surprise to hear the member for the Western Isles speak in favour of a marine bill. The sea has represented life and, often, death for generations of my constituents. The sea gives my constituency its outstanding beauty and distinctive way of life, and it represents a powerful argument to boundary commissions. I welcome the Scottish Government's commitment to deliver a marine bill and the bill's likely impact on Scotland's seas and marine habitats. The Scottish Government's intention to introduce a marine bill follows its success in reaching an agreement with the United Kingdom Government to devolve to Scotland responsibility for all planning and marine conservation issues in Scottish seas to a distance of 200 nautical miles. That agreement, which was announced on 27 November 2008, has been welcomed by interests as varied as Oil and Gas UK, the RSPB and the Scottish Fishermen's Federation. Any proposed legislation that appeals to all three of those at once surely deserves a prize. As we heard, the current situation is confusing. Scotland is defined in the Scotland Act 1998 as the land and territorial waters out to 12 nautical miles, but Scottish ministers are responsible for regulating some industries, such as fisheries and renewable energy, beyond those limits to 200 nautical miles. Even within the 12 nautical miles, some activities are reserved to the UK Government, such as shipping, navigation and safety at sea. The situation is arbitrary and makes little sense to those who use our seas for a living or who seek to preserve their environment.  There are a number of specific differences between Scotland's seas and those of the rest of the UK, which explains why a distinctive approach is needed. The environmental status of most seas around Scotland differs from that of the seas around the rest of the UK, with most Scottish seas being classed as good or excellent environmentally, whereas the environmental status of most seas around the rest of the UK is compromised or severely degraded. In addition, most of the exceptionally long coast around Scotland is underdeveloped, inaccessible and sparsely populated. Scotland has an incredible 11,000km of coastline, which is 10 per cent of the coastline of Europe. There are many good economic reasons for the bill. Scotland's fisheries zone—that is, the waters that are within 200 miles of the coast—covers 127,000 square miles of sea, which, amazingly, is nearly a quarter of total European Union waters. Scotland accounts for 90 per cent of the UK's farmed fish. There are a significant number of fish farms in the Western Isles and elsewhere. I am sorry to say, of course, that we do not currently have the number of local fish processing jobs that we used to have, or could yet have. The seas around Scotland are some of the most productive in the world and support around 16,000 fishing and aquaculture-related jobs, with more than 60 per cent of the UK's total catch coming from Scottish vessels. Scotland's seas are, obviously, essential to fishing communities around Scotland, which is a point that I made recently to the European Commission in Brussels, which seems determined to press Scotland into designating a deeply controversial marine special area of conservation around Mingulay and Barra. Perhaps the most immediate and practical argument for the bill is that it will overhaul and consolidate the complete mess of around 80 acts that regulate Scotland's seas at the moment. It has often been said, rightly, that this Parliament's land reform legislation is an example of something that Westminster never had—and never would have—the parliamentary time or political inclination to do. What goes for Scotland's land probably also goes for its seas. Consolidating all the legislation into one bill should bring cohesion to an area that is vital to the economy and environment of Scotland. The complexity of the proposed bill is undeniable. However, that is only because of the complexity of the mess that it seeks to clear up. Scotland's seas deserve a single bill and a single agency. Unfortunately, we might have to leave to another day discussion of the really interesting questions, such as the role of the Crown, what the  rights to mineral exploitation should be or what the definition is of where the border in the Solway Firth really lies on any given day and at any given level of the tide. The proposed bill will give Scotland's seas the legislative protection and definition that they surely deserve.

The tone of the debate has suggested that members do not doubt one another's sincerity on the need to tackle hospital-acquired infections. In that spirit, I commend the motives behind Cathy Jamieson's motion. Many members will have relatives or constituents who have been affected by hospital-acquired infections—I can think of some harrowing examples. However, in supporting the amendment in the name of the cabinet secretary, I bring to the Parliament's attention the work that NHS staff are already doing to tackle the problems. Nobody should underestimate the size of the task ahead, but neither should we overlook the work that is being done.

The Western Isles are, in every respect, a beacon, and I am happy to commend that particular example. As I said, we should recognise the work that is being done. Nurses, doctors, health managers and, perhaps most important, cleaners have already made great progress. As Christine Grahame pointed out, between 2001 and 2006, the number of deaths in which C difficile was an underlying or contributory factor soared from 170 to 417. Such a massive increase requires dramatic action, and action is being taken that is paying dividends. The tragedy of a single death from a hospital-acquired infection renders all statistics redundant, but we should pay tribute to the health service in Scotland for reducing rates of hospital superbug infections to their lowest levels since records began in 2003. Perhaps the most significant change of emphasis has been on the simple matter of hand hygiene. We have come a long way in the 100 years since an instruction went out to all doctors, particularly those dealing with infectious patients, to wash their hands before delivering a baby. It seems scarcely believable that such a reminder was required. No doubt it was resisted by some doctors at the time as an undue interference that called into question their clinical judgment. Patricia Ferguson's story about a consultant leaps to mind when I say that. That single measure 100 years ago resulted in a staggering decrease in mortalities among mothers and babies. Today, we cannot overestimate the enormous significance of improving the hand washing regime in hospitals in tackling superbugs. A zero-tolerance policy on hand hygiene has been announced and compliance is at the highest rate since records began—93 per cent, which exceeds the Government's targets. That is one of the many ways in which the health service is already doing much of what the 15-point plan that is mentioned in the Labour motion calls for. I welcome the consensus that has emerged. Other measures include the HAI reporting template, which gives the public instant access to information on infection rates, and the plans for a care environment inspectorate. Further, there is the welcome news that all new-build hospitals will have 100 per cent single-room accommodation.

No one pretends that the entire hospital estate can be rebuilt overnight, but the Government has made it clear that we are moving towards 50 per cent provision in existing hospitals. Everyone accepts that, in the longer term, single rooms are the way forward. Nobody underestimates the scale of the task, which is why the Scottish Government has released £3 million to promote further development of local surveillance systems and to prepare for the roll-out of the national MRSA screening programme. Perhaps one of the most significant changes will be the ending of the privatisation of cleaning services in hospitals. I hope that, once more, cleaning staff will begin to feel as though they are the valued workforce that they deserve to be and that they will be able to play their vital role in the fight against infection without forever having to look over their shoulder at a contracting system that has, in the past, worked against those very ends.

The member has much to say about the settlement that local government receives from the Scottish Government, which, as we have learned, includes many increases. Is he prepared to comment on the settlement that this place receives from another place, which includes a £1 billion cut over the next two years?

I thank the minister for the efforts that he is making on the issue. Will he agree to hold a meeting, perhaps by videolink, before the formal consultation opens, and to press home the argument that local fishing and commercial interests must be safeguarded? I will raise that argument with the European Commission on a trip to Brussels in the coming few days.

Tha mi a' toirt fàilte chridheil gu òraid a' mhinisteir, gu plana Gàidhlig an Riaghaltais agus dhan chonaltradh a tha a' fosgladh an-diugh. Tha mi an dòchas gum bi a h-uile duine ann aig a' chèilidh bhig air a' chuspair sin ann an seòmar comataidh 3 aig 6 uairean. Anns a' chiad dol a-mach, agus ann an dòigh neònach, tha e a' toirt misneachd dhòmhsa gu bheil an Riaghaltas ag aithneachadh anns a' phlana cànain gu bheil suidheachadh na Gàidhlig air leth lag, mar a thuirt Iain Fearchar Rothach. Carson a bhithinn toillichte sin a chluinntinn? Uill, a chionn 's gu bheil e fìor agus a chionn 's gu bheil mi toillichte gu bheil am plana a' dèiligeadh ri cùisean mar a tha iad. Mar eisimpleir, chan eil àite sam bith anns an t-saoghal a tha nas Gàidhealaiche na na Hearradh. Tha beul-aithris prìseil aig an àite. Tha Gàidhlig làidir anns a' choimhearsnachd fhathast. Tha dealbh eadardhealaichte air fad ann, ge-tà, nuair a bheir sinn sùil air an t-suidheachadh am measg nan daoine òga. Ged a tha tòrr dhaoine ag obair gu math cruaidh airson na Gàidhlig anns an sgìre, seo na figearan: tha 117 sgoilearan anns na bun-sgoiltean anns na Hearradh. Tha mi a' creidsinn gu bheil 15 no 16 dhiubh a' dol dhan sgoil tro mheadhan na Ghàidhlig. Tha mi toillichte gu bheil an Riaghaltas ag aithneachadh dè cho cugallach 's a tha cor a' chànain. Bhiodh eagal mòr orm nan robh am plana a' tòiseachadh le sgeul gun robh a h-uile rud gu math agus gu dòigheil ann an saoghal na Gàidhlig. Ciamar a bhios sinn a' tionndadh air ais tancair-ola na Gàidhlig bho na creagan? Tha mi a' creidsinn gu bheil an Riaghaltas a' dèanamh dà rud glè chudromach an-diugh airson na Gàidhlig. Airson aon rud, tha am plana cànain a' togail suas inbhe na Gàidhlig taobh a-staigh an Riaghaltais fhèin. Nas cudromaiche, ge-tà, tha e a' toirt taic dhan Ghàidhlig taobh a-muigh togalaichean na seirbheis catharra. Tha e math a chluinntinn gum bi spèis agus inbhe nas àirde aig a' Ghàidhlig anns an Riaghaltas ann an dòigh ìomhaigheil agus barrachd air ìomhaigheil. Tha e cudromach gum bi an Riaghaltas ag ràdh gum bi e a' meudachadh àireamh de dh'fhoillseachaidhean a tha rim faotainn sa Ghàidhlig. Tha e soilleir gum bi a' Ghàidhlig aig chridhe "dearbh-aithne chorporra" an Riaghaltais agus anns a h-uile template eileagtronaigeach a tha an Riaghaltas a' cleachdadh. Bidh a' Ghàidhlig na phàirt àbhaisteach ann an obair an Riaghaltais, nuair a bhios ministearan a' toirt freagairt gu puist-dealain a tha a' tighinn a-steach anns a' chànan no ann am fiosan naidheachd. Carson a tha an stuth sin cudromach? Uill, na aonar, chan eil e cudromach,  ach tha mi a' smaoineachadh gu bheil e riatanach. Am measg adhbharan eile, tha cuid de dhaoine òga a' cur an cùlaibh ris a' Ghàidhlig a chionn 's gu bheil iad a' creidsinn nach eil ùidh sam bith aig Alba mar dhùthaich anns a' Ghàidhlig. Mar a bha am ministear ag ràdh, tha BBC Alba ag atharrachadh nam beachdan sin agus tha an t-atharrachadh dhan mholadh ag aithneachadh sin cuideachd. Tha e cudromach gu bheil an Riaghaltas ag aithneachadh an aon rud anns an dòigh obrach a tha aige. A' tionndadh dhan dàrna pàirt den phlana, tha an Riaghaltas a' toirt taic làidir dhan Ghàidhlig anns a' choimhearsnachd fhèin, le bhith: a' meudachadh air cleachdadh na Gàidhlig anns an dachaigh; a' meudachadh air na tha ri fhaotainn de dh'fhoghlam tro mheadhan na Gaidhlig; a' meudachadh cleachdadh a' chànain anns a' choimhearsnachd. Mar eisimpleir, tha an Riaghaltas a' cumail siostam thabartasan sònraichte gu foghlam Gàidhlig agus a' toirt airgead a-steach gus aonadan Gàidhlig agus sgoiltean Gàidhlig ùra a leasachadh. Tha barrachd airgid ann airson Bòrd na Gàidhlig airson nam prìomh phròiseactan aige, ma gheibh—thathar a' tuigsinn—buidseat an Riaghaltais taic anns a' Phàrlamaid mu dheireadh thall. Tha e inntinneach cuideachd gum bi an Riaghaltas a' cur stiùireadh a-mach don roinn phoblaich mun dleastanas a tha oirre fo Achd na Gàidhlig (Alba) 2005. Tha e na dheagh chomharradh gum bi a' Ghàidhlig air a "mhainstreamadh" ann am poileasaidh an Riaghaltais. Tha taic aig an Riaghaltas airson na Gàidhlig gun teagamh sam bith, agus bha e furasta fhaicinn aig deasbad nam ball a bha agam o chionn goirid gu bheil an aon sheòrsa taic am measg nam pàrtaidhean air fad. Ann an dòigh, ge tà, tha an Riaghaltas direach a' tòiseachadh leis a' phàirt as inntinniche den deasbad seo, a thachras anns a' chonaltradh às dèidh an-diugh. Tha mi cinnteach gum bi an conaltradh a' togail nan ceistean cudromach. Ciamar a bhios sinn a' meudachadh an àireamh de sgoilearan a tha a' dol tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig? Dè seòrsa co-obrachadh a bu chòir a bhith ann eadar an Riaghaltas, Bòrd na Gàidhlig agus comhairlean? Dè na targaidean a tha againn airson àireamh nan Gàidheal aig cunntas-sluaigh ann an 2011 no 2021? Tha mi an dòchas gum bi saoghal na Gàidhlig air fad a' gabhail pàirt anns a' chonaltradh—bidh mise co-dhiù. Tha mi toilichte fàilte a chur air a' phlana a tha romhainn an-diugh.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  I give a warm welcome to the minister's speech on the Gaelic plan and the consultation that starts today. I hope that everyone will take part in the associated event in committee room 3 at 7 o'clock.  In a strange way, it gives me confidence that the Government recognises that Gaelic is in a very weak state, as John Farquhar Munro said. Why would I be happy about that? Because we have a plan that deals with things as they are. For instance, there is no place in the world that is more Gaelic than Harris—there is wonderful folklore and Gaelic is still strong in the community—but an examination of the situation among the young people in the area paints a different picture. Although a lot of people are working hard to support the language among young people, only 15 or 16 of the 117 primary school pupils in Harris are going through Gaelic-medium education. I am happy that the Government recognises how uncertain the state of the language is, and I would have been afraid if the plan had begun with an announcement of the good news that everything was going well in the Gaelic world. How are we going to turn the Gaelic oil tanker away from the rocks? I believe that the Government is doing two very important things today: first, the plan raises the status of Gaelic within the Government; secondly, and more important, it gives support to Gaelic outside the civil service buildings. It is good to hear that there will be respect and higher status for Gaelic in the Government, and it is interesting that the Government says that it will increase the number of things done in Gaelic—it is obvious that Gaelic will be at the heart of the Government's corporate identity. Gaelic will play a huge part in the work of the Government, such as when ministers are answering e-mails and issuing press releases in Gaelic. On its own, that is not important, but it is necessary because, among other reasons, some of our young people are turning their back on the language because they believe that Scotland as a nation has no interest in Gaelic. BBC Alba is changing those opinions, as the minister said, and the practical recommendations in the plan will support that change. It is obvious that the Government has identified that issue. I turn to the second part of the plan. The Government will give strong support to Gaelic in the community by increasing its use in the home, the amount that is received in education, and the amount that is spoken in the community. The plan says, for instance, that the Government will maintain the specific grants system to provide funding for Gaelic units and build new schools—if, that is, the Government's budget receives support at long last. The Government will send out a signal that Gaelic will be mainstreamed in Government policy. There is no doubt that the Government supports Gaelic, and it was evident from my members' debate that there was the same support among all the parties.  In a way, however, the Government is just beginning, and the most interesting part of the debate will come after today in the form of the consultation. I am sure that it will raise important questions—for example, on how we will increase the number of school pupils who are learning through the medium of Gaelic; the collaboration and co-operation that there ought to be among the Government, Bòrd na Gàidhlig and councils; and our targets for the number of Gaelic speakers in the 2011 and 2021 censuses. I hope that the whole of the Gaelic world will take part in the consultation. I will do so, and I am happy to welcome the plan that is before us today.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it has taken to monitor the changeover from British Airways to Flybe on island air routes to ensure that service levels have been maintained. (S3O-5716)

I am aware that both Loganair and the Government have gone to considerable lengths to maintain the level of service that was provided by the previous operator. Is the minister willing to take up concerns that constituents have expressed to me anecdotally, for example that a return flight from Stornoway to Edinburgh, which cost £85 last year using the discount scheme, might now cost £160?

How will the Scottish Government assist organisations in building new affordable housing in the Western Isles?

The cabinet secretary mentions the importance of our landscape. One reason why it is in the form that it is in is that it is grazed. Does he intend to make any further response to the representations from many crofters about the future of bull hire in Scotland?

I congratulate Jamie McGrigor on lodging his motion. As members know, crofting is the most marginal of all marginal agricultural activities, to the point where I have seen puzzled looks when it is explained to people from outside the crofting counties what crofting actually involves and how little financial return can be expected from it. The future of livestock in the crofting counties is, as Jamie McGrigor said, crucial to those communities. Lamb prices are often prone to collapse, so the future of cattle is particularly vital if we are to attract new entrants to crofting. I have made representations to ministers, asking them to consider the retention of the bull hire scheme in its present form, but I recognise that we should start from our current position. The challenge now is different: it is to ensure that whatever replaces the old scheme meets crofters' needs. I welcome the reassurances that the Government has already been able to give: that there will be Government assistance to meet the needs of communities that require to keep a bull; that the Government will be sympathetic to providing the buildings and overwintering costs for that to be achieved; and that the existing stock in Inverness might be disposed of at minimal cost. The question is how we can ensure that all those positive ends are met. This evening's debate provides a useful opportunity to consider that. Crofters who used the old scheme are keen to engage constructively. One thing is certain: it is beyond the powers of most crofting townships to keep a bull. In addition to the scale of the financial undertaking, there is the risk. People face the prospect of going all the way to a mart in Perth and, on the basis of a few seconds' inspection, making a judgment that will determine the stock quality of future generations of cattle. There are also practical questions. Where would the bull be overwintered? Who would maintain the buildings? In these days when crofters have other jobs, who would tend to the animal during the day? We must also consider—shall I put it this way?—the importance of maintaining harmony within crofting communities. I know that the minister understands what is involved in a crofting dispute. I have examples in my live constituency files that have their origins in the 1920s. For that reason, we should, if possible, avoid any situation that leads to debates within townships about which croft should have the bull when. There is little to be gained if we do not turn our attention to positive solutions. There is no doubt in my mind that those solutions, albeit that they might  not involve a centralised stud in Inverness, will have to involve units bigger than individual townships. That means that we will need a continuing Government involvement in some shape or form, if only to allow bigger local units to build up the infrastructure that is needed to find such solutions. In the islands, because of the lack of any viable commercial alternative, there must be continuing Government involvement in the provision of advice on and assistance with the keeping of bulls. When I met local crofters to discuss the matter, they raised various questions, including how we can ensure that the state aid rules do not hinder Government assistance and how we can ensure that the resources that the Government allocates to the provision of bulls through the SRDP are, to use an appropriate phrase, ring fenced. If the minister addresses those questions tonight, he will bring us much closer to the solution that we all seek. He will also go a long way to reassure the crofting community and ensure that it remains viable to keep cattle in our most fragile communities.

What is the Scottish Government doing to respond to the on-going concerns expressed by many farmers and crofters about beef imports in particular?

Will the member give way?

I pay tribute to the many members, including Dave Thompson, who have a record of campaigning on drink driving. On the face of it, the issue of 80mg versus 50mg might appear to be pretty academic, but it is one of those issues where the statistics are compelling. Other members have already quoted some of those statistics, but the one that clinched the argument for me was the following, which was provided by the BMA. Someone with 50mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood is twice as likely to be involved in an accident as someone without a drink in them, but someone with 80mg of alcohol is 10 times more likely to be involved in an accident. The current limit of 80mg was set 40 years ago, when Scotland had less than half the number of cars that it has now. In the same period, drink has become more than 60 per cent cheaper. The human cost of all that is only too apparent. In Scotland, one road fatality in nine is drink related, and there are families in all our constituencies who live daily with the consequences of that. Many of them will be known to us through our constituency work. I make no case against drink. I would not be in a strong position if I tried to do so. I would no more make a case against drink than make a case against driving, but it is obvious that attitudes to drink driving have changed dramatically. I am old enough to remember when it was not unusual to hear people joke openly about the number of pints by which they had managed to defy the drink-driving law. They invariably hoped that, among their listeners, they would achieve the Robin Hood status that is achieved by poachers on a certain  type of estate. However, times have changed, and it is time to reflect the changes in law. As others have pointed out, no European country apart from Ireland, Malta and Luxembourg regards it as acceptable to drive with more than 50mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood in the body. I appreciate that the point about random testing does not feature in the motion, but I point out that no other country in Europe except Denmark has a law that prevents the random testing of drivers. In our country, police have to jump through various hoops before they can test drivers. They have to suspect that a driver is driving erratically or committing a traffic offence or find that he has been involved in an accident. Case law has established that it is lawful for a police officer to stop a car randomly, but he can do a breath test only if he has reasonable cause, which is usually taken to mean that he smells drink from the driver. That is a convoluted situation. However, I accept that that matter is not in the motion. I sympathise strongly with the sentiments of Bill Aitken's proposed changes to Richard Baker's amendment. Mr Aitken rightly comments on the dangers of driving under the influence of drugs—a phenomenon that is almost certainly on the increase. I must confess that there is something about Richard Baker's amendment that I find perplexing and, to be honest, misjudged. I have no doubt whatsoever about Mr Baker's sincerity about the problem of drink driving, as his speech made clear, but his amendment seems to proceed from the assumption that the motion could be signed up to only by political opponents of the UK Government or people who share the SNP's position on the constitution. Other parties that do not support the SNP's position on the constitution clearly support today's motion. I do not see what Richard Baker's amendment is all about, nor do I see that our motion is any kind of constitutional Trojan horse. Indeed, much as I would like to devolve powers on road traffic law from Westminster to Holyrood, the motion does not ask the Parliament to sign up to that; it simply seeks to reduce the blood alcohol limit for drivers. Nor is the motion opposed to the idea of the law in this regard being changed on a UK basis. Like others, I would be delighted if the law were changed on a UK basis. However, if that does not happen, we in this Parliament should have the guts to say what our view is. The BMA, which speaks with unique authority on the matter, has welcomed all efforts in the Scottish Parliament to raise the issue with Westminster. Mr Baker's amendment enjoins us to participate in the UK Government's consultation on drink driving. Again, I have no difficulty with the UK Government's efforts in the area, just with the  slowness of its progress. I hope that a UK solution to the problem can be found and that the UK Government consultation will bear fruit eventually. However, if it does not, it would hardly be a revolutionary stance for us to call on the UK Government to act on our concerns about a matter of such cross-party concern as drink driving. For what it is worth, I do not accept the argument that different drink-driving laws on either side of the border would be any more heinous than when we had different smoking laws on either side of the border. The public are well aware that criminal justice differs between the two countries. However, the motion does not call for any of that; it does not call for separate legislation. I hope that the motion appeals to everyone, regardless of their constitutional views. I hope that the UK Government acts, but if it does not, I am with the BMA when it says that although the matter is reserved, there is full support for Scotland to increase pressure on the UK Government to take action. Mr Baker and Dr Simpson said that they believe there is a good case for reducing the alcohol limit. Let us say so as a Parliament. The issue is too important for us not to take a stance on it. If we do not take a stance, we cannot expect much to change soon.

Will the member concede that the Scottish Government is now giving a greater proportion of its budget to local government?

Tapadh leibhse, Oifigeir-riaghlaidh. Tha mi glè thaingeil don a h-uile duine a tha a' gabhail pàirt anns an deasbad seo, an fheadhainn aig a bheil Gàidhlig agus, dìreach cho cudromach, an fheadhainn a tha ga h-ionnsachadh fhathast—mi fhìn nam measg. Tha mi taingeil cuideachd do  na buidhnean Gàidhlig a bha a' gabhail pàirt an-diugh ann an latha Gàidhlig na Pàrlamaid. Carson, ge-tà, a tha sinn a' bruidhinn mun Ghàidhlig a-rithist? Carson a tha Alasdair MacAilein gur bodraigeadh leis a' chuspair seo turas eile, agus nas miosa, a' bruidhinn sa Ghàidhlig fhèin. Chuala mi cuideigin gun ainm anns a Phàrlamaid a' gearan o chionn goirid mun phuing seo. Thuirt e, "Bidh deasbad againn an t-seachdain seo a' tighinn mu dheidhinn seòladh. Am bu chòir dhuinn uile a bhith a' bruidhinn mar pirates?" Uill, chan eil mi duilich idir gu bheil mi a' bruidhinn sa Ghàidhlig. Air an làimh eile, tha mi a' tuigsinn a' chunnairt a tha ann, anns an t-suidheachadh seo, agus is sin cunnart "tokenism" mar a chanas iad. Is ann air sgàth sin a bhios mi a' faighneachd cheistean sa Ghàidhlig anns a' Phàrlamaid, bho àm gu h-àm, air cuspairean eadar-dhealaichte. Tha mi a' dèanamh sin dìreach a bhith a' cumail nam chuimhne gu bheil Gàidhlig comasach air barrachd na cuspair na Gàidhlig fhèin. Ma tha an inbhe a tha aig a' Ghàidhlig a-nis a' ciallachadh dad, tha i a' ciallachadh gu bheil a' Gàidhlig cho math airson còmhradh mu Bhaghdad 's a tha i airson còmhradh mun mhòine. Ma tha sibh ag èisteachd ri seo air na clogaidean-èisteachd, tha mi duilich nach robh an alliteration ag obair anns a' Bheurla cho math 's a tha i anns a' Ghàidhlig. Cuimhnichibh air an eisimpleir sin an ath thuras a bhios sibh a' cluinntinn na h-argamaid gu bheil bàrdachd Gàidhlig dìreach cho math anns a' Bheurla 's a tha i anns a' prìomh chànan. Co-dhiù, chan eil mi a' smaoineachadh gu bheil an deasbad seo cudromach dìreach aig ìre ìomhaigheil. Tha tòrr a' tachairt ann an saoghal na Gàidhlig an-dràsta a tha a' dèanamh an deasbaid seo freagarrach agus feumail. Bha deasbad den t-seòrsa seo againn airson a' chiad uair ann an 2000—a' chiad deasbad a bha air a chumail tro mheadhan na Ghàidhlig bhon bhliadhna 1307. An uair sin, bha sinn a' suidhe ann an Àird Chatain ann an Earra-Ghàidheal, agus cò bha anns a' chathair, Oifigear-riaghlaidh, ach Raibeart Brùs? Dè tha air tachairt don Ghàidhlig eadar 2000 agus an-diugh? Uill, airson aon rud, tha taic nas làidire ann don Ghàidhlig aig a h-uile pàrtaidh. Bhiodh e doirbh a chreidsinn 10 bhliadhna air ais, mar eisimpleir, gum biodh sianal telebhisein aig a' chànan, le prògraman matha, luchd-èisteachd a' fàs, ùidh ga brosnachadh anns a' chànan agus misneachd ga toirt gu gnìomhachas craolaidh ann an Alba air fad. Agus ged a tha cnap-starra ann—ged nach eil an sianal air Freeview fhathast—tha  sinn uile aig an aon ràmh a' strì gus sin a chur ceart. Tha plana Gàidhlig aig a' Phàrlamaid a-nis a tha a' cur ris na seirbheisean Gàidhlig a tha rim faotainn aig a' Phàrlamaid an-dràsta ann an caochladh dhòighean. Chaidh na planaichean Gàidhlig aig Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, mar eisimpleir, agus Comhairle na Gàidhealtachd fhoillseachadh o chionn ghoirid cuideachd. Canaidh am ministear, tha mi cinnteach, rudeigin mu phlanaichean a tha aig an Riaghaltas cuideachd, agus na targaidean neartmhor a tha aca airson adhartas nas làidire fhathast. Mar eisimpleir, a' dèanamh cinnteach gu bheil àireamhan nan Gàidheal aig a' chunntas-sluaigh ann an 2021 aig an aon ìre 's a bha e ann an 2001. Airson a' chiad uair, tha mi an dòchas gu bheil sinn ag obrachadh gus crìonadh na Gàidhlig a thionndadh air ais. Carson a tha sinn a' bruidhinn mu dheidhinn leasachadh a' chànain, ge-tà? Uill, a chionn 's gu bheil rathad fada romhainn eadar an seo agus slàinte airson na Gàidhlig. Tha mòran adhbharan ann airson "meal-an-naidheachd" a chantainn rinn fhèin. Ach feumaidh sinn, aig an aon àm, ar casan a chumail air an làr. Tha mi eòlach air cuideigin ann an Leòdhas a tha a' tuigsinn na Gàidhlig, ach cha bhi e ga cleachdadh idir. Bha mi a' faighneachd dheth carson, agus thuirt e nach robh ach a' Ghàidhlig aige nuair a thòisich e anns an sgoil. Thuirt an tidsear ris—anns a Bheurla, ged a bha Gàidhlig gu leòr aice—gum faigheadh e an strap a h-uile turas a bhiodh e a' cleachdadh na Gàidhlig. Fhuair e an strap a h-uile latha anns a' chiad agus san darna bliadhna aige anns an sgoil gus an do dh'ionnsaich e a' Bheurla. Agus tha sinn a' faighneachd fhathast carson a tha "hang-ups" aig tòrr dhaoine anns na h-eileanan mu bhith a' cleachdadh na Gàidhlig agus carson nach eil ach cairteal de na pàrantan a' taghadh fòghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig airson na cloinne aca ged a tha a' chomhairle a' dèanamh deagh obair air a' chuspair siud. Chaidh a' Ghàidhlig sìos mu 3,800 duine dìreach anns na h-Eileanan an Iar eadar 1991 agus 2001. Anns an 100 bhliadhna eadar 1901 agus 2001, chaidh àireamh nan Gàidheal ann an Alba air fad sìos bho faisg air cairteal a' mhillein gu dìreach 58,000. Cha mhair a' Ghàidhlig le àireamhan mar sin. Is e fàs no bàs an roghainn a tha againn. Ged a tha an rabhadh sin romhainn ge-tà, tha sinn ag aithneachadh an adhartais a tha ann. Tha 2,200 cloinne a' dol tro fhoghlam tro mheadhan na Gàidhlig aig ìre na bun-sgoile air feadh na h-Alba. Bha dìreach 24 ann ann an 1985. Feumaidh an àireamh seo a dhol suas gun dàil sam bith.  Tha e fìor chudromach gu bheil am poileasaidh againn ag aithneachadh gu bheil a' Ghàidhlig airson na coimhearsnachd, agus chan ann dìreach airson na sgoile. Mar a thuirt aon nighean bheag riumsa ann an Leòdhas, "Carson a tha a h-uile mac màthair anns a' bhaile agam a' bruidhinn riumsa anns a Bheurla? Nach eil iad a' creidsinn gu bheil a' Ghàidhlig agam?" Mar sin, feumaidh sinn an t-àite a tha aig a Ghàidhlig anns a' choimhearsnachd a neartachadh, ma tha sin a' ciallachadh cùrsaichean ulpan no ge-brith dè. Tha a' Ghàidhlig mar phàirt de ar n-eachdraidh, ar cultar, pàirt de ar nàdar fhèin. Ma bhios sinn ga call, bidh sinn a' call rudeigin prìseil da-rìribh. Tha an cànan ann an staid chunnartach, ach tha e ann an staid dòchasach cuideachd. Sin an t-adhbhar gu bheil e cho cudromach gu bheil Gàidhlig ga cluinntinn anns an t-seòmar seo. Sin an t-adhbhar gu bheil mi a' togail a' chuspair seo turas eile agus is ann air sgàth sin gu bheil mi, gun nàire sam bith, a' bruidhinn mun Ghàidhlig a-rithist.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  Thank you, Presiding Officer. I thank everyone who is taking part in the debate—those with Gaelic and, just as important, those, like me, who are still learning. I am also thankful to all the Gaelic organisations that have taken part in the Scottish Parliament's Gaelic day. Why, though, are we talking about Gaelic again? Why is Alasdair Allan bothering Parliament once more with this subject and, indeed, worse than that, why is he speaking in Gaelic itself? Recently, I heard someone in Parliament who shall remain anonymous making that very point. They said, "There's a debate next week on sailing. Should we all speak like pirates?" Well, I am not at all sorry to be speaking in Gaelic. On the other hand, I understand the danger of tokenism in this situation. That is why, now and again, I will ask questions in Gaelic in Parliament on many different subjects; I need to remind myself that Gaelic is useful for more than simply talking about Gaelic. Gaelic's current status means that it is just as good for talking about Baghdad as it is for talking about peat. I should apologise to anyone who is listening on headphones, because the alliteration in my previous sentence does not work as well in English as it does in Gaelic. Members should remember that example the next time someone argues that Gaelic poetry is just as good in English. Anyway, this debate is important not only at a symbolic level. Just now, there is a lot happening in the Gaelic world that makes this debate appropriate and useful. The Parliament first had a debate of this kind in 2000; in fact, it was the first such debate in Gaelic to take place since the year 1307. At that time, the  Parliament met in Ardchattan in Argyll, and who was in the chair, Presiding Officer, but Robert the Bruce? What has happened with Gaelic between 2000 and today? For one thing, there is stronger support for it from every party. Ten years ago, for example, it would have been difficult to believe that the language would have its own television channel. The channel has good programmes, its audiences are growing, interest in the language is being encouraged and confidence is growing in the broadcasting industry in the whole of Scotland. However, there is an obstacle: the channel is not available on Freeview, although we are working together to put that right. Parliament now has its own Gaelic plan, which adds to its many services in a number of ways. Western Isles Council and the Highland Council recently published their Gaelic plans. I am sure that the minister will say something about the Government's plans and its strong targets for promoting Gaelic, which include ensuring that the 2021 census shows that the number of Gaelic speakers has remained at the level that it was when the 2001 census was carried out. I hope that, for the first time, we are all working to turn back the decline of Gaelic. If that is the case, why is my motion on the development of the language? Well, the road between where we are now and a healthy Gaelic language is a long one. There are many reasons for congratulating ourselves, but we must keep our feet firmly on the ground. For example, I know someone on Lewis who understands Gaelic but does not use it at all. When I asked him why, he said that when he started school he only had Gaelic. The teacher told him—in English, even although she had plenty of Gaelic—that he would get the strap every time he used Gaelic, and he got it every day in primary 1 and P2 until he learned English. That story shows why many people in the islands still have hang-ups about using Gaelic and why, for example, only a quarter of parents in the Western Isles choose Gaelic-medium education for their children. Between 1991 and 2001, the number of Gaelic speakers declined by 3,800 in the Western Isles alone and, in the 100 years between 1901 and 2001, the number of Gaelic speakers in Scotland decreased from a quarter of a million to 58,000. Gaelic will not survive with numbers like that; the choice is growth or death. Bearing that warning in mind, however, we should also acknowledge the progress that has been made. At the moment, 2,200 children throughout Scotland are in Gaelic-medium primary education, whereas in 1985, there were just 24, although I have no doubt that the number must increase without delay. It is very important that our policy recognises that Gaelic is for the whole community, not just for  school. As one little girl said to me, "Why does every single person in my village talk to me in English? Do they not believe that I have Gaelic?" We must strengthen the place that Gaelic has in the community, whether that means using ulpan Gaelic immersion courses, or anything else. Gaelic is a part of our history, our culture and our nature. If we lose it, we will lose something that is priceless. The language is in a dangerous state, but it is also in a hopeful state. That is the reason why it is important that Gaelic is heard in this chamber, that is the reason why I am raising this subject again and it is the reason why I am once more speaking—without apology—about Gaelic.

Will the member confirm to the many patients who have benefited from the reduction in prescription charges that the Labour group's policy is that the proposed measure should be postponed and they should wait longer? Is the member speaking in a personal capacity or for the Labour group?

Will the member give way?

What representations will the Scottish Government make to Her Majesty's Government about the failure of the benefits system to recognise that weavers who are left without work as a result of the downturn in the industry are unemployed? As a result of that anomaly, they cannot claim relevant benefits.

The committee would like to thank the chamber for what has been, on the whole, a positive debate that has featured many useful contributions. [ Interruption. ] Mr Neil's sneeze was not one of the more useful contributions, but there were many others. All members will cherish their own recollections of the chaos on election night, and we have heard many of them recited this morning. I am not sure whether all of them have met Mr Whitton's stringent criteria for interesting stories, but, for my part, I must say that the council staff in Stornoway acquitted themselves extremely well, although there was a 12-hour hiatus between the counting of the votes from Lewis and Harris and those from Uist and Barra, which certainly heightened the sense of drama. That hiatus was a result not of the computer failures that other members have referred to but of an erroneous forecast for fog, which led to the helicopter not turning up, which just proves that we cannot prepare for every eventuality. Many other colourful episodes from around the country have now entered into political legend: the widespread failures of computers and counting machines; the ballot box that fell into the sea; the returning officer who failed to add up one party's list vote and came extremely close to announcing an erroneous result; the scarcely believable spectacle that other members have mentioned of a representative of the company that was tasked with organising the process going on television to say that things were going "incredibly well"; and, of course, the voter who lost the place altogether and attacked one of the rather flimsy new style ballot boxes with a handy golf club. Greater than the sum of all those individual farces, however, was the level of voter confusion  that the design of the ballot papers seems to have caused. It is worth saying that the committee surprised itself with the degree of consensus that it was able to muster, on the whole, when assessing evidence relating to the parliamentary and council elections and in assessing Mr Gould's recommendations. The committee, like the country, felt instinctively uneasy about the sheer number of discounted votes in 2007, and felt even more uneasy to discover that, in some parts of the country, the question whether a possibly spoiled paper should be rejected was being adjudicated by a computer, without any human intervention. As Mr John Wilson and Mr Doris pointed out, the number of spoiled papers in the local government vote, while higher than in previous local elections, was lower than the number of such papers in the parliamentary vote. That is surprising, given that the local elections were using an entirely new voting system. Serious concerns have been raised about our democratic system, but we should be careful not to overstate them, real though they are. Mr Stephen strayed into overstatement in some of his language; indeed, I felt at certain points of his speech that I was listening to a description of the infamous presidential election in Liberia in the 1920s, in which the winning candidate claimed a majority that was estimated to be around 10 times the population of that country. The committee thought that the real concern was not that significant numbers of voters had voted for someone else by mistake, but that voters had been denied the opportunity to participate at all. That is a serious matter in any democracy. The committee made its recommendations in light of those problems. It is pleased that the Government has already acted on most of what it recommended, and the minister confirmed the Government's intentions. The committee's convener provided a comprehensive outline of our recommendations, but it is worth recapping the report's main themes. A key theme is that national and local elections should be separated, a view that seems be shared almost across the chamber. In that context, I make a mental note not to quote out of context and cheaply at any point in the future Mr McLetchie, who said that separation is desirable. National and local elections need to be separated, and not just for practical reasons, although such reasons are considerable. The committee's report clearly shows, as Mr Hepburn said, that there is a growing feeling that councils deserve to be assessed by the voters on their merits. The committee agreed with Mr Gould's recommendations on the fractured nature of election administration in Scotland and supported  the creation of a single chief returning officer post for all elections in Scotland. It also recommended that, if practicable, sub-ward level information on the 2007 local government elections should be released. Members will know that when the Scotland Office released equivalent information on the Scottish parliamentary elections, it proved to be veritable meat and drink for the many political anoraks in Scotland, to whom Michael McMahon referred. Mr Kelly mentioned voter confusion. Like many members, I have spoken to many voters who failed to fill out half of their parliamentary ballot papers simply because they read at the top of their paper that they should make one mark. That illustrates the confusion that reigned in many parts of the country. The committee also recommended that the Scottish Government explore the greater use of postal voting, and it is keen to hear more about the Government's proposals on personal identifiers. It is difficult to talk here, as it was in the committee, about any of the recommendations that I have mentioned and stick within the Parliament's own responsibilities—that is, it is difficult to consider only local government elections. Believe me, I am straining every politically consensual sinew that I have not to stray into a debate about reserved powers, but Gould, the committee and the minister have all said that there must be far more cohesion in the organisation of different elections in Scotland. That means that the Scottish Parliament must have more of a role in running Scottish parliamentary elections. Numerous members have made that point. The committee was content with a motion that the Parliament passed on 10 January, which stated: "That the Parliament welcomes the Gould report, including the recommendation calling for the further devolution of executive and legislative powers to the Scottish Government and the Parliament for the administration of its own elections". The committee thought that there could be no clearer view of the Parliament's position than that. The Parliament did not open up such tempting questions as whether it should have increased powers over its own composition, the extent of the franchise or the use of STV—Mr McNulty colourfully raised that issue. It simply said that, like any normal Parliament, the Scottish Parliament should be able to administer the operation of the election process, and that to do that, there should be an increase in the relevant executive and legislative powers available to it in Scotland. The committee was content to associate itself with that sentiment because it recognised that council and parliamentary elections in Scotland must be seen  as a single democratic process to some extent and that they should certainly administered as such. It is clear that it is now time to move on and ensure that we get things right the next time round. The report shows that there is the will in all the parties that are represented in the Parliament to do just that. In that spirit, I commend the report's findings to the Parliament.

Other members have ably recalled the impact that the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak had on Scotland's rural communities. The impact was felt no less keenly in crofting than in farming communities, as people in my constituency and other Highlands and Islands constituencies will testify. The marginal nature of crofting will have been brought home to the cabinet secretary recently when he saw the lamb prices at the mart in Stornoway, and to the chamber more generally yesterday, when we debated the Government's response to the Shucksmith report. Crofting is essential to the social fabric of a place such as the Western Isles, although its existence is continually under threat, either from the economic climate or from actively daft proposals such as Europe's plans for the electronic identification of animals. Last year, the greatest threat to the sector came from the inability to move livestock to mainland markets, which was coupled with a long-term threat that it might prove to be impossible to import rams from the mainland. The outbreak fell at the worst possible point in the agricultural year. The problem, of course, originated some 500 miles away and was not of the Scottish agricultural industry's making. It was not the fault of English farmers, either. Unlike in the 2001 outbreak, there was little mystery this time about where the virus had come from—there was no need this time to speculate about whether pigs had been fed Chinese food. The foot-and-mouth virus that has destabilised the farming industry in Scotland was, as we know, released in error from a UK Government lab. Nonetheless, it fell to Scotland to act quickly to minimise disruption here, and the Scudamore review praises the Scottish Government for doing just that, saying that there is widespread agreement that the Government here handled the situation well. Indeed, within three hours of the outbreak in England being confirmed, an action plan was put into effect by Scottish ministers.  None of that is to minimise the pain that ensued. However, the fact that action was taken quickly allowed the action to be brought to an end quickly, too, with movements within the islands being among the first relaxations. I am sorry but, at this point, the consensual tone—which I would dearly love to be maintained on issues that are of such obvious consequence to rural Scotland—will have to be abandoned. "It is time the gloves were taken off and, if need be, for battle to commence. If this means that the Scottish government has to publicly, forcefully and loudly promote a policy which is at odds with its Westminster counterpart, then so be it." Those are the words not of the SNP but of the magazine The Scottish Farmer . The one thing that not even the most zealous advocate of the UK Government could argue with a straight face is that the UK Government was helpful on the issue of compensation. There is not the slightest doubt that, although the Scottish Government paid out, the responsibility lay with the UK Government. As the NFUS and many others have pointed out, given that the UK Government paid out after the 2001 outbreak, there is no reason why it should not do so after the 2007 outbreak. To this day, the attitude of Hilary Benn, the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, remains shrouded in mystery, to put it politely. Over the course of a weekend, his draft speech promising assistance to Scottish farmers and crofters was mysteriously abbreviated to remove such a promise. That was despite the fact that, for reasons that are best known to those who wrote the Scotland Act 1998 and its attendant concordats, although policy on animal welfare is devolved, the budgets that govern it are reserved. If there was any further room for doubt, the Scotland Act 1998 (Concurrent Functions) Order 1999 spells out that the Scottish Government retains responsibility for disease compensation payments made under the tuberculosis and brucellosis legislation but the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food will make compensation payments for all other notifiable diseases. All that is even before we bring to mind whose lab it was that released the infection in the first place. The reason for bringing all this to the fore a year on is that Scotland has had to find support for compensation from within existing budgets. It has had to use moneys that could have been used to support other areas of agriculture and rural development, despite not having any legal responsibility for making compensation payments. If, God forbid, there is another outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease, we have to learn from  Scudamore's recommendations. We should pursue a science-based approach of the kind that Scottish ministers pursued in 2007. As other members have said, we should also examine the case for more localised restrictions on movement, where that is consistent with scientific advice. Above all, we have to act quickly. We must heed Professor Scudamore's call for a clearer set of ground rules between the UK and Scotland; that means that we should revisit the concordats—which, in many respects and on the face of it, one would have thought were pretty clear—if they remain open to wilful misinterpretation, as recent evidence suggests they do. First and foremost, we have to find a solution that puts to the forefront the interests of our farmers and crofters. We have to ensure that never again are they subject to the kind of disruption that they have suffered as a result of foot-and-mouth disease in recent years. Professor Scudamore's recommendations are to be welcomed in that context.

I welcome the attention that the minister has given to two issues that have been raised by me and by many others—burdens, and the structure of the Crofters Commission. What will the minister do to reassure crofters who have used the bull hire scheme in the past, especially in areas where commercial alternatives are not readily available? Will the money for that be kept inside the crofting system? Will the Government be able to direct crofters to any source of assistance towards the high costs of wintering a bull?

Following this week's announcement that Lighthouse Caledonia Ltd is reviewing its fish processing operations, putting at risk 130 jobs in my constituency, what action is the Scottish Government taking to find a more secure future for that area and for related industries in the Western Isles?

A dh'fhaighneachd do Riaghaltas na h-Alba dè na planaichean a tha aige airson leigeil le taisbeanadh-siubhail de na fir-tàileisg Leòdhais a dhol air adhart ann an Leòdhas, am measg àitean eile. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to allow the exhibition of the Lewis chessmen on the Isle of Lewis, among other places.

The cabinet secretary mentioned the importance of maintaining a population that is engaged in agriculture in our remoter areas. Does he recognise that there is an enormous potential disincentive to that, in the form of the requirement to identify livestock electronically? Many crofters tell me that that would be the final straw. [ Interruption. ]

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government supports the establishment of a Scottish digital channel alongside the new Gaelic digital channel, as recommended by the Scottish Broadcasting Commission. (S3F-1000)

Will the First Minister join me in giving MG Alba best wishes for its launch next week? On broadcasting more generally, does he believe that network broadcasters need to move quickly to increase their revenue share to 8.6 per cent to allow Scotland to experience the kind of television service to which it is entitled and which most other countries take for granted?

I commend the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee for the work that it has done in its excellent report on ferry services in Scotland. Given the obvious importance of the issue to my constituency—I represent 15 inhabited islands containing 26,500 people—I have a personal interest in it. The Western Isles have five mainland and two internal ferry routes, all of which are operated by CalMac. The committee's report is welcome not only for the light it shines on public ferry services, but for the welcome it gives to the Government's review of ferry services. It will come as little surprise to Parliament to hear that I welcome the introduction in October of a road equivalent tariff on every mainland route to the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree. People in the islands have been waiting for such an initiative for the best part of 40 years. I am glad that their wait will be ended in around five weeks' time.

It is worth noting that the opposite effect has been observed in past years, when tourists who would have come to the Western Isles have not done so simply because it is massively more expensive to get to the Western Isles than to Skye, Mull or Islay. For a long time, the Western Isles have suffered from a lack of investment in their tourism industry. It is only reasonable that that situation should be rectified through the introduction of an RET that recognises the importance of tourism. I hope that the RET will do that.  I make no apology for supporting the Western Isles as the most obvious area for the pilot scheme to take place. Indeed, such a scheme was promised in the SNP's manifesto before the election for—despite various innuendos to the contrary—very good reasons, not least of which is the fact that incomes in the Western Isles are dramatically lower than those in most other parts of Scotland and significantly lower than those in other island groups. Some members have made comments that have ranged from the plain silly to the grudging. Mr McNulty talked about my leaving the chamber, despite the fact that he was absent for three speeches himself. More important, we have heard members accuse the Government of political expediency. The people who made those comments can in no way be accused of political expediency. The Western Isles is a place of famously long memories, and I can tell those members that their party's comments are already being noted, recorded and talked about by the fireside. It is in no way to denigrate the specific and considerable needs of island communities elsewhere to recognise that the Western Isles are in desperate need of economic regeneration. The Western Isles face the prospect of further depopulation unless the costs of living and doing business there are significantly reduced. It is not to take anything away from the needs of other island communities to say that RET is also particularly appropriate for a community that currently pays more per mile for its ferry services than is paid practically anywhere else. This new initiative—which was broadly welcomed by the committee—will help to make the economy of the Western Isles much more competitive with that of the mainland, with every islander and visitor benefiting from drastically cut ferry fares.

There is no doubt that part of the purpose of the pilot scheme is to monitor the economic effects of a reduction in ferry fares. I wish to take nothing away from the needs of other island communities; however, by definition, a pilot project must be tested somewhere. We are living up to our manifesto commitments and going beyond them in testing the scheme not only in the Western Isles, but in two other islands as well. Every islander and visitor who benefits from the scheme will notice the benefits that it brings to the community.  The report also points to other areas of concern to all ferry users. Recently, I found a note in my diary, written by my parliamentary assistant, that said I should get from Leverburgh to my home in the north end of Lewis by hitchhiking. I hope that any member who has had to hitchhike 50 miles across their constituency will understand how poor the connectivity is between different modes of transport in the Western Isles. If one lesson can be learned from this report, by the Government and the rest of us, it is that the connections between ferries and other forms of transport in our islands must be improved. I welcome the committee's report.

I will overlook that slur. The Liberal Democrats' criticisms would appear a little less grudging and would have a little more credibility if it were not the case that some routes on which they want RET—not least the route to Shetland—would be dearer if the formula were applied.

A dh'fhaighneachd do Riaghaltas na h-Alba dè thathar a' dèanamh gus daoine ùra a tharraing a-steach gu croitearachd. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to encourage new entrants into crofting.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it will extend the provision of domestic abuse courts to rural areas. (S3O-4006)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that people reporting domestic abuse in rural communities face particular problems, not least the perceived difficulty in reporting crimes anonymously?

There can be no doubt about the scope and ambition of the Government's legislative programme. The committees that have complained of a shortage of legislative material to get their teeth into will regret their words. Indeed, some on those committees will now long for the days when they could get away with engineering time to take a vindictive stroll on the golf course, so to speak. The sheer variety of the legislation that is proposed would make it impossible—or, at least, tedious—for every speaker in the debate to try to cover every bill, so I will dwell on only a couple of pieces of legislation that have an immediate resonance in my constituency and which, I am sure, will apply well beyond. Before I do so, however, I want to say—perhaps surprisingly, given that I welcomed the Shucksmith report on crofting—that I am quite glad that the legislative response to the report is not coming this year. There has been a positive reaction to the report, but I feel that it would be good to allow the full debate that it has engendered in the crofting community to be held before legislating. I want to talk about the Government's education proposals in particular. Tomorrow night, Comhairle nan Eilean Siar will consider a proposal from its education committee to close all seven of its two-year secondary schools over the next three years, so the Government's education proposals could hardly have been announced at a more emotionally charged time for the communities concerned. The schools have excellent records and tribute should be paid to the work of staff and the wider community in making them the successes that they are. The council has the right to make its own decision about its closure programme—although we should remember that the ultimate decision on four of the schools will have to come before ministers. However, the council's decision will pre-empt the bill that will be put before us. Nobody underestimates the hard funding decisions that local authorities are faced with. However, speaking as someone who went to a one-teacher rural primary—a school that closed—my view is that pretty much anything that this Parliament can do to make the task of closing a rural primary more difficult will be welcomed in rural Scotland.  The bill described by the minister contains measures that are likely to find favour throughout rural Scotland. In many respects, it shifts the onus from the community having to explain why a school should remain open to the council having to explain why it should be shut. Things that the bill asks to be considered when a consultation takes place and which are not really considered just now would include the alternatives to closing the school and the impact on the community of closing the school. Without minimising the difficulties of school closures in general, there is no doubt that the closure of a rural school has an enormous impact on the viability of the community concerned. I am also delighted that, despite the howls of protest from some on the Opposition benches, Parliament is to be presented with a bill to abolish the now totally discredited council tax. I dare not intrude too far into the private grief that is the Labour Party's likely approach to such a bill, but I hope that Mr Kerr is still of the view that is expressed on his website, which is that his own party's stance on the council tax as recently as the last election was "widely ridiculed". Whatever the eventual stance of Opposition parties proves to be, when we debate the council tax and its replacement in the context of the bill, I hope that we remember the human facts that lie behind the issues. At a time when fuel costs are rocketing, the council tax represents a real and serious injustice to many pensioners and others on fixed incomes. The rate of fuel poverty in my constituency was recently measured as being 47 per cent—that is, 47 per cent of people were spending more than 10 per cent of their income trying to stay tolerably warm. Taking rising fuel costs into account, the rate of fuel poverty in my constituency is now probably nearer 60 per cent. Are we seriously going to advance the argument in the Parliament that we should continue to apply a tax that bears no relation to many of those people's ability to pay? The answers that the parties represented in the Parliament give to that question will certainly be remembered as the temperature falls. Pity the politician who advances the case for the council tax this winter. Many arguments have been advanced to commend the Government's legislative programme to Parliament, but the principle of fair taxation must be among the most compelling. The words "new politics" might have fallen slightly into disrepute, but if they are to mean anything, it is that the Parliament will be prepared to find a replacement for the council tax that recognises people's ability, and inability, to pay.

A dh'fhaighneachd do Riaghaltas na h-Alba dè an ìre aig a bheil na planaichean a chur às do sgiobaidhean singilte air carbaidean èiginn anns na h-Eileanan an Iar. To ask the Scottish Government what stage its plans are at to stop the single manning of ambulances in the Western Isles.

Some years ago, I attended a conference on Scottish culture at the University of Aberdeen at which an eminent politician made an astonishing statement of her view of culture, a remark that lives with me still. She said: "We should be careful about giving people in Scotland too much culture. My constituents, for instance, are not really familiar with books and libraries and so on." Good manners prevent me from saying who that politician was. She is not here, and I know that no members present would dream of making such a condescending remark about their own constituents. I hope that we have come some way since such expressions of hostility to the idea of Scottish culture were routine and respectable, so the Scottish Government's proposals on culture in the bill are to be welcomed. Every bonfire needs some kindling. The merger between Scottish Screen and the Scottish Arts Council will not only help to declutter our public landscape but will, more importantly, further support Scotland's vibrant and dynamic cultural community. Creative Scotland will build on the work that Scottish Screen and the Scottish Arts Council have already done and will have the freedom to support any form of creative expression. By working in partnership with other bodies, it will play a key part in our aim to promote Scotland's rich cultural heritage—an aim that all  members share—by giving artists the chance to express themselves in every form of the arts. Such partnership working will not only be the case with national organisations but will, I hope, permeate down to local level so that communities throughout Scotland can work towards shared goals. We have seen the benefits when national Government works with, instead of against, local government in the new relationship between the Parliament, Government and COSLA, and perhaps there is something to be learned from that single-outcome-agreement approach that would be useful for our relationship with arts funding bodies. A couple of members have mentioned funding for Scotland's languages; one thing that emerges from the debate is that language maintenance is slightly distinct from artistic endeavours that happen to be in one of Scotland's languages. Perhaps there are things that we can learn about structures to help focus our attention on those languages. Such successes can come about only when all sides are listened to and given the responsibilities they deserve. To effect change and move Scotland to a new cultural level, every side has to be inspired. That is why there should be no ministerial interference in day-to-day cultural or arts decisions—even in China, the days when symphonies were written by committee have long since passed. It was apparent from the consultation on the draft culture (Scotland) bill that that was something that the cultural community wanted to make clear. By listening to the community as a whole and to community-based organisations, while leaving responsibility artistically in the hands of creative Scotland, we hope once more to work in partnership with and inspire the cultural community to achieve the positive results that we all want. Although the artistic and economic benefits of cultural activity go hand in hand, one slight concern I had with the previous draft bill was the overreliance on arguing for the economic benefits of art and culture. Before we even consider the vast array of physical, mental, social and spiritual benefits that arise from participation in the arts, we should ultimately celebrate the arts because they teach us something. The Government clearly has a vision for the arts in Scotland, in which the Government works closely with creative Scotland but safeguards its artistic autonomy. To those who oppose or are suspicious of the bill, I wish only that they could be inspired to share that vision, particularly given that it took others eight years to get round to even drafting a bill, which we have done in our first year of Government. There may be some people out there who still long for political interference in the arts or, worse  still, who subscribe to the view of Scottish culture that is favoured by the unnamed politician whom I mentioned at the start. For someone like that, Gaelic has a phrase: "B' fheàrr leam ann an Hiort i." I could see her far enough—or, in fact, more specifically, as far as St Kilda. Happily though, there is no need for us to wish for that. The politician I am thinking of is further away than St Kilda these days; she is in Australia, and Scotland's cultural politics have moved on. I support the principles of the bill.

As other members have done, I declare an interest in as much as my office pays rates. Whatever our arguments today, there can, I hope, be no disagreement about the importance of small business to Scotland. In my constituency, with perhaps a dozen exceptions, every single business is a small one. Under the SNP Government's proposals, business rates relief for small businesses will be between 20 and 80 per cent this year and between 25 and 100 per cent next year. That means that, from 2009, 120,000 businesses will pay no rates and 30,000 will pay between 25 and 50 per cent. Because of the increase in the small business rebate, small businesses will save up to £2,400 in the next financial year and, from 2009, the figure will go up to £3,100. In my constituency of the Western Isles alone, almost 1,900 businesses will benefit from the Scottish Government's small business bonus, according to an answer to a parliamentary question from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance  and Sustainable Growth on 10 December last year. I am afraid to report to Labour members that that is simply unalloyed good news for anybody who is struggling to maintain a small business or seeking to grow one. The fact that it is good news possibly explains why the Labour amendment is so sour and grudging in tone, even by the standards of Labour amendments, which I am sure will not go unrecorded among Scotland's small businesses. That is why, alas, against my every consensual instinct, I have the unhappy but necessary task of deriding the Labour amendment. The amendment dare not say outright that it opposes the benefits that the Government intends to bring to Scotland's small businesses. The amendment would simply change the wording of the motion so that the existence of such benefits would be merely noted, rather than welcomed. Whenever the sun shines, I sometimes have the feeling that Labour members can bring themselves only to note the good weather, rather than welcome it, lest a nice day ever be credited to the SNP.

That should win a prize for a non sequitur. The member should go to Ness or Barvas, offer those rather odd figures and see how long he survives socially. As I said, the Labour amendment dare not say outright that it opposes the benefits. Curiously, it states that rates reductions employed by the previous Administration were a good thing, but those introduced by the present Administration are a bad thing. Labour will have to try a bit harder than that if it ever wants to be taken more seriously as a former party of Government. However, judging by Mr Park's example, there are some in Labour's ranks who oppose the measure on ideological grounds. Certainly, the comments about fleets of cars and the subliminal comparison between Alex Salmond and George W Bush are way off-beam. Is the Parliament really going to entertain the idea that jobs are not a route out of poverty or that small businesses are not a way to achieve those jobs? Before Labour gets too carried away with its conspiracy theories, let it take a reality check, however brief. As Roseanna Cunningham said, we are not talking about McDonald's, Rupert Murdoch or even Bernie Ecclestone. The small business bonus scheme will provide much-needed relief from business rates for all small businesses with properties whose combined rateable value is  £15,000 or less. As many other members have said, we are talking about a family-run grocer or a joiner with two apprentices; companies employing one or two people, many of whom might well be asking why the principle of progressive taxation should not be applied to businesses as well as to individuals. The plea that business cuts do nothing to help the jobless would be a little more convincing if it did not come from a party that has this week failed so disastrously on its own child poverty targets. Iain Gray claimed that the small business bonus scheme would not help economic growth because we are spending less in other areas. He said that, to achieve economic growth through the small business bonus, "the Government is cutting in real terms spending on education, transport and enterprise".— [ Official Report , 6 February 2008; c 5866.]  Yet, as the 2007 spending review demonstrates, there has been no reduction in spending on education. The budget for schools will rise by £4.7 million. In addition, rail services spending will rise by £50 million this year, and motorway and trunk road spending is up by close to £50 million. Further, among many other measures, the saltire prize was introduced to help enterprise. Are any of the Opposition parties saying that Scotland's small businesses should not benefit? If they are, they should be straightforward about it. The UK Government makes every effort to make the tax regime harder still for small businesses, not least through the punitive rural fuel tax—a subject for another day. By contrast the Scottish National Party Government recognises the need for small businesses to grow and flourish. The small business bonus scheme has been met with such a warm welcome from businesses, and from pretty much everyone except Labour Party members, because it has the potential to bring jobs to where they are most needed in Scotland.

I thank all members from across the parties who have signed my motion and who will speak tonight. Although the stories that I have to tell about fuel prices relate mainly to the Western Isles, the problem affects all our island communities. It is an issue that my colleague, Angus MacNeil, has also pursued at Westminster. The vast majority of the cost of petrol to the consumer is the tax that must be paid to the United Kingdom Government—a policy that has been pursued, at least in part, for the environmental reason of discouraging people from driving unless it is necessary. Without straying too far into another debate, I hope that we can all agree that, as a country, we should aim to reduce the use of the car and promote public transport alternatives. I hope equally that we can agree that public transport is not a realistic option for many islanders. That contention is supported by analysis by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, which concluded that the impact of increases in fuel duty falls hardest on poorer households and especially on people who live in the most rural areas. When fuel prices go up, people in urban areas tend to reduce the number of miles they travel—something that is just not feasible in the islands. Last week, I made a journey from my home on Lewis to make two school visits and to attend a couple of other events, all of which were on Harris. I clocked up 170 miles in that one day without setting foot on any of the numerous other islands in my constituency.  It is important to stress what this evening's debate is not: it is not the fevered debate that is taking place in the United States, where fuel prices are a fraction of ours; it is not part of some anti-environmentalist agenda; and it is not about well-off people whining about the cost of running a Chelsea tractor. This debate is about constituents who have contacted me—as constituents have, I am sure, contacted other members—to tell me that they cannot afford to travel to work. It is about fishermen telling me that they fear for their livelihoods because of an 80 per cent rise, in some cases, in their fuel costs over the past two years and it is about pensioners saying that they do not know how they will get to the shop because it is some miles away and they can no longer afford to drive there. I am pleased to see that hydrogen technology is being pursued vigorously by both Lews Castle College in Stornoway, and by Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, which has applied it in some of its vehicles. However, until such technologies become more widely available, people in the islands have no choice but to put petrol in their cars and diesel in their fishing boats. The cost of those fuels has now reached astronomical levels, far exceeding the relatively modest figures that I quoted when I lodged my original motion. The price of a litre of petrol in Edinburgh is now around 117p. In Benbecula, it is 126.8p, and in North Uist the price of diesel has just reached 145p. The Western Isles compete with Shetland for the distinction of being the most expensive place to fill up a car in the whole world, although I await a call from the Falkland Islands or Tristan da Cunha to contradict me.

Or from Orkney. I accept that many things are beyond the control of politicians—the price of oil reaching more than $130 a barrel is one of them. We are expected to strive to not be partisan in a member's business debate, so I will observe without comment the fact that the United Kingdom Treasury will make more than £4 billion in additional revenues from Scotland's North Sea gas and oil this year alone as a result of that high price. Enough said. It is not beyond our wit to find a way of using such vast wealth to make life more passable in our most economically fragile communities. For the time being the power over fuel taxes is reserved to Westminster, so the purpose of tonight's debate must be to present Scotland's concerns to the UK Government. When the Chancellor of the Exchequer was on holiday in Lewis several weeks and several pence per litre ago, he remarked that he was shocked at the prices that islanders were paying. I welcome his  alarm, but I ask him whether he will therefore now follow the French Government's example when it comes to fuel tax. France has varied the rate of fuel duty in la France profonde. The UK Government supported that measure for rural France, so why does it not do the same for the most remote parts of Scotland? European directive 92/82/EEC requires mandatory minimum rates of excise duty to be set in member states. It states: "it is possible to permit certain Member States to apply reduced rates to products consumed within particular regions of their territories". In Greece, the Government may also apply rates of excise duty up to ECU22 lower than the minimum rates that are laid down in their directive on gas, oil and petrol that are consumed on certain Greek islands.

As a Borderer, I am happy to acknowledge the problems of mainland rural Scotland. I made tonight's debate specifically about the islands because even comparing prices between Ullapool and Stornoway shows that there is a clear premium for buying fuel on an island. We know that measures can be taken and that the Westminster Government supported France's fuel derogations. It should also be said that those derogations came on top of a recent £88 million aid package from the French Government to ease the financial burden of French fishermen as a result of high fuel costs. If a derogation is granted, people in Glasgow are not going to drop in to Ardhasaig or Castlebay for cheap fuel. In fact, fuel in the islands will be slightly more expensive than fuel on the mainland, but it might just help to balance the books for pensioners, fishermen and families in our island communities. If the chancellor is willing to listen to islanders, as I hope he is, we can begin to address some of the economic and social injustice that they currently face. I do not have a car in Edinburgh, partly because, as the First Minister once remarked from my passenger seat as I drove round the hairpin bends of Harris, my driving licence should be endorsed in some way to limit its validity to the Western Isles. The other reason is because I do not need one. I am signed up to that agenda, but those who have the fewest available alternatives to the car should not have to pay most dearly for that agenda.  So—and not without support from other members here tonight, I hope—I call on the chancellor to apply for a fuel duty derogation for all Scotland's islands. The present situation cannot go on.

I declare an interest, although not a financial one, in that I am an associate member of both Storas Uibhist and Harris Development Ltd. Anyone who, like me, attended the launch on Monday in Stornoway of Professor Shucksmith's report into crofting cannot fail to have been impressed by both the breadth of the committee's research and its willingness to offer us radical solutions. More than anything else, they will have been impressed by the warmth of the welcome that the report received from crofting organisations and several individual crofters whom the minister and I visited after the event. It is important to emphasise, as other members have, why crofting matters. In case anyone in Parliament is wondering, perhaps understandably, why crofting needs to be so regulated, it is no exaggeration to say that if crofting were not regulated, it would probably not now exist. Indeed, had the crofting acts from 1886 onwards not been passed, it is seriously questionable whether constituencies such as mine would now have any viable populations at all. Is crofting still necessary? Does it demand our attention and our parliamentary time? The answer to both those questions is definitely yes. As Mark Shucksmith emphasises, although crofting is in a fairly fragile—let us be honest, precarious—position at present, its continued existence in some form is essential. It is essential if we are to maintain any population working on the land in the Highlands and Islands, if we are to maintain Gaelic-speaking communities and if we are to promote the social and economic development of rural Scotland. There are undoubted environmental benefits to crofting as well. To take one example, the unique landscape of the Uists and the varied bird life that it sustains would not exist if it was not grazed and unless hay was made there in something like the traditional way. The minister will be waiting for me to make my customary plea for the greylag goose  population in Uist to be controlled to achieve those ends. I hope that I have not disappointed him. Many have used the word "radical" to describe the report—and justifiably so. In recommending the abolition of the Crofters Commission the report recognises that crofters want and need a much greater sense of ownership over the structures that regulate their way of life. I hope that we will take the opportunity to introduce a much-needed element of democracy into the process. As others have said, the separation of regulation from the development functions will be useful in that respect. The strengthening of common grazings committees will also be welcomed in the crofting community. Perhaps the most immediate impact would come from the implementation of the recommendation that the rights given to individuals in the Crofters Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886 should extend only to those living reasonably locally and using the land beneficially. That recommendation has the potential to go a long way towards tackling multiple problems. If we do it right and implement the recommendation sympathetically, we could cut back on the number of derelict or unworked crofts, making things easier for new entrants, and we could end the speculation in croft land for house building. Shucksmith's proposals to enhance the croft house grant scheme and to permit house building by crofters without the need to decroft are extremely useful. Those proposals will be appreciated, not least in areas where there is on-going friction between the need to provide houses—affordable ones, I hope—and the temptation to build on the most viable crofting land. I hope that communities will seek imaginative ways out of that tension by promoting building, where possible, on common grazings rather than croft land. Above all else, Professor Shucksmith is to be congratulated on seeking to bring some simplicity to a massively complicated area of Scots law. It is an area so complicated that only a handful of lawyers in private practice now specialise enough to know their way through it entirely. The old adage that a croft is a small piece of land surrounded by legislation is quoted to death, but it is nonetheless true. A century and more of laws have been allowed to build up like the layers of paint on the Forth rail bridge. Add to that the byzantine complexities of European Union agricultural regulation and throw in a few bits of ancient Norse law, and we have a massive disincentive for any potential new crofter. I hope that we will be bold enough, however we legislate, to simplify rather than complicate as we respond as a Parliament to the report. Elements of important detail will certainly give rise to debates.  For instance, the future of the Government's bull hire scheme, which others have mentioned, continues to concern many in my constituency, and there are genuine questions about the viability and availability of commercial alternatives in many areas. It is also important that we avoid further cluttering our—at first sight—uncluttered Highland landscape. That will mean entering into genuine discussions to ensure that any new structures do not duplicate the functions of community landlords, many of which rightly see development as a key part of their role. There is also the issue of community land buyouts. In the past, buyouts involving private landlords perhaps proved simpler than buyouts involving the man who was recently described as the biggest landlord in Scotland—the minister. I do not think I am testing parliamentary privilege to the utmost if I mention that one landlord who was rightly bought out in a community land buyout is now languishing in an Australian jail for a serious crime. It would appear that greater complications are involved in buying out Mike Russell—I hope that the representatives from the west side of Harris who are here today and who will meet the minister will be able to make progress on that. The crofting community is clearly enthused by what it has heard from Professor Shucksmith. The Parliament has passed far-sighted legislation on crofting and land reform in the past and, as one or two members have mentioned, it has also wisely avoided bad legislation. Crofters are clearly looking to us as a Parliament to respond, as legislation is undoubtedly now required. I hope that the ideas in the Shucksmith report, which was commissioned by the previous Executive but presented to the new Government, can command cross-party support. Crofters certainly deserve that.

The First Minister mentioned the international links that Scotland is building in North America and elsewhere. Will the Government continue to build  on those links in order further to disprove the remarks that were made on Radio Scotland a week ago by former Labour minister Sam Galbraith, who said that, but for the guiding hand of Westminster, Scotland would be "an insignificant little country"?

I welcome the minister's comments on the matter. Does he expect the renewal of the air discount scheme to lead to an increase in the number of passengers who use Highlands and Islands airports?

Much as it must seem otherwise to the casual observer, or to anyone listening to the opening speech in this debate, the Local Government and Communities Committee does not disagree on every subject. There is a wide consensus among members of the committee, as elsewhere, that one of the key drivers of our wellbeing as a society is the ability of families and individuals to access good-quality affordable housing. For that reason, the Government has published its intentions on housing in "Firm Foundations". Those include delivering across all tenures an increased supply of housing that is built to higher environmental standards and making it possible, once more, for councils to build council houses. As Jamie Hepburn said, despite the attempts of some people to exclude that subject from the debate, there is no doubt that councils' ability to build council houses, thanks to the abolition of the right to buy new social housing, is central to the debate on housing. I make no apology for not being the first member to point to the stark contrast with the painful achievement of the previous Administration in that respect, which managed to build six council houses in Scotland during its term of office.

The member has already made the point that social housing was built in Scotland. I do not dispute that. However, the fact remains that only six council houses were built during the previous Government's term in office.

No thanks. I have just taken one. Labour's record of housing failure is no respecter of geography, even though the problems differ in different parts of Scotland. In my island constituency, several hundred people are waiting for affordable houses—a situation that the local housing association is now working to address.

I am wary about offering Labour advice on referendums in these fevered times, but unlike Rhoda Grant I accept the right of people to have their say in a referendum or local ballot. They should have that right without being told by the Treasury that unless their views are the same views—politically and dogmatically—as the Treasury's, they will be punished for their decision. The Western Isles is a unique community with housing problems that are different from those of many urban areas, but it is an example of why local authorities need the freedom to find solutions that work for them. For instance, the private rented sector plays a small part in the Western Isles, which means that the abolition of the right to buy new social rented houses will have an even more important role to play there. That was recently welcomed by the Western Isles Council and the Western Isles forum of tenants and residents associations. Of course, it is not just the residents of rural Scotland who have been failed by the record of the previous Executive—a record that we are now being asked by some members to look back on as the veritable halcyon days of housing policy in Scotland. Right here in this city, the gaps in that former policy are writ large. In Edinburgh alone, an astonishing £300 million of housing debt has resulted in 40p in every £1 of rent being spent not on housing improvements, but merely on servicing that debt. That injustice takes place—

I have taken two interventions. That injustice takes place every day, even though no good reason has yet been given—certainly not in the course of this debate—for why the Treasury can afford to write off debt for authorities whose tenants voted one way in ballots, but cannot do so for authorities where tenants voted another way. In contrast, "Firm Foundations" does much to help people who have housing hopes and aspirations: for example, the 90 per cent of under-35s who wish to own their own homes. There is also much in it to help the people of rural Scotland, who face an uphill struggle, as many members have said, to find an affordable place to live. It does much more to ensure that social housing gets built. The SNP Government will end the right to buy for all new social housing. That has already kick-started local authorities into building new houses—Midlothian will build 1,000 units by 2010; West Lothian is seeking to build four sites to provide around 240 new homes; and Dundee is planning to build 135 new homes. In other words, three authorities alone will have built 229 times as many council houses as the previous Administration managed to. Much about Labour's stance these days is puzzling, but one of its strangest positions is its apparent nostalgia for a Thatcherite form of the right-to-buy policy. Whatever that policy's limited benefits may have been, it is, even from the most charitable of viewpoints, past its sell-by date. The SNP will rise to the housing challenge. We have laid the framework to build 35,000 houses a year by 2015 and we have enabled younger people to take the first step on the property ladder; but perhaps most remarkably of all, we have made it realistically possible once more for councils to build council houses.

Will Duncan McNeil give way?

What will the Government do to address serious concerns in my constituency about the future of the Harris tweed industry, following this week's announcement that Kenneth Mackenzie Ltd's mill in Stornoway intends to lay off half its workers, with the threat of consequent additional loss of work for weavers?

Will the member give way?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement and for the effort that he and others in the Scottish Government have put in to bring Unite and INEOS together. Will he say a few words about the operation of Scotland's transport services and reassure residents of Scotland's islands that, as Caledonian MacBrayne has made clear, ferry services will not be affected by the strike action?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Might the objective observer draw the conclusion, which the report also states, that no minister or official was guilty of breaking the law or the ministerial code?

A dh'fhaighneachd do Riaghaltas na h-Alba ciamar a nì e cinnteach gum bi Uisge na h-Alba ag obair nas fheàrr anns an àm ri teachd ann a bhith a' reic grunnd croitearachd tro rop poblach. To ask the Scottish Government how it will ensure that in future Scottish Water improves the way it deals with instances where it sells crofting land by public auction.

I congratulate Hugh O'Donnell, Epilepsy Scotland and the cross-party group on epilepsy on securing the debate. I hope that the debate will raise awareness about a common condition and help to broaden and deepen the political consensus that specialist epilepsy nurses have a greater role to play in the future. I read that one in 129 Scots has epilepsy, so I declare an interest in the statistic: there are 129 members of the Scottish Parliament and I have epilepsy. I have seen startling displays of lack of awareness of the nature of the condition. What most comes to mind in that context is the man from Alabama with whom I shared an office at the University of Aberdeen, and with whom I never quite managed to share the information that I had epilepsy after I caught sight of a tome on his bookshelf entitled, "Satan Cast Out, or the True Causes of Epilepsy." The greatest lack of awareness was my own—not only when I suddenly developed epilepsy at 18, but for a long time thereafter. I was pretty ignorant about my condition. However, I have been very fortunate in that my seizures have been gradually brought under control to the extent that I have been without symptoms for the past four years. My knowledge of what was happening with my health was ropey and it was not helped by my attitude. It is fair to say that I was not the model patient. It took me a full year to find strategies that were equal to the task of overcoming my absent- mindedness to ensure that I always took my pills. If my mother is listening, I say to her that I now always do that. If she is not, I will say that when a doctor told me at 18 that drinking "might exacerbate my condition", I took the word "might" to undermine the strength of his argument, if not to discredit it completely. I do not advise anyone else with epilepsy to conduct the same experiment that I conducted when, as a student, I was cycling home one day. Feeling the first symptoms of a seizure, I took the gamble that if only I pedalled fast enough I would have just enough time to get home before slipping completely into unconsciousness. Happily, my plan worked out fine, but I would not try it again. More than anything, and with absolutely no disrespect to them, the doctors whom I consulted from time to time had very little idea of the medication I should take, or of how much, or when. That is not a criticism of those doctors; they were frank about the process being one of trial and error. I saw consultants infrequently and had brain scans that may have told the hospital something, but which told me nothing at all. Between those infrequent visits, I ignored my epilepsy, except on the four or five occasions a year when I was ill. Between those times, I offered the occasional suggestion to my GP on whether the dose should be put up or down. I had absolutely no rational basis for those suggestions, however. In the end, I took roughly the doses that I felt I should take, given that my medical notes and prescriptions never seemed to agree on the correct dosage. I cannot help but think that if I had had even occasional contact with a specialist epilepsy nurse, I might have received practical information and probably the occasional—productive—telling off. When I was first diagnosed, an epilepsy nurse would have been a considerable reassurance to my parents. They would have ensured that a more systematic attempt was made to get the correct dosage. The only real frustration—now, at last, it has been overcome—was not being able to drive, which is a significant problem in the Western Isles. After having gone the required year without a seizure, I started the lengthy process of learning to drive. I finally passed my driving test, thanks in no small part to a Lewis road being blocked by a funeral cortège for several minutes. Very irreverently, that struck me as the ideal opportunity to waste time in injury time. Fortunate as my experience has been, there can be no underestimating the distress that epilepsy must cause a young child and those who have more regular seizures than I ever had. Through provision is very patchy, the key to better diagnosis, treatment and information lies in wider  provision of specialist epilepsy nurses, on which I see an emerging political consensus.

As many members have testified, fuel poverty blights every region of this energy-rich country. I make no apology for pointing to a particular problem in my constituency. I cite the Western Isles as being where the problem afflicts Scotland most extremely. Seventeen per cent of Scottish households are officially in fuel poverty; in the Western Isles, the figure is 42 per cent or, if we aggregate the last three surveys, 46 per cent. In other words, getting on for half my constituents are paying more than a tenth of their income just to keep tolerably warm. Some of the reasons for that are obvious enough: the wind-chill factor; the ageing population; and the unavailability of mains gas in most areas of the islands. There are also some distinct historical reasons. Government grants in the 1930s were designed to get people out of the thatched black houses, and another wave of housebuilding took place in the 1970s. The new houses were not all fuel efficient and many of them are now in need of significant repair. The most recent Scottish house condition survey indicated, unsurprisingly, that dwellings in the Western Isles score among the lowest in Scotland according to national home energy rating measurements. In the islands, 92 per cent of houses scored 6 or under on the 10-point scale. Many people in the islands live in what might, at first sight, be classed as private sector accommodation, but their houses are in fact tied to crofts and to crofting legislation—and that is not to mention the several hundred people who are waiting to get a house at all. The islands have a huge task on their hands to deal with that legacy of inefficient and ageing housing stock, which was recognised by the Government's recent decision to dedicate an extra £750,000 to the housing repairs budget in the islands. Given all that, like many other members, I looked hopefully to the UK budget for signs that fuel poverty would be genuinely tackled, but that hope was largely confounded. I welcome any initiative, however small, to get a better deal for people who use prepayment meters, but the call from the Chancellor of the Exchequer to the energy companies to spend an  extra £50 million on social tariffs must be seen in two telling contexts. First, the social tariffs are not mandatory for the companies. Secondly, the sum amounts to less than a week's profits for them. Whatever Westminster's failures in this area, I hope that we in Scotland can take a lead. Therefore, I welcome the freeze in council tax, which will, slowly but surely, take people out of fuel poverty. As the Scottish fuel poverty statement of 2002 made clear, it defines household income net of council tax. A local income tax would certainly remove more people from fuel poverty.

I thank the member for that intervention, and I challenge her to come to my constituency and explain to pensioners that it would be a good idea for them to continue to pay the council tax. I welcome the current review of the Government's central heating scheme. Like other members, I pay credit where it is due. When it was first introduced, the scheme made significant progress in tackling fuel poverty—36,000 houses received central heating. However, any member who is alive to the contents of their mailbag must see the flaws that are now appearing in the scheme. The character of the scheme's operation has changed. In certain areas, certainly in the Western Isles and the other islands, there have been periods when no installations have taken place. It is unclear whether the scheme takes account of the needs of areas where there is no mains gas supply. I hope that, despite the howls of contrived outrage that greeted the news of a review—from some parties, anyway—we can all now see that if we are going to tackle fuel poverty, such a review is welcome and long overdue.

Like other members, I welcome the OECD report and its many sound recommendations. In its opening gambit, the report states: "Rural Scotland as a whole evidences good socio-economic indicators as compared to urban and intermediate areas". I do not wish to gainsay that, but it must be pointed out that, as other members have recognised and as the report acknowledges, rural Scotland is no more homogeneous than is urban  Scotland. If we categorised urban Scotland as either rich or poor, we would be dealing in some fairly serious generalisations. For instance, the report rightly points to the welcome economic growth and population increases that have occurred in the Highlands and Islands as a whole, but it also acknowledges, as members have mentioned, that such growth is far from uniform. The population decline in and economic fragility of areas such as the constituency that I represent are very real. The growth in the rural population is welcome, but the report shows that areas of multiple deprivation in the Highlands and Islands coincide with the areas of greatest remoteness, not least among which are the island communities. It is no disrespect to either area to say that Harris is an economic world away from the commuter belt of Inverness. The reasons for that are not hard to find. It will come as little surprise to members that, as far as I am concerned, transport policy is highly important in promoting economic growth in rural Scotland. As other members from remote and island constituencies will be aware, transport issues can pose difficulties for island communities and put a brake on economic growth. The OECD report makes it clear that Scotland's rural communities have immense economic potential. However, that potential, I contest, simply cannot be realised when it costs £350 to take a lorry one way across the Minch or when a tourist must be persuaded to part with £81 before he or she can take a car from Oban to Barra. At the moment, a company in my constituency spends more on exporting its product from Stornoway to Ullapool than on subsequently transporting it from Ullapool to Brussels. I therefore welcome the fact that the Government has honoured its manifesto promise to pilot road equivalent tariff in the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree. I will leave Mr McNulty to assess and try to fathom his own reasoning—and taste—in comparing the RET policy to the policy of exterminating the Kurds. As far as I understand it, that is what he did this afternoon. If I am mistaken, perhaps he can explain where comical Ali comes in. For some in the islands, the long wait for Labour to do something about the injustice of ferry costs has given RET a kind of unlikely, mythical status. Some wondered whether they would wait longer to see a ferry arrive from Ullapool offering RET tickets than they would to see one arrive from Tìr nan Òg. Some in the local Labour Party called RET the economics of the madhouse; others were recently heard to make rash promises about how they would welcome the day that the SNP delivered on its promise. However, the  Government has delivered on its promise. I hope that the RET study will provide information on the kinds of benefits that, in time, I hope other islands will share. Transport is not the only challenge that we face in rural Scotland, but the challenges as a direct consequence of transport links to the islands undoubtedly mean that, in the likes of the Western Isles, it is impossible to tackle other economic problems, such as housing and jobs. For that reason and many more, I welcome the report's findings and the fact that, at last, the Western Isles will be part of the national road network, with journeys priced accordingly.

Chan eil mi a' tuigsinn càit a bheil comical Ali a' tighinn a-steach. A dh'fhaighneachd do Riaghaltas na h-Alba dè seòrsa beannachdan eaconamach a thathar an dòchas gun tig dha na h-Eileanan an Iar agus gu Colla is Tiriodh nuair a thòisicheas sgeama pìolait RET air aiseagan anns an sgìre. I am not sure where comical Ali fits into this. What benefits does the Scottish Government expect to come to the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree when the RET pilot begins on ferry services in the area?

Will the member give way?

The member has set out his position on abolition of the graduate endowment. Do his former colleagues in the National Union of Students share his position?

The member has painted a rosy picture of the graduate endowment and all its benefits. Are there any circumstances in which he would vote this afternoon to preserve the endowment?

Will the member give way?

Will the cabinet secretary join me in welcoming the news that NHS Western Isles is making progress towards breaking even in future years? What lessons does the Government hope to draw from the Auditor General's recent report into the corporate and financial governance of NHS Western Isles?

To ask the Scottish Government what its position is in respect of community buy-outs of government-owned land. (S3O-2272)

The Government is aware of considerable community interest in a community buy-out in Seilebost, Scarista and Luskentyre in South Harris. Is the Government willing to meet representatives of those communities, which are keen to bring to South Harris—if possible—the many benefits that other areas have enjoyed following community buy-outs?

As many members have said, there are few countries with closer cultural ties to Scotland than Malawi. My friend Malcolm Fleming, who visited the country recently on behalf of Oxfam, got into conversation with a family and asked their daughter what she was studying in history at school. He was astonished to find that she had been memorising the dates of all the schisms in the Church of Scotland. She had reached 1843 and was still working on the rest. Although the example that I have given may be bizarre, both the previous Executive and the present Government have recognised the strength of the connections that exist. Scotland has a real opportunity to make a significant mark by promoting sustainable development in the developing world. Other members have outlined the contribution that Scotland has made and the statistics relating to Malawi, which might be thought to speak for themselves. However, I would like briefly to highlight the human aspect of the  situation and the reasons why Scotland is involved with Malawi in the first place. I have not been to the country, but my friend who has says that it left a lasting impression on him. When he was there, he met 17-year-old Steve Julio and his brothers, who live in a rural part of Chiradzulu province. Steve said: "When our parents were alive, we never really had any challenges in meeting basic needs". He continued: "The challenges started when dad died as he was the main breadwinner. But mum still tried. Working our vegetable garden we grew and sold tomatoes to have a little to keep going." However, in June 2004, their mother also passed away—one of hundreds of thousands of Malawians, and millions of Africans, who have succumbed to HIV and AIDS. Perhaps a failure of imagination on our part means that we do not understand the scale of that or what any of it means. Perhaps the only way of putting it is to say that the last time that Scotland saw death and dislocation on that scale may have been during the plague some seven centuries ago. However, disastrous as the situation is, it is important to say that Malawi is not merely another reason for a wasteful and lazy western world to feel appropriately guilty; Malawi wants to work. I hope that, through Scotland's active engagement in Malawi's civic life and health and education services—our funding for which is rising from £3 million to £9 million by 2011—we will show which side of the argument Scotland takes. Scotland is remembered fondly by Malawi. The least that we can do is return that compliment.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making with its international development policy to ensure measurable and sustainable development in some of the world's poorest countries. (S3O-2169)

As the minister will be aware, HIV is an endemic problem in many African countries. What plans does the Government have to work positively in Malawi, where 17 per cent of the population has HIV and where, according to Oxfam, life expectancy is 38?

I hesitate to intervene once the names of Goebbels and Stalin have been mentioned. While I agree with the member that, obviously, no Government would wish to use history as a means of espousing nationalist propaganda, I am sure that he agrees with me that there have been instances—I can remember some from school—of history being used to espouse unionist propaganda.

In seeking the return of the chessmen to Scotland, will the minister consider the possibility of some pieces being exhibited permanently or temporarily on the Isle of Lewis? What impact might that have on the cultural and economic life of the islands?

I am interested to hear myself referred to obliquely by the member. If he is referring to the Western Isles, will he comment on the fact that his party's candidate in the Western Isles was far more militantly opposed to wind farms than I was, calling for an absolute ban on wind farms in the Western Isles and feeling that the SNP was too moderate in its stance?

Will the member allow me to welcome the sensible views of some members on the Labour benches? Sarah Boyack, Malcolm Chisholm and Pauline McNeill have all either signed or lodged motions on nuclear power that SNP members could have written. Does he agree with them that no convincing case has yet been made for a new generation of nuclear power stations in Scotland?

Scottish langoustines, as they have now been officially renamed, are in huge demand across the world. What does the Government intend to do for Scotland's nephrops fleet, which is so crucial to many of our communities, particularly on the west coast? In relation to the west coast fleet, will he comment further on the increase in the Rockall haddock quota?

Like others, I congratulate Bashir Ahmad on bringing this debate to Parliament. As he pointed out, there are concerns about the dual standards that are applied to various dictatorships around the world. Quite rightly, the British Government and many in this Parliament condemn the atrocity that passes for a Government in Burma. However, we should also be as strong in the statements that we now make about the situation in Pakistan under the Musharraf regime. The explanations that General Musharraf gives for his claim to be Pakistan's head of state are fascinating. The general more or less admits that he broke the constitution, but claims that he did so to "save the country". Evidently, the rule of law was inadequate for that purpose, so he had to resort to other methods. As has been said, he decided to get himself sworn in as head of state all over again, this time in a suit rather than a uniform, in a desperate attempt to make his claim to constitutionality a bit more convincing. What is more important, we all know that any regime that locks up judges when they disagree with the Government has something fundamentally wrong with it. The judges were, of course, among many thousands of people who have been arrested in recent months, which has led to the international community—particularly the  Commonwealth—losing faith in the Government of Pakistan. Some people have been squeamish about the idea of this Parliament expressing views on international affairs and on matters that are reserved to another place. However, we can all agree that we should be coming to a view and expressing that view in relation to the situation in Pakistan, partly because Scotland is part of the world and the wrongs that are inflicted on people in Pakistan ultimately affect us all, but, more specifically because, as has been said, Scotland has a substantial Pakistani community whose relatives are suffering as a direct consequence of the uncertainty of the situation in Pakistan. That community seeks a clear indication from Scotland and this Parliament that Scotland stands with them in that concern and suffering. It is worth putting on the record that that concern exists in Parliament. Regrettably, Pakistan is now a dictatorship. Although General Musharraf no longer has to explain away that situation in court—even in the presumably compliant courts that now exist—he still has to explain it to us and to the world. These are difficult international times. As others have pointed out, the threats of terrorism and extremism are real. However, the war on terror—a phrase that has been rather misapplied throughout the world in recent years—is nowhere used with more unconscious irony than in Pakistan, where General Musharraf uses it as an explanation for imprisoning people without any good reason and for dismantling constitutional Government, not to mention hand picking who can and cannot stand in elections, if they ever happen. I am sure that the Parliament will want to join Bashir Ahmad in making it clear that Scotland has no pet dictators.

Has the Government given any consideration to the use of new technology that might overcome the particular problems experienced by deaf people in remote and rural areas? There is often a lack of any meaningful access to British Sign Language interpreters.

I note that the member does not credit his constituents with any interest in civil liberties. On the blanket retention of DNA samples, would his constituents be more or less inclined to participate in future mass DNA testing if they knew that their DNA samples would be kept for all time despite their innocence?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the member for giving way and apologise for interrupting his Ciceronian flow of rhetoric. Does he really take the view that the Government's national conversation is in some way exclusive and unhelpful, when it includes all the options, from giving the Parliament more powers to independence? The option that the member favours is that we should have a conversation purely about the constitutional options with which he happens to agree.

Will the member take an intervention?

If, in its separate national conversation, the Labour Party has no fear of the answer to the question of independence, why is it afraid to ask it?

Will the minister confirm that one of the key issues that the BBC Trust might be considering at present is the potential appeal of any such channel beyond Gaelic speakers in Scotland? In light of that—which the minister has touched on—will the Government take the opportunity of the forthcoming official visit to the Parliament by representatives of the Isle of Man's Parliament to inform its submission to the trust? There are 2,000 speakers and learners of Manx Gaelic, some of whom have contacted us about the issue.

Does the Government see NHS Western Isles continuing to be a statutory national health service authority that is independent of any other equivalent authority elsewhere in Scotland?

As many members have said in the debate, there can be no doubt about the importance of tourism to Scotland. That much is obvious in a constituency such as  mine. Given the six-minute limit for my speech, I will not try to list the many appeals of the Western Isles, between Vattersay and Ness. Tourism is increasingly a genuinely national industry that contributes significantly not only to places such as Edinburgh and Loch Ness, which was traditionally the case in the past, but to cities such as Glasgow and Aberdeen. As other members said, tourism contributes some £4.2 billion to our economy each year, and almost 9 per cent of our total employment. The 2009 year of homecoming presents an opportunity at every level, economic and cultural, to make Scotland known globally by renewing our links with the Scottish diaspora. It is worth bearing in mind just how distinctive and positive the image of Scotland is to most people around the world. Some years ago, I was in Boston on the way to a ceilidh. In saying that, I do not mean that I had mistakenly ended up in Boston en route to a ceilidh in the Western Isles, although such things have been known to happen. I got off a bus in Boston, wearing Highland dress, and was accosted by an elderly lady who seemed almost overcome with emotion at seeing someone dressed in that way. She told me, at some length, of her husband's ancestry and the warmth of those sentiments was in no way undermined when it quickly became clear that she believed I was Lithuanian. [ Laughter. ] I did not feel the need to correct her. The Government is expending great effort to promote Scotland as a world brand. At local level, there is much that Scotland can do, and is doing, to promote a range of niche tourism markets. Bed and breakfasts are involved in schemes that offer a tailored welcome to niche groups such as hill walkers, mountain bikers, Gaelic learners, and film crews. In my constituency, numerous agencies, including Caledonian MacBrayne, have co-operated very successfully to promote a network of so-called Gaelic rings round the west coast of Scotland and, increasingly, we have a basis for food tourism, ecological tourism, sports tourism and so on. However, all that activity requires structures that are fit for purpose, and the restructuring of VisitScotland, Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise will enable the bodies to work together closely towards the goal of ensuring sustainable economic development in Scotland.

I accept entirely that the island groups have a distinct market and play a distinct role with regard to tourism. However, where I differ from the member is that I do not think it necessary for those areas to have all the bureaucracy that is associated with the different organisations. Instead, it is important that we maintain service quality and the network of tourist information offices, and the Government has given many assurances on that issue. VisitScotland will receive from the Government £47 million a year, which will trigger another £25 million of private sector and local authority funding. Of course, we should not ignore the significant challenges that are faced by the industry. I am sure that we can all bring to mind certain small problems that we have encountered in the past. For example, when I recently called in at a small hotel at 10 in the morning—I will not name it; suffice it to say that it was not in my constituency—and asked timidly at reception whether there was any chance of a bacon roll, I was met with the very frosty comment that I "might get a biscuit". However, I did not. Such incidents are becoming noticeably rarer and, when they happen, they are—if our tourists have any sense of humour—part of the charm. Indeed, VisitScotland has assured me that part of Scotland's appeal is that the experience on offer is not synthetic. Tourists get to meet real people. In fact, the real challenges that face the industry are not of its own making; they are problems that do not fit neatly into the tourism portfolio. For example, visitor attractions and B and B owners in my constituency can do as much as they like to promote their businesses, but they will always find themselves at a competitive disadvantage if it costs £200 for tourists to reach them by car and ferry. I am confident that solutions to that problem are in hand, and the cutting of small business rates will also help many businesses in the tourism sector in my constituency to grow and prosper.

I think that one intervention is probably enough. I am just about to conclude. The Government has made tourism one of six key sectors with potential for high growth, which reflects its importance to the economy. Tourism proves that Scotland can aim higher than being merely the best small country in the world—and that, I believe, is the nearest that I have come to straying from the spirit of cross-party consensus on this issue. However, the fact that I have made it this far without the leaven of partisan  loyalty rising in me goes to show that Scottish tourism is a global industry with a global brand that we can all agree operates on a truly global scale. The spin-off benefits extend far beyond tourism. As the mood of national optimism extends, our tourism industry can provide a means of attracting people to come back to live here, to invest here and to spread the word about our country to those who have yet to visit us. I commend the motion to the chamber.

You have not changed.

Fisheries are a crucial part of the local economy and way of life in my constituency of the Western Isles. The shellfish sector is particularly important. Shellfish landings make up 16 per cent of the total landings by weight, but 38 per cent by value, which makes shellfish, for the first time, the sector that is most valuable to the Scottish fleet. The value of shellfish landings increased by 25 per cent between 2005 and 2006. Although much of the focus of the EU fisheries talks is, understandably, on cod, the importance of shellfish should not be forgotten. The wider picture—as anyone who knows any fishermen will be aware—is that the industry has had a rough time on both coasts of Scotland in the past ten years. Measures that have been taken under the common fisheries policy in the name of conservation have caused more than 1,000 boats to be decommissioned in Scotland during that time. That in itself, however, is not why fishermen in Scotland feel aggrieved. What really hurts is that, as we have heard today, the Scottish fleet has been leading the way in conservation measures during much of that time—not least in recent months, when the industry has increasingly pursued a range of ideas that have been developed with fishermen and environmental groups. Those measures included voluntary closures of fishing areas and independent onboard observers to ensure that young fish were not  caught and then—as we have discussed—discarded. The measures are having an effect: the UK fisheries minister, Jonathan Shaw, conceded only this week that "We have seen a recovery in cod in the North Sea in particular—now that is good news. " For the first time in six years, the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea has not called for a complete closure of North Sea cod fisheries in forthcoming years. It found that cod stocks were showing signs of recovery, and that is good news—news that I hope will be acted upon in the coming round of fisheries talks. However, what really leaves Scotland's fishermen feeling hard done by is that, throughout those difficult years, the Executive in Scotland felt unable at any point to challenge the most destructive policies that were being pursued by Whitehall against their industry.

Members may say "nonsense", but it could be said that the previous Executive created a desert and called it "partnership". I am sorry to be partisan, but is it any wonder that most of Scotland's fishing communities are now represented by the SNP? Those fishing communities, which are awaiting the European negotiations, recognise that the cabinet secretary cannot deliver everything that they want, not least because of the intransigence of the EU and UK positions. They know, however, that there is something new in the equation—the first ever pro-fishing Scottish Government.

The full input of a Scottish minister under the previous regime usually consisted of the word "yes". As commendable as the member's interest in this subject is, and as commendable as his attitude on many aspects of it is, I want to know how he can reconcile his position with the comments made by his Liberal colleague Chris Davies in the European Parliament. On 5 September, Chris Davies said: "you have to stop the fishing; you have got to put the fleets on the side, you have got to put fishermen out of work". However, I am being called on to be consensual, so I note that Mr Scott has lodged an amendment that seeks to join up the Government in working constructively with Westminster, and I have no doubt that it will. I am certain that Mr Scott is not asking Scotland's Government to agree with Westminster in the instances in which  Westminster happens to be wrong—as it has undoubtedly been on many occasions. If ever any issue were devised to disprove the argument that Scotland benefits from having Britain act as a middle man in Europe, it is fishing. Scotland is not a member state in its own right—it is barred from participating in the talks, and the Scottish Government is accorded only observer status at the meetings. That is why my comment is met with mutters from die-hard unionists, and why Scotland should be leading the UK negotiating team in Europe. Unionists might moan, but we should consider how obsessive and dogmatic their position is.

I have already taken one. Scotland has 25 per cent of European Union waters and 62 per cent of UK landings, yet it has no direct say in European fisheries talks. As we go into the next round of negotiations, let us hear why the mighty European sea fishing powers of Luxembourg, Austria, Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Hungary all have a direct vote on what happens to Scotland's fishing industry, but Scotland itself does not. Members should not try to explain that to me—they should try to explain it to a fisherman.

Tourist centres throughout Scotland report an increasing interest from Scotland's diaspora in genealogical tourism. With 2009 the planned year of homecoming, what plans does the minister have to involve tourist centres in that year of events and in genealogical tourism more widely, not least in the islands, which played such a disproportionate role in Scotland's story of emigration?

The First Minister and the cabinet secretary have set out the priority of tackling climate change and introducing a greener Scotland culture. Will the cabinet secretary elaborate on those aims that are represented in the budget and say which specific measures will be taken to promote sustainability in Scotland? Does he agree that a sustainable environment goes hand in hand with sustainable rural communities and, in so doing, does he agree  that communities in the Western Isles, long weary of politicians merely talking vaguely about a road equivalent tariff, will be delighted with today's announcement that such a tariff is on its way and will transform those islands' economies?

I hear the member's argument that Scotland punches above its weight by being part of a larger country. Can he list any countries in Europe that are keen to give up their place on the Council of Ministers to benefit from such a situation? Are there any analogous situations around Europe?

I am interested to hear that exposure to light could cause irreversible damage to the Act of Union. I am sure that many of us agree with that sentiment. In the light of the many controversial criminal aspects that surround the Act of Union and the circumstances of its creation, will the Government consider the Lothian and Borders Police museum of crime on the Royal Mile as a potential home for the Act of Union?

How does the minister intend to progress the work that was formerly undertaken by Scottish Screen, especially to get Scottish films on general release? I trust that Mr Brocklebank does not take that to mean that I am over-tartanising the silver screen. The question is brought to mind by the success of the excellent Gaelic feature film "Seachd", which raises a second issue that I would like the minister to address. How does she intend to mainstream Gaelic within the work of the new agency?

The member lists some very worthy projects that the Crown Estate undertakes. However, will he concede that, in many places where there is no such investment, it is only too obvious that the Crown Estate is ultimately a revenue-raising organisation for the Treasury?

I commend Tavish Scott for the motion. The charges that are levied by the Crown Estate on harbours affect many communities in Scotland, not least in my own in the Western Isles and the others that have been mentioned. I realise that, as has been said, the Crown Estate is in many ways doing its best to engage with the public and with parliamentarians, or at least to engage better than it has done in the past, but I am afraid that for many people it remains a pretty opaque organisation. The Crown Estate is accountable to the Crown and its ministers but not, at least as far as its revenues are concerned, to either the United Kingdom or Scottish Parliaments. Although I do not want to take away from the various works that the Crown Estate does in research and investment, it is ultimately an institution that raises £14 million annually for the Treasury in London. Although that money is raised in Scotland, it is not completely—indeed, not anything like completely—returned to Scotland, far less to the communities from which the moneys are generally levied. I am afraid that many people seriously question what the Crown Estate is all about. I am sure that Parliament wants to work constructively with the Crown Estate for as long as it exists, despite the lack of any direct parliamentary accountability that it enjoys. I am sure that the Crown Estate will likewise be thick-skinned enough to accept that it is not a popular organisation in many parts of Scotland. I will give an example of what I mean. Stornoway Port Authority is among a number of organisations in my constituency that have to deal regularly with the Crown Estate. The authority and its predecessor organisations have been investing continuously in their harbour for a century and a half, yet it still has to lease the seabed underneath it from the Crown. That means that it has to provide the Crown with a payment for every leisure craft that uses the harbour—a cost that it would be impracticable to try to pass on, even did the port authority believe that it were in the island's economic interest. As has been mentioned in respect of other places, Stornoway Port Authority has to lease the foreshore on which its piers are built and on which its own linkspan is built. In 2006 alone, the authority had to pay more than £16,000 in such  rentals to the Crown Estate—the community in Lewis must wonder to what end. The Western Isles is, like other island communities, in urgent need of economic renewal, and the cost that its communities incur from the Crown Estate has to be passed on to someone—inevitably, that means the people who use the services. That means, in large part, the fragile fishing industry. The justification for the situation is, as far as I can see, that the foreshore just belongs to the Crown—except in parts of Uist where the chiefs of Clanranald ingeniously managed to appropriate it a couple of hundred years ago. The reasoning is that the Crown is therefore entitled to expect payments in return for its trouble, but the question is: for what trouble? Why is the Crown Estate not accountable to this Parliament? Why is the Crown Estate land not subject to the same principles of land reform as other parts of the land in Scotland? Stornoway is one community among many where people struggle to see why, in the modern age, the Crown can charge communities for use of the sea. As one person locally put it to me, "They might as well charge for use of fresh air, and it would make about as much sense." I appreciate that all those questions may tend towards dangerous conclusions as far as the Crown Estate is concerned, but they are questions that Scotland's coastal communities are asking. I commend Tavish Scott for asking them, too.

The member refers to the iconic Forth bridges. Am I being unfair, or do I recall that she called for one of those bridges to be knocked down because the paint was coming off?

We all recognise the benefits of the islands' unique biosecure position. However, in the circumstances of a food-and-mouth outbreak occurring again at a similar time of year—I hope that it does not— would the cabinet secretary consider measures to accelerate the timescale during which breeding rams could be brought to the islands, if that proved necessary, during the final stages of movement restrictions?

In the light of what the minister has said, will he give a long-term commitment to supporting air transport in Barra, no matter what type of runway—whether man-made or natural? On the other option that he outlined of acquiring new aircraft, what stage has consultation with the community and other interests reached?

Sometimes the business of the chamber involves a certain amount of synthetic rage. Sometimes, I  dare say, the most consensual of politicians have to force a little anger into a debate purely to keep it going. However, despite what some have suggested, there is no reason why any of us who represent farming or crofting interest needs to resort to such a tactic. The anger in crofting and farming communities is only too real. Crofters in particular do not expect to become rich by crofting. They are willing to do what they do in all weathers, for the most part because they realise that it is integral to their community's way of life and because it is essential to the wider Highland economy. However, when lambs are selling for less than £8 each, as they did on one recent occasion in the Western Isles, we are dealing with a situation that is unsustainable for any length of time. To some extent, that has already been recognised and acted on. The NFUS and others have welcomed the swift action in Scotland to cope with the build-up of light lambs on farms, for instance, and the early relaxation of certain movement restrictions in the islands has also been useful. Crofters have indicated to me that they do not want to have to slaughter their lambs to no great purpose, but there is no realistic alternative while foreign markets remain restricted and while the livestock industry is still trying to bring livestock movements back to something like their normal pattern. Farmers and crofters have had to struggle with the fact that, until today, there has been no obvious move to compensate them for the losses that movement restrictions have forced on them. Many farmers would have to question the viability of their farms in those circumstances, so I welcome what the cabinet secretary has announced today. It would be foolish of any of us to claim that today's announcements are everything that crofters or farmers have asked for, but they are a substantial move in that direction. The Government in Scotland is going well beyond what it is required to do morally and, I believe, legally. I hope that the actions of the Scottish Government will now shame others into living up to their responsibilities—because the UK Government most certainly has responsibilities. Unlike the 2001 outbreak, there is little mystery this time about where the virus came from. There is no need to speculate about pigs being fed Chinese food; we all now know that the foot-and-mouth virus that has so destabilised the farming industry in Scotland was released from a UK Government lab. That is probably more than a moral argument, but if it fails to impress, there is the argument of precedent. If compensation was made in 2001, why should it not be made now?  And if precedent fails to settle the question for some people, there is the small but important matter of the Scotland Act 1998 and its attendant concordats, which so many members hold up to be inviolable and unalterable sacred texts. The animal health budget is clearly reserved to the UK. No farming or crofting body has questioned that assessment, so what has happened to influence the UK Government's view? A couple of Saturdays ago, I was in the passenger seat of a car travelling in North Uist. I went out of mobile range, as always, in Lochmaddy. When I went out of range, I was discussing the forthcoming general election with a journalist who had phoned me. By the time I came back into mobile range, I had learned that there was to be no general election. Within hours of that, the UK Government had reneged on its position on compensation. According to his draft speech, the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Mr Benn, was due to say: "I have also agreed with the Chief Secretary to the Treasury that Scotland should receive £8.1 million and Wales £6.5 million to assist them in countering the impacts of foot-and-mouth on their livestock farmers." However, by Monday 8 October, when Mr Benn delivered the statement to MPs, that paragraph had disappeared. He instead said: "I am announcing today a package of assistance for the English livestock sector amounting to £12.5 million. The devolved Administrations are proposing to introduce their own schemes."—[ Official Report , House of Commons, 8 October 2007; Vol 464, c 39.] Who are we to judge whether the disappearance of the general election was in any way related to the disappearance of the compensation scheme? However, if the question was asked of any crofter in my constituency, the assessment would be pretty universal. It would not be far from the assessment of Jim McLaren, the president of the NFUS, who said: "There is a crisis on farms across Scotland and we cannot accept that the UK Government has no responsibility." The Prime Minister, Gordon Brown, must now live up to his word and address the problems in Scotland or face the imminent wrath of its rural communities.

Will the member take an intervention?

I commend Kenneth Gibson for bringing the debate to Parliament.  Mary Scanlon talked about smart meters. I am not sure whether the heater in my house qualifies as a smart meter, but it has the uniquely Hebridean feature of accepting only the big 50p pieces that went out of circulation 20 years ago. I do not know whether that means that it is a smart meter or just an odd one. I have been moved to speak in the debate because of the situation in my constituency, the Western Isles. I am not going to claim that fuel poverty is unique to the Western Isles, but the extent of it there is unusual and the reasons are, perhaps, unique. The solutions to the problems that we face have, to a large extent, been set out by Kenneth Gibson in his speech. Mary Scanlon set out some of the reasons why fuel poverty is particularly acute in rural areas. In the Western Isles, an unusually high proportion of the population is elderly; there are a lot of people who own private homes that they have inherited or which have come as part of a croft but who do not necessarily have the income to maintain them; there is a cultural reluctance, particularly among old people, to claim benefits to which they are entitled; and there is the apparent slowness of Scottish Gas—which I have mentioned in Parliament before—in implementing the central heating programme in the islands, for some strange reason. Furthermore, as has been mentioned, there is the unavailability in most areas of mains gas, which means that there is an unusual reliance on solid fuel. There is also the wind-chill factor. Along with all that, there are problems with the design of many of the houses that were built between the wars to replace the black houses. Many of them now need attention. Those factors add up to a startling reality, which is that 42 per cent of households in the Western Isles are in fuel poverty. That is not merely the highest figure in Scotland; it dwarfs the 13 per cent figure for Scotland as a whole. That figure means that almost half the people in my constituency are shelling out a tenth of their income trying to heat their homes. We can safely assume that a significant proportion of them are in severe fuel poverty and will be spending 20 per cent of their income on heating their homes. I am glad that we are considering the example of Warm Zones—it is great to learn from an example in England. One of the great things about having a Parliament is that we can choose what to take and what not to take as examples from other countries. I hope that this Government will see the benefits that Warm Zones has offered many communities in England. I hope that the Local Government and Communities Committee, on which I and other members in the chamber serve, will in its examination of the wider issue of fuel poverty, look  at the benefits of the Warm Zones project, because it draws together many aspects that unite us all. It systematically assesses households, it brings various agencies together, and it cuts across many of the problems that are caused by, for example, the lack of co-operation among agencies. The phrases "warm zone" and "the Western Isles" are not often heard in the same sentence, but I hope that the experience of the Western Isles, which is the most extreme example of a Scotland-wide problem, provides further fuel for serious consideration of whether the Warm Zones concept can be imported successfully to Scotland. As a result, I commend it to the attention of Parliament and the Government.

The member has said a lot about the supposed disadvantages of a legally enforceable right to a maximum waiting time. I am sure that his view would not be shared by the 35,000 people who were on hidden waiting lists under the previous Administration. Given that he and members of his party object to the principle of a legally enforceable right to a maximum waiting time, does he also think that there should not be legally enforceable rights for workers and  consumers, in case lawyers ultimately become involved?

Will the member give way?

There is a tidal island on the west coast of North Uist called Baile Sear. At first sight, that name is curious, as it means "eastern village". It is difficult to understand how one of the most westerly communities in Scotland could ever have got such a name, until we realise that there was once, next door to it, a Baile Siar—the western village. That was until one night 300 years ago, when Baile Siar simply disappeared permanently beneath the waves. I tell that story only to give some idea of the extent to which the Uists are at the mercy of the weather and the tides. There are probably few communities in Europe, outside the Netherlands, where flood prevention is of such dramatic and obvious concern. The islands of South Uist and Benbecula rely heavily on the natural flood defences that have built up on their machairs over the centuries, because many communities in the islands are at or, in some cases, even below sea level. That was illustrated in January 2005, when a storm of unparalleled intensity hit the Western Isles. People were lifted off their feet and caravans, sheds and even the front half of a hotel disappeared without trace overnight. For days, people were without electricity and, in many cases, found themselves living on islands within islands. As Rob Gibson mentioned, the school in Balivanich was also rendered unusable. A far more tragic event occurred on the Uist causeway network: three generations of one family lost their lives and a whole community was left devastated. All members will have had the experience of leaving a meeting in their constituency feeling rather humbled. The Minister for Environment and I attended one such meeting recently in Uist. At the meeting, members of the local community, including bereaved relatives, made a polite but straightforward plea for a number of basic coastal protection measures to be taken to prevent disasters of the same kind occurring in future. Those measures were repairs to the causeway network, a hydrographic survey of the coasts, and attention to rebuilding and seeding the damaged machairs. Many members have spoken of soft solutions to flooding problems. The traditional method of coastal protection that the machairs provide is an instructive example of such a solution. As the Minister for Environment will testify, the lasting impression of the meeting was of the quiet,  patient hope of that community. However, as scripture has it, a hope often deferred maketh the heart sick. Two years ago, the Executive promised those measures as a matter of "urgency". It would be dishonest of me to say that anybody in the Uists, of any political persuasion, feels that evidence of such urgency has yet been easy to see. Nevertheless, I am confident that the situation can be changed, not least in the context of the proposed flooding bill and in the evident interest that the Minister for Environment has taken in the subject. It is with that hope and confidence that I commend to the Government and to Parliament as a whole this very real, painful and urgent concern of my constituents.

A dh'fhaighneachd do Riaghaltas na h-Alba am bi iad ag ionnsachadh bho eisimpleir nan sgeamaichean làn-thìde anns a' Chuimrigh airson luchd-teagaisg a tha ag iarraidh Cuimris ionnsachadh gu fileantas. An smaointich an Riaghaltas air sgeamaichean dhen aon seòrsa airson na Gàidhlig?  Following is the translation:  To ask the Scottish Government whether it will learn from the example of sabbatical schemes operating in Wales for teachers who wish to learn the Welsh language to fluency. Will the Government consider a similar scheme for Gaelic?

Members are, I hope, agreed that Scotland needs to build on its reputation for educational excellence, that we all have a role in contributing positively to that shared enterprise, and that, when it comes to education, the motives of all members are probably honourable. If I had the choice, I would—in the spirit of the new politics—politely avert my eyes from those parts of the motion that in the cold light of day must seem petulant, ill informed or unreasonably doom laden even to its supporters. It would serve no purpose to add to their probable embarrassment, but averting our eyes from those bits of the motion would leave us little to discuss regarding the overly and ridiculously negative contribution to today's debate from the Labour Party. We can agree on one thing—the motion catalogues some of the problems that are facing Scottish education, from indiscipline to crumbling school buildings. There are certainly enormous challenges, and the SNP does not shirk from that fact. However, it must be evident to the supporters of the motion that eight years of Labour rule in Scotland, and 50 years in many councils, left a record that I make no claim my party can solve within 100 days. The Government is setting about that task, big as it may be. I welcome the fact that the Labour Party is hungry for our manifesto promises on education to be implemented. It is even hungry for us to implement pledges that it simultaneously appears to oppose, such as the reduction of class sizes in P1 to P3, to be piloted in the areas of Scotland that have the greatest social need. Other members have commented on many aspects of the Government's plans for a smarter Scotland. I will focus briefly on higher education. If we want Scotland to flourish culturally, economically and socially, we have to move away from the culture of student debt that ballooned under the previous Government. The SNP made its intentions clear by setting out plans to abolish the graduate endowment fee, by beginning the process of replacing the loans system with fair and affordable grants, and by making it clear that the funding of our higher education institutions will not be raided in the process. Something that sets the Government's proposals for higher education apart from others' is that they are based on principle. I do not suggest for a moment that the Labour members  are strangers to principle, or indeed the Lib Dems, one of whom I see rise.

The SNP Government has made it clear that the process of making student funding fairer does not involve raiding the money that is allocated for the provision of universities and for university teaching and research. I conclude with a comment on the principle of free education. I do not suggest that our opponents in the argument are strangers to principle. However, during the election campaign I heard an argument from principle—or at least from first principles—that it is a good thing for education not to be free. A Labour Party person at a political meeting suggested that the fact that education was free in the bad old days was a bad thing, because it meant that the poor had to subsidise toffs to go to university. All that I can say is that my grandparents would have been amused. They did not get a chance to go to secondary school because of their circumstances. They would have been amazed to be told that the system of free education that used to operate in this country was a wicked scheme and one that we should not aim to reintroduce.

Am I to take it from the comments that have been made about PPP and its supposed benefits that Karen Whitefield not only is criticising the Government's proposals for a replacement to crowd out PPP, but is actually endeared to, and enamoured of, the idea of PPP and the prospect of paying credit card rates for ever for school buildings that may end up outside public control?

I join other members in thanking the cabinet secretary for his statement and for his speedy response to the situation. I, too, wish to draw attention to the situation in the islands and, in particular, to concerns about this second disruption to the life and work of crofting communities. Will the cabinet secretary indicate, even at this early stage, what is his attitude to allowing crofters to move livestock to sales on the mainland at some stage in future? What is his attitude to the unusual situation that the islands have in that respect?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I associate myself and all the representatives of the islands with the remarks that have been made by Mr McArthur and others about the gratitude that is felt in the islands for the role that was played by officials in ensuring that a difficult situation was contained relatively quickly. Despite the attempts of one or two members today to make this a constitutional issue—reflecting some Labour members' constitutional obsessions—most people understand that the process was science driven and that the response was proportionate. In particular, I am grateful for the fact that the situation of the islands was recognised in that response. Should another outbreak occur in the future, although we hope that that will not happen, what lessons have been learned specifically about the situation of the islands, particularly with regard to ensuring that people are able to get livestock to markets on the  mainland as soon as it is safe and practicable to do so?

Like many members—indeed, I hope, like all—I am delighted to hear that such an array of talented individuals is participating in the council. Will the council also have the opportunity to draw on the experiences of other talented academics at home and abroad?

In the light of that question and answer, and in the light of the Government's enthusiasm for vertical integration and co-operation between services, does the Government intend to take advantage of the coterminosity of many agencies in the islands to pursue its agenda of reducing clutter in government in Scotland?

On the other side of the equation, what support will the Government give to encourage people to become partners in practices, with all the responsibility that that entails? What support can the Government supply to practices that get into financial difficulties—it will be aware of examples of that?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

The Parliament has already heard many expressions of deference to Westminster. Will the member also defer to the majority of Scottish MPs at Westminster, who—unlike, apparently, members on the Labour benches opposite—have a view on the issue?

Given the failure of the previous scheme—the graduate endowment—to ensure that people from poorer backgrounds in particular were attracted into higher education, will the cabinet secretary, in pursuing her new policy, learn from the successful examples of countries such as Ireland, where participation in higher education has risen steadily since fees were abolished in 1995?

In the Government's cultural policy, what place will be given to the future of Gaelic? Given the worrying situation in which tiny numbers of children in Scotland use Gaelic in everyday life, will an element of urgency on the issue now enter Government policy?

Mar a tha an sean-fhacal Leòdhasach a' ruith, "Is ann caochlaideach a tha a h-uile nì ach faochagan an Acha Mhòir." Following is the translation:  As the Lewis proverb runs, "All things are subject to change except the whelks of Acha Mòr." The member continued in English.  The proverb is made all the more surreal by the fact that Acha Mòr, as members may know, is some distance inland. Nevertheless, surreal as it may be, the saying can be used to describe the political landscape in Scotland, which has  "changed, changed utterly"—a fact that the spirit of the new politics precludes me from celebrating too overtly this afternoon. Government has changed and the style of government has changed. That fact is appreciated throughout Scotland, not least by islanders. Islanders in the constituency that I now have the honour of representing are looking to the Parliament both to listen to their distinctive economic needs and to act on them in order to develop the island economy and to maintain the environment and culture that give the islands their distinctive identity. If Parliament wants to demonstrate that it is listening to those distinctive needs, it will, for instance, have to listen to the call for the people of Lewis to have a more direct say in the future of their island in terms of wind farm planning. Although I appreciate that ministers cannot prejudge that issue, I was encouraged by the First Minister's comment yesterday that he wants Scotland to become a renewables powerhouse. However, that does not mean that every application for renewables projects is right. If the Parliament wants to show that it is going to address the economic needs of the Western Isles and similar places, it will have to address transport. Islanders are aware that the cost of living and doing business in the islands is so high as to be almost unsustainable. Recently, I spoke to a constituent who runs a business exporting goods from the islands. He told me that the cost of getting his goods from Stornoway to Ullapool is greater than that of getting them from Ullapool to Belgium. We would do well to examine the lessons that can be learned from other European countries, where island communities and their transport links are regarded as an integral part of or an extension to the national road network. That lesson can be learned in the Western Isles. I hope that the Parliament will examine it. My party has been at the forefront of that cause, but it has many other supporters. No electorate in Scotland is more engaged, attent or sophisticated than that of the Western Isles. Today, it has heard a programme for, or an outline for an approach to, Government that it will find inspiring, not just because it is more open on issues such as the Howat report, but because it is generally and genuinely more open to listening to the voices of others and to the voice of Scotland. The programme or approach can be commended to all of Scotland, from Auchincruive to Acha Mòr.