I join others in congratulating Stuart McMillan on securing the debate but I, too, wish to express my disappointment because it struck me that part of his speech had more to do with an argument about the constitution than the reality that people are living with. We are facing a cost of living crisis, the likes of which has not been seen since the 1930s. Incomes are stagnating at best and falling behind at worst. I will illustrate that point. Since 2010, wages in Scotland have fallen in real terms by £27.30 a week. That is £1,420 a year, which is a lot of money for a low-paid worker. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation’s report “A Minimum Income Standard for the UK in 2013” highlighted that the cost of a basket of essential goods and services has increased by almost 25 per cent in the past five years. That is staggering. The cost of bread, milk, electricity and gas are all up. Over the three years since the Tories came to office, prices have risen faster in the UK than in any other G7 country. Times are tough and they are increasingly tough for the employed, as well as the unemployed. I am particularly pleased that the work of West Dunbartonshire Community Foodshare has been highlighted. That organisation is in my constituency. I have been out on a number of occasions, helping it to collect food and donations in the communities that we serve. I pay particular tribute to not just the management committee but all the hard-working volunteers that support it. The organisation was recently awarded £50,000 by the Big Lottery Fund and I am extremely grateful that that has happened because the service is finding that demand is increasing. I will not repeat the figures that Stuart McMillan has shared; suffice it to say that the number of people using the service has increased by 100 per cent just in the past four months and, over the same period, there has been a staggering 400 per cent increase in the number of families using the service. The Trussell Trust reported in April 2013 that the number of people in Scotland using food banks had risen by 150 per cent from 5,726 to a staggering 14,318. It will now, of course, be more. One third of those were children and one fifth were in full-time employment. The latest research from the Debt Advisory Centre Scotland shows that one Scot in 10 borrowed money to pay for food in July last year. One in 10 is 500,000 people. We can only begin to imagine what the numbers are like now. Although we are very grateful for the work of all the volunteers in communities throughout Scotland, it is a damning indictment of our society that food banks even exist. It appears from anecdotal evidence from Citizens Advice Scotland that some local authorities have been sending people to food banks rather than providing crisis grants. Of course, all that is happening while the Scottish welfare fund remains hugely underspent. The most recent figures published show that only 11 per cent of the £33 million available has gone out the door. That is at a time when the need is self-evident. That benefit has been devolved. It is in our hands already, but we cannot get the money out of the door. I think that the minister would agree that that is appalling and it would be helpful to know what action is being taken. We asked the Scottish Government to commission research and I am pleased that that has now been published, but what will the Government do? Of course we should challenge the Tories and Lib Dems at Westminster, but it is not enough for the Government simply to wash its hands and blame Westminster. We created the Parliament to protect people when times are tough. Let us not turn the matter into yet another issue that is seen through a constitutional prism but take action to protect people who are suffering in communities throughout Scotland now.

I could not agree more with the minister but, given independence, the case for which some of her back benchers have made, which of those cuts would she reverse?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. Unsurprisingly, I will focus my remarks solely on the bedroom tax. I say at the outset how much I welcome the position that the Scottish Government has now taken on the bedroom tax. In particular, I single out for praise John Swinney, whose approach to the negotiations has been positive. I very much welcome our discussions. I look forward to continuing to work with him in the future and would welcome confirmation from him that I will be involved in the discussions on shaping the mechanism that will be used, as we previously discussed. Let us be clear: by voting for the budget today, we will, in effect, bring an end to the bedroom tax in Scotland. I can find very few people who believe that the bedroom tax is anything other than a vile and iniquitous piece of legislation. It affects almost 80,000 people in Scotland, at least 80 per cent of whom are disabled, and the majority of whom are on low fixed incomes. [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I think that we all agree that the policy itself is completely wrong-headed. You do not use a blunt policy instrument such as the bedroom tax, which charges people simply for having a spare room, to fix a problem in housing supply. Indeed, it is estimated that some 60,000 people would need to move house to avoid the bedroom tax but that only around 20,000 one-bedroom properties were available for let last year. The fact that the policy just does not add up demonstrates that it has more to do with Tory ideology than any evidence base. Labour has been very clear throughout the debate: we oppose the bedroom tax. We voted against it and we will abolish it if we are elected in 2015. I acknowledge that the SNP is also committed to the tax’s abolition in the event of independence, but in both those cases we are asking people to wait, to cope with having to pay extra for their housing while they are on fixed and low incomes, and to deal with the stress that that causes. John Swinney said in a previous debate that he did not want to let Westminster off the hook, but I am sure that he would also agree that some of our poorest people should not be left on the hook to prove a political point. This is so much more important than a debate about the constitution. This is about the Parliament using powers to protect people. It is exactly at times like these that the Parliament should fulfil that purpose. The 80,000 tenants in Scotland hit by the bedroom tax cannot afford to wait until the votes are counted in the referendum or, for that matter, the general election. We can and should act now. In January this year, I gained sufficient support to introduce a bill to protect people from evictions as a result of the bedroom tax. With one brave exception, Scottish National Party members did not rush to sign it, but it certainly served its purpose by concentrating the minds of ministers. My only disappointment is that it has taken so long to do so. For more than a year, Labour has been calling for the Scottish Government to fully mitigate the bedroom tax. We stood shoulder to shoulder with campaigners throughout Scotland. We have marched together across cities in Scotland and our activists have taken to the streets with petitions, taking the campaign to local neighbourhoods. In March 2013, Govan Law Centre lodged a petition in this Parliament calling for no evictions as a result of bedroom tax arrears. It would be fair to say that the petition was not met with universal acclaim from the SNP; indeed SNP back benchers were lined up to condemn it. In October 2013, the no2bedroomtax campaign lodged a petition calling for £50 million to mitigate the bedroom tax in Scotland. Again, that was not met by universal acclaim from the SNP and, again, SNP back benchers were lined up to condemn it. It is not a matter of cost: £50 million is a tiny drop in the ocean of the Scottish Government’s budget. Under pressure from Labour and civic Scotland, John Swinney added a very welcome £20 million to discretionary housing payments, claiming that that was all he had the power to do. However, we now know that that is not the case. We provided clear evidence of two successful schemes that are operating in Scotland. First, we had Renfrewshire Council’s tenant assistance fund, which was helpfully considered positively by Audit Scotland. A similar fund operates in East Lothian Housing Association. Both are perfectly legal. Existing housing legislation can be used to deliver. There are other routes, too, that the Scottish Government can take that are within its powers. That was confirmed by Danny Alexander and David Mundell, both UK Government ministers. The money pledged by the finance minister today to end the bedroom tax in Scotland is absolutely and unreservedly welcome. It removes the need for any social landlord to take eviction proceedings against tenants due to bedroom tax arrears. Despite the 11th-hour letter to Lord Freud asking for the cap to be lifted, John Swinney has recognised that there is action that he can take. I very much welcome that. I will borrow a phrase from the First Minister—not someone I often quote. He is fond of saying, “Let me say, as gently as I can”; usually, he is talking to Jackie Baillie. On this occasion, let me say as gently as I can to Nicola Sturgeon that the letter could have been written at any point in the past year, but it was not. Margaret Burgess could have raised it with Lord Freud when she met him the other week, but she did not. It was a straw man—a fig leaf—designed to give some cover to a spectacular U-turn by the SNP. The people of Scotland expect us to work together in their interests and not to engage in political posturing with the UK Government. I welcome that U-turn by the SNP. It is a strength of a Government, not a weakness, to listen and then to act, and to admit when it is wrong. Today, we can vote in effect to end the bedroom tax in Scotland. It is absolutely the right thing to do.

Will Murdo Fraser give way?

Does the member accept that, because of the Scottish Government’s actions in putting the £50 million on the table, we have effectively ended the bedroom tax in Scotland?

It would be helpful if the cabinet secretary could, when winding up, offer clarification on John Mason’s amendment 25 so that members, in exercising their vote, are aware of all the facts. I understand that the amendment seeks to ensure that there are no circumstances in which any religious or belief body can be compelled to carry out a same-sex marriage. I understand—and as has been referred to—that a similar amendment was made at Westminster to the Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Bill, which became the 2013 act. Can the cabinet secretary confirm whether that is the case, and whether there is a difference between what was passed at Westminster and the bill? Can he confirm whether the point raised by my colleague Marco Biagi is indeed correct about the reservation? I understand that the view of the Equality Network is that the amendment is “unnecessary” and that: “Section 10(2) of the bill already states ... that there is no duty imposed by the bill on religious or belief bodies to request to be prescribed to conduct same-sex marriages, or to nominate any of their celebrants for registration to conduct same-sex marriages.” That provision goes on to offer the same protection to individual celebrants, too. It would be helpful to the entire Parliament if the cabinet secretary could advise us whether John Mason’s amendment is necessary and on what discussions he has had, if any, with our colleagues at Westminster, given the fact that similar changes were apparently accepted in the UK Parliament.

I wish to comment on amendments 1 and 2 in the name of Richard Lyle and amendment 30 in the name of John Mason. I will start with the latter. I am totally opposed to amendment 30, because whether or not John Mason intended this to be the case, it is undoubtedly a wrecking amendment. Expanding the protected characteristic of religion and belief to include belief that marriage should be only between one man and one woman raises questions about the overall status of other beliefs. As I understand it, it is extremely unlikely that the UK Government will agree to those particular amendments to the Equality Act 2010. Therefore, because the bill could be enacted only after those specific changes had been made, it would in effect never happen. Of course, it is up to individual colleagues to exercise their judgment on amendment 30, but I urge caution, given the likely effect of agreeing to it. The Scottish Government has, of course, been in dialogue with UK counterparts, and it would be useful for the cabinet secretary to set out the agreement for an order under section 104 of the Scotland Act 1998 and how those additional protections in the Equality Act 2010 will be taken forward. I turn to amendments 1 and 2 from Richard Lyle. It seems a long time ago, but I recall the same matters being discussed in the chamber during the passage of previous legislation and my colleague Michael McMahon seeking clarification from ministers about Catholic adoption agencies when we last considered fostering and adoption. He was given an on-the-record assurance about the Scottish Government’s intentions, and we know that that counts. I recognise that decisions about adoption and fostering are taken with the interests of the child as the paramount factor, so what reassurance can the cabinet secretary offer that belief in traditional marriage between a man and a woman is not an issue in determining fostering and adoption? Members will understand concerns, as the charitable status of St Margaret’s Children and Family Care Society was questioned, and I am delighted—as, I am sure, are many other members—at the ruling of the Scottish Charity Appeals Panel only last week, which recognised that the society provides public benefit and qualifies for charitable status. My question to the cabinet secretary is whether we need to put the matter beyond doubt by putting it into the bill. If not, what clear indication of safeguards and intention on the Government’s part can he offer that would be useful to members in determining how they vote?

Like the cabinet secretary, I am pleased to participate in the stage 3 debate on the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill. I commend the members and clerks of the Equal Opportunities Committee for their diligence in scrutinising the bill at stage 1 and, at stage 2, considering many of the amendments that we have also debated today. When there is a free vote in the Parliament, it places much more responsibility on committee members to take care in their considerations. Whatever their ultimate view, all the members of the Equal Opportunities Committee have done an outstanding job for the Parliament in subjecting the bill and its amendments to a robust level of scrutiny. I believe that Margaret McCulloch deserves particular recognition for so smoothly taking over from Mary Fee as the committee’s convener part way through the bill’s passage. [Applause.] Ultimately, however, this is a Government bill, started by Nicola Sturgeon, who was clear in her commitment to same-sex marriage, and carried forward by Alex Neil, who may not have used all his speaking time but has certainly used his considerable political skill to deliver the bill itself. Undoubtedly, there has been a volume of evidence both in favour of and against the bill. The consultation received a record number of submissions—over 70,000 in total. As Scotland for Marriage pointed out, more of those submissions were against the bill than in favour of it. I have to say that the correspondence that I have received over the passage of the bill is much more finely balanced. Views are passionately held and I respect that. However, I repeat something that I said at stage 1: this is about changing attitudes in Scotland. It is the case that attitudes are changing. We should consider the evidence on that, which I think we would all agree is robust and reliable. The Scottish social attitudes survey in 2002 showed that 41 per cent of people were in favour of same-sex marriage and 19 per cent were against it. In the same social attitudes survey, but this time in 2010, the proportion of people who were in favour of same-sex marriage had risen to 61 per cent. I can only imagine what it would be today. A shift of 20 per cent in opinion on any issue in such a short space of time is, frankly, astonishing and it speaks to the way that we are progressing as a society. If we begin to unpack the detail of that, we find that support for equal marriage can be found across all echelons of society, among the religious and the secular, people of all ages and income groups and people resident across the length and breadth of the country. Support for this bill therefore transcends religious, social, demographic and geographical boundaries. If we examine the detail even further, we see that, according to the survey, 55 per cent of those who identified themselves as Catholic supported same-sex marriage and 21 per cent were opposed. Among Scottish Presbyterians, 50 per cent supported same-sex marriage and 25 per cent were against. Of those living in the most deprived areas of Scotland, 67 per cent supported same-sex marriage, while the figure for those who live in the most affluent areas was 63 per cent. Frankly, it makes no difference whether someone lives in urban or rural Scotland, because support for same-sex marriage is roughly the same. Support among young people is higher than support among older people. I will explore that in more detail shortly. There is no doubt about current public attitudes. Let us look at another data set, helpfully provided by Professor John Curtice, who as we know has a wealth of experience in these things. He described a cultural shift in Britain over the past 30 years. According to Professor Curtice, in 1983, 62 per cent of the population believed that same-sex relationships were mostly or always wrong. That figure has dropped to 28 per cent, which is quite extraordinary. His explanation for that shift is that it is young people who increasingly support same-sex marriage. The Equality Network backs that up by telling us that support for same-sex marriage is highest among those who are under 55. Taken together, I believe that that offers the kind of robust and credible evidence that we always pride ourselves on seeking before making policy in this chamber. On that note, I want to consider what has happened in other countries that have legislated for same-sex marriage. In Europe, since 2001, we have seen the Netherlands, Belgium, Spain, Portugal, Norway—I could go on and on—and, most recently, England and Wales, legislate in this area. We also see same-sex marriage in Canada, South Africa, Argentina, New Zealand, Uruguay, Brazil and 17 states in America where it is the norm. Many of those countries are considered to be very religious. A significant number, such as Spain, Portugal, Argentina and Brazil are predominantly Catholic. In Portugal an amazing 81 per cent of the population identify themselves as Catholics, but they have same-sex marriage in place. In the Netherlands, which was the first country to introduce same-sex marriage, support for their bill was about 62 per cent in 2001. That has now risen to such an extent that I understand that almost everyone there supports same-sex marriage—the highest approval rating of any European country. Apparently some 16,000 people have a same-sex marriage each year out of a nation of 16 million. When the Parliament passed a law on civil partnerships, we took a huge step forward. Same-sex couples had the legal rights associated with marriage. However, I recognise that, for some, that falls far short of a marriage in which their love and commitment are fully recognised. The Equality Network talks about a gold standard; whatever language we use, it is a matter of equality and fairness. For a host of reasons, I believe that equal marriage is an idea whose time has come and I will vote in support of the bill this evening. That said, very few of us in this chamber have been deaf to the concerns that have been raised. I am pleased that we had a robust debate at stage 2 and today in this chamber. I welcome the openness of the chamber to hearing the concerns expressed. It is a sign of a mature Parliament that we have been able to consider the bill in a calm, sensible and objective manner, with tolerance of those who hold differing opinions from ours. The principal area of concern was in relation to the protections that have been put in place by the Scottish Government. I believe that most members have been persuaded that it will not be possible for any religious or belief body to be forced to perform a same-sex marriage. Celebrants will not be forced to perform a same-sex marriage if it is against their beliefs and no one will be compelled to perform same-sex marriage ceremonies. Under the Government’s proposals, it will be their choice to opt in. Indeed, throughout consideration of the bill, it has been made clear on numerous occasions that no part of the religious community that does not wish to conduct same-sex marriages will be forced to do so. I believe that that is right and proper: these are matters of conscience, doctrine and belief that are properly for the church and not the state. Religions already can and do refuse to marry people. That is a matter for them; it is not proposed that that will change in any way. However, I recognise the genuine concerns that people have raised about protections and I very much welcome the arrangement between the Scottish and United Kingdom Governments to amend the UK Equality Act 2010. The 2010 act contains provisions about not discriminating when providing a service, with exemptions for religious and belief bodies that apply in certain circumstances. The Scottish Government has rightly sought the protection to be more comprehensive by asking for a further amendment that would help allay fears about challenges. Amendments with the aim of respecting the right of those who, as a result of their religious beliefs, take the traditional view of marriage as being between a man and a woman have been considered this afternoon. Concerns have also been highlighted about freedom of speech. I think that the assurances that were given by the cabinet secretary were sufficient to allay those fears. The Equal Opportunities Committee asked the Scottish Government to look again at the gender recognition provisions and I am pleased that the Government has acted to address those concerns. For me, the bill is about equality, fairness and social justice: values that are instilled in many of us by our parents, community and society. For many of us, the bill is also about how we see ourselves as a nation, and how others see us. It is about the values that we hold and whether Scotland is indeed a confident, progressive nation where equality is truly valued. It is about our recognition that tolerance and acceptance of all are essential qualities of a mature and civilized society. We are not the first country to agree to same-sex marriage and we certainly will not be the last. Those countries that have led the way have not suffered any adverse impact on their social and cultural values; in fact, I would suggest quite the opposite. It is time for change. It is time to support equal marriage.

I say at the outset that I regret some of the comment in the previous speech, which struck me as being out of step—even with those who have disagreed with the bill. We have heard powerful testimony and experience from a number of members, and there have been excellent contributions from across the chamber. I will attempt to do justice to most of them, but members will forgive me if I run out of time. It may come as a surprise to people outside the chamber, but we often agree across the parties. We are capable of working together, although that might not be evident when they look in on Thursday’s First Minister’s questions. I welcome the First Minister to the chamber. I think that we can agree that we are proud of Parliament and of how we deal with difficult issues that inspire passion on all sides. There was substantial committee scrutiny, substantial external scrutiny of the bill and quite a bit of comment on top of that. Like Jackson Carlaw and many others here today, I want to pay tribute to all the campaigners. With only a few exceptions, they have engaged maturely in the debate. I have no doubt that their contributions have made today a historic day. Jackson Carlaw was almost singing from “South Pacific”. I am not sure whether that is a good thing or not; I will leave it for others to judge. I am always happy to take an intervention, if he wants to regale us with song, but I put it down to the excitement of the occasion. Indeed, his observation, which was echoed by Mary Scanlon, about those in the Tory party who had to strangle their sexuality, earned a laugh of substantial recognition. I will leave that sticking to the wall. In a considered contribution, Marco Biagi brought the voices of his constituents directly into the chamber and, in an emotional and well-thought-through speech, made this debate very much about them and what we now do for them. Margaret McCulloch, ever the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, was rightly pursuing the cabinet secretary right to the end on the question of converting to marriage civil partnerships that have been conducted outside Scotland. I hope that the cabinet secretary will take some of the considerable time that we have at our disposal to respond to her points in his closing speech. James Dornan spoke about his brother’s marriage in Lisbon; I was jealous of the sunshine of Portugal that he brought into the chamber. He was right to say to Alex Johnstone that the bill can only strengthen marriage. It is about celebrating all marriages and it underlines the benefits that flow from marriage. As the cabinet secretary said, this is about a nation that cherishes love. As Drew Smith said, demonstrating love and commitment to each other can be a private thing for many couples; for others, it is a proudly public matter. On that note, I will correct Jackson Carlaw. I know that he is not often wrong, but I am sure that he will take what I say in the intended spirit. It is not just Neil Bibby and Mark Griffin who are engaged to be married; Drew Smith got engaged to Jillian Merchant on Christmas eve. I suppose that I should declare an interest—I am not sure what our register of members’ interests requires—because she used to work for me, so I take some credit for bringing the two together. I say to Jackson Carlaw that, for the error that he made, Drew Smith will send him the gift list in the post. [Interruption.] I ask the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth to stop heckling from a sedentary position. In all seriousness, I say that John Finnie was right. As we listened to the debate, it was clear that the measure is not about a hierarchy in equality. People either believe in equality or they do not; there is no pick and mix. I am pleased that Parliament came to the same conclusion with a series of amendments. I hesitate to say that Mary Fee has been married for 36 years to Brian. She told us all at a Burns supper last week that he has bought her presents including a lawnmower and even a pan loaf. That is a clear example that shows that, even with the most extreme provocation, marriage is about love and commitment that endure. Kevin Stewart and I have often disagreed, and about many things, but he was correct to say that legislation should not be tokenistic. Legislating is about doing what is right and what will stand the test of time. In her usual quirky way, Mary Scanlon reminded us all that we have a responsibility to challenge discrimination, as she did, whether it is in the classroom or on the football pitch in interesting circumstances. Christian Allard treated us to an exposition on chicken farming moving into the 21st century. He was right to say that what we are doing today is celebrating same-sex marriage. Patrick Harvie said that no clear, coherent or moral argument has been heard in the chamber against same-sex marriage. He reminded us of the story of our progress; he said that we should share that progress with countries that come to the Commonwealth games and that we should use the games for a positive purpose. What can I say to Jim Eadie? I look forward to the invitation to his wedding, as do most members. In the stage 1 debate, Alex Neil was right to say that “we are not redefining marriage ... the bill does not in any way redefine ... marriage. It does extend the eligibility for marriage, which is the key point of the proposed legislation. People in Scotland who have been ineligible for marriage will now be eligible for marriage and for that marriage, and the love that it represents”— irrespective of whether it is same-sex marriage or otherwise— “to be recognised by the state”.—[Official Report, 20 November 2013; c 24691.] That is crucial. In front of the First Minister, I pay tribute again to Alex Neil. That does not happen often, so Alex Neil should savour it—although it probably will not do his career in the SNP much good. Alex Neil has piloted the bill through Parliament with considerable skill, for which I thank him. Today, we take a decision on the essential character of Scotland and on how we see ourselves. Equal marriage is about equality, fairness and social justice. Let us vote for it. It is time for change.

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the report by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation about the number of families living below the minimum income standard. (S4F-01853)

I thank the First Minister for his expected response. The JRF report states that the number of families living below the minimum income standard has actually increased by 70,000 over the past five years. Some 82,000 of the families are now under even greater financial strain due to the bedroom tax. We have asked the Scottish National Party Government, for the best part of a year, to fully mitigate the bedroom tax. We have provided evidence of the power that the Government has to do that, as Audit Scotland confirmed in relation to Renfrewshire Council’s assistance fund. Will the First Minister tell me whether his Government will provide the funds to mitigate the full impact of the bedroom tax?

Those who take the time to read the report that the University of Stirling published this week will see that it completely undermines the Scottish National Party argument that leaving the UK would automatically reduce inequality. After all, the Institute for Fiscal Studies made it clear that a separate Scotland would need to make spending cuts that are twice as deep as those in the rest of the UK. Is it not the case that it is the poorest and pensioners in our country who would be hardest hit by the SNP’s plans for an independent Scotland?

No you haven’t.

I congratulate Neil Findlay on bringing the debate to the chamber, and I commend him for a very personal and thoughtful contribution. I am privileged, as the convener of the cross-party group on muscular dystrophy, to have already had a presentation on many of the issues from the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign’s trailblazers network at one of our recent meetings. The network is a group of disabled campaigners from across the United Kingdom who tackle the social issues that affect young disabled people, such as access to higher education, employment and social and leisure facilities. They campaign tirelessly to fight what they see as obvious social injustices, and there is really nothing like lived experience to inform our debate and highlight the reality of what they face. The trailblazers network published a report in October 2012 called “Up in the air”. I am disappointed that the industry has not rushed to pick up on the report’s recommendations. It is only as a consequence of some of the activity that Neil Findlay has spoken about that we are starting to see some change. However, being a generous soul, I will put that to one side. Neil Findlay highlighted some of the issues that the trailblazers network described at the cross-party group meeting, such as being unable to take flights on most budget airlines because they do not carry wheelchairs above a certain weight. He rightly made the point that space and cost are the excuses that are used, but frankly those excuses can be dismissed—we see that Ryanair has aisle chairs—despite what the other airlines may say.

I am not sure if I have time—but I see that the Presiding Officer is willing to be generous.

That is helpful, but the point is that action can be taken now; there is no excuse for inactivity and delay. While I am sure that companies can do things that are much more imaginative as they renew fleets, something should be done now. I am conscious of time, Presiding Officer, but I want to talk about some of the issues that have been highlighted. Those include wheelchairs being damaged beyond repair; holidays or business trips being ruined; people being physically hurt or feeling humiliated when they are carried from wheelchairs to airline seats as staff members ignore advice about best lifting techniques; and people having very low expectations of airlines with regard to understanding—or even beginning to understand—their medical and mobility equipment. Let me give members some examples from the trailblazers report. Emma Muldoon from Grangemouth said: “Jet2 refused to take my wheelchair when I was flying to Prague from Newcastle because of the weight of the chair. Jet2 blamed Swissport (the ground staff for special assistance) for refusing the wheelchair. After many phone calls and arguing, they agreed to take my wheelchair as long as the height of the wheelchair was under a certain height. I’ve also had to wait up to a week to know if I can get booked on to a flight.” Lauramechelle Stewart from Port Glasgow said: “Jet2 have broken my wheelchair and are only taking responsibility for £1,000 of the damage. My chair is worth £5,000-£6,000.” Hayleigh Barclay from Prestwick said, in relation to the idea of travelling on a plane in her own wheelchair: “It would be a lot more comfortable as my own chair has been designed around my scoliosis etc. I also wouldn’t have to be transferred so this would eliminate more discomfort and humiliation. I also wouldn’t have to worry about my wheelchair being damaged or broken in the luggage bay.” Turning to the future, here are a couple of suggestions that came from the group who were involved in the report. Karis Williamson from Inverness said: “Stop charging money for things that you can’t help, e.g. equipment, wheelchairs and oxygen. Stop making me feel inhuman and like cargo. Take better care of wheelchairs and equipment.” Hayleigh Barclay went on to start a campaign called plane fair to encourage the aviation industry to put in place the new technology that would allow wheelchair users to remain seated in their chairs. Let us at least have on-board aisle chairs—Ryanair, Monarch, Thomson and Virgin all do it. There is nothing to prevent the other airlines from following suit. Let us get the industry to take action to make travel easier for disabled people. It does not take a lot of effort or money and it is absolutely the right thing to do.

There is no doubt that we are facing the worst cost-of-living crisis in almost a century. Hard-working families are struggling, pensioners are struggling and people without work are struggling. There is no doubt that people on low or fixed incomes are finding it extremely hard to make ends meet. Across Scotland, people are now facing electricity and gas bills landing on their doorsteps following inflation-busting increases by the energy companies, and we know that it is not just energy costs that are going up. The costs of food and housing have gone up, too, and across a basket of essential goods and services costs have risen by more than 25 per cent over the past five years. That is the estimate from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation and its work on minimum income standards. At the same time, incomes have at best stagnated and at worst, as in many cases, fallen in real terms. Since 2010, wages in Scotland in particular have fallen in real terms by more than £27 a week or about £1,420 a year. I think that we would all agree that that is a lot of money for someone who is low paid. It is therefore little wonder that people are being forced to make choices between heating and eating, rent arrears are spiking and the number of people who are using food banks has increased by a staggering 150 per cent. The number of households in fuel poverty is now likely to be nearer 900,000, and it is unlikely that the Scottish Government will meet the commitment to end fuel poverty by 2016. It is exactly at times like these that people expect help from the Government, whether that is the Scottish Government or indeed the United Kingdom Government. In the context of this budget debate, I genuinely believe that the Scottish Government is not focusing its budget on the scale required to make a substantial difference to the lived experience of hardship that people now have. I know that John Swinney faces many different and difficult policy choices, but we surely agree that tackling poverty and alleviating the cost-of-living crisis must be an increased priority. Given the context, it is perhaps not surprising that the fuel poverty and child poverty figures have not improved and that the suggestions are that they are beginning to go the wrong way. That paints a very different picture from that which the Conservatives who have spoken this afternoon have painted. I welcome the refresh of the child poverty strategy, but I echo a point in Save the Children’s briefing that was mentioned earlier. How will the budget support the aims of that vital strategy? I recognise that these are big challenges, but on tackling poverty, we surely have a shared ambition to find solutions that will help people now. On that basis, I turn to the bedroom tax. I start, of course, by welcoming Labour’s commitment to the abolition of the bedroom tax when we win the general election in 2015, and in the spirit of consensus I also welcome the SNP’s commitment to abolish the bedroom tax if it secures independence. In both cases, however, people who are suffering hardship as a result of this unfair and unjust tax will have to wait for two years or more before they get any relief. Meanwhile, arrears will mount and the fear and pressure on individuals and their families will remain. It really does not have to be that way. The Scottish Government can and should do something now. It has the power to do that; it just needs the political will. I was genuinely disappointed to hear the SNP’s previous excuse.

No. SNP members have quoted the Scotland Act 1998 three, if not four, times and I will deal with that. I was genuinely disappointed to hear the SNP’s excuse for its lack of action, which was that it did not want to let Westminster off the hook. I do not want to do that either, but the SNP implies by that position that it is content to leave some of the poorest people on the hook. However, we can and should do better. I believe that the view is shared across the chamber that the Scottish Parliament was created for times such as this. The debate has shifted to whether you have the power. I make it clear that, although the Scottish Government does not have the power to make social security payments to individuals, it has the power to make funding available to councils and housing associations in devolved policy areas. Housing and homelessness are entirely devolved—Michael McMahon’s comments highlighted that. What about a prevention of homelessness fund or a housing sustainability fund? Surely you agree that they would be useful vehicles to protect tenants from the bedroom tax. Alternatively, local government’s general power of wellbeing could be used.

Let me continue.

The required sum is £50 million, according to estimates from Shelter.

I have been told that I am in my final minute. I think that the cabinet secretary would acknowledge that that figure is a tiny drop in the ocean of his overall budget. I welcome the £20 million that he has provided for discretionary housing payments, but it is not enough—the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations echoed that point today. I have proposed a member’s bill to protect tenants from eviction because of arrears that are due to the bedroom tax. I am genuinely grateful to members across the chamber for their support, which means that the bill can move to the next stage. Whether I proceed is up to the Scottish Government. It has until 14 February—Valentine’s day—to give me its answer, but let us not wait, because we can do this. Tenants should not have to wait for the votes to be counted in the referendum or the next general election.

We can do this now. I look forward to meeting John Swinney in the next week or so, because I know that, if we work together, we can make this happen and axe the bedroom tax.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Like Rob Gibson, I start by congratulating John Finnie on securing the debate and on stealing everything that I was going to say. However, it bears repeating, so I shall do so. I also commend Oxfam for its lift lives for good campaign because, as John Finnie rightly said, its vision, which I believe is one that we all share, is of a just world without poverty. People who are empowered to do something about their own circumstances and who can, in turn, help lift others in their own communities out of poverty are an extremely powerful tool. Oxfam describes it as a chain reaction; others might suggest that it is a virtuous circle. One thing is clear, though: it has the potential to change lives and to lift people out of poverty for good. I will share with members one local example. I used to work with a community in which we empowered people by providing them with vocational and non-vocational training. We lifted a huge number of women who had no qualifications out of poverty by equipping them for the jobs market, and many of them went on to secure jobs. The one who I think of in particular had three children and no qualifications to her name, but she is now a teacher, and her three children have a very different role model. It is not just about the power of what she did to her family; the chain reaction that came from that impacted on the whole community, and she is now giving a lot back to that community. Empowering people does work; it changes lives. The point of the campaign is to raise funds so that Oxfam can continue with its good work on tackling the root causes of poverty. Its approach is based on smart aid, which is about helping people to help themselves. If we all do just one thing, or make just one intervention, and then we all disappear, the effect will not be as long-lasting or sustainable as it would be if we did something that the community could carry forward. Oxfam gives us a number of different examples. My favourite one is of the dairy co-ops in Sri Lanka. A family receives a cow, which is a very useful thing, and training in its care, so the family is given an asset and the skills in using that asset to benefit themselves and their community. I am not quite sure whether that exact example would work in Scotland, but I am sure that it is absolutely appropriate in Sri Lanka. We all know that there are lots of demands on Oxfam’s funds. It is right that John Finnie should have highlighted some of its achievements. In the past 10 years, 50 million more children in Africa have gone to school. Oxfam has responded to twice as many disasters as it did a decade ago. Through all that, it has ensured that 4.3 million people have improved access to clean water, 120,000 people have been helped with emergency services, and overall, in 2012-13 alone, Oxfam reached 13.5 million people across 54 countries. That is a huge achievement, but we all know that that work needs to continue and that the demands continue to grow. Like John Finnie, I do not often praise the UK Government. In fact, it would normally be a cold day in hell before I would praise the UK Government. However, on this occasion, I unreservedly welcome its commitment to match fund Oxfam’s efforts in raising funds. If we actually manage to raise £6 million through Oxfam, I wonder whether we could encourage the UK Government to match that and not put a cap of £5 million on its contribution. We know that Scotland has a very positive history of giving generously, including through Oxfam’s network of 51 shops, 12 bookshops—I use one regularly—and two specialist music shops. We have a positive culture of giving. All I can do is add to the words of John Finnie and Rob Gibson, when they suggested that, if we do nothing else, we should pop into Marks and Spencer, or one of the Oxfam shops, and give generously, because it has the power to transform lives.

I, too, thank the staff in West Dunbartonshire and Argyll and Bute for their work but I am sure that the minister will acknowledge that the areas that have flooded are those that have ever done so. Are the flood prevention schemes that are under development on the River Leven and Gruggies burn likely to attract Scottish Government support?

As it is Christmas, will the minister commission research to establish the number of young adults who need bespoke respite services so that the policy responses that he mentioned are evidence based?

5. To ask the First Minister when the Scottish Government will publish the next set of statistics for the Scottish welfare fund. (S4F-01785)

In this season of goodwill, let me thank the First Minister for his response and wish him a merry Christmas. I am sure that he will be aware, however, that for some families it will not be a very merry Christmas, due to their experience of poverty. Is it not the case that the First Minister promised publication of the statistics on the Scottish welfare fund in November? The date then slipped to December and now it is to be the middle of February next year. Is it not the case that his Government has failed to spend the money that is intended for the poorest, most destitute people in our communities? Is it not the case that publication is being delayed solely to hide the fact that in some areas as little as 11 per cent of the available money has been distributed?

There were 16 changes to the guidance.

I am an immigrant—I was born in Hong Kong to a Portuguese father and a Scottish mother. Although I came to this country in my teenage years—quite a long time ago, some might say—this is my home and where I choose to live and bring up my family. When the Home Office says, “Go home”, what is it saying to me? More important, what is saying to people who are seeking asylum? Many are fleeing from violence or to save their lives, and the reality is that many of them will not see family and friends again. Those are the tough choices that people face when they seek asylum. Some of us are just about old enough to remember the 1970s and the hate-filled and toxic rhetoric of the National Front, telling the newly arrived visible minority immigrants to go home. I do not accept that the Home Office campaign is in any way a coincidence, which makes it all the more appalling. It is beyond belief that the Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition would borrow from such right-wing racist ideology. For those who missed it, the campaign consisted of mobile billboards in London and a pilot poster campaign in the Glasgow and Hounslow reporting centres. The billboards asked: “In the UK illegally? GO HOME OR FACE ARREST”. There’s subtlety for you. How about the posters in Glasgow? One said: “Is life here hard? Going home is simple”. Another said: “This plane can take you home. We can book the tickets”. Yet another said: “Going home is as easy as 1, 2, 3”. One Scottish Refugee Council client, a woman awaiting asylum, had this to say: "The signs were everywhere in the Glasgow Reporting Centre—on the back of chairs, on the walls and on the steps. I had my three year old with me and he kept asking me what all the signs said, where the footprints on the floor led. There were huge pictures of homeless people. I didn't know what to say to him." What can one say about such a crude, insensitive and utterly appalling campaign? Theresa May should be ashamed of herself. It was, I think, a personal error of judgment; she signed off the vans, the slogans and the funding and defended them for months until her recent U-turn. It is fair to say that the billboards triggered not only a storm of protest across the United Kingdom but successful challenges to the Government. First, the courts determined that the Home Office had acted unlawfully by failing to have due regard to its public sector equality duty. Secondly, the Advertising Standards Authority determined that the figures quoted for arrests could not be substantiated and should be withdrawn. The ASA also concluded that the Home Office must not run the campaign again in its current form. The campaign had the potential to damage community relations and incite hatred against minority communities. Of course, it is part of a wider and more worrying approach by the UK Government, which I believe nurtures a deep and persistent hostility towards migration, especially those who are seeking asylum. Although the Immigration Bill, which is currently before the UK Parliament, contains provisions that would command support across the chamber, it also contains others that are deeply concerning. For example, the clauses on residential tenancies place a duty on private sector landlords and housing associations to check and monitor the immigration status of prospective and existing tenants, with little practical support from the Home Office and the prospect of a £3,000 fine for failing to do so. It will undoubtedly lead to discrimination in such housing, and it is totally impractical to burden landlords with no experience of dealing with immigration matters in such a way.

I do not agree with the member, but I believe that we need to get beyond the populist rhetoric and come up with evidence-based solutions. Let me be clear: I think that we all accept that there are people who come into the country who do not have protection needs and should therefore return to their country of origin. However, that is best done as part of the routine assessment carried out between a Home Office decision maker and the person who is seeking asylum, not through generic advertising of the kind that we witnessed in the go home campaign. I want to explode some myths on immigration. Myth 1 is that many immigrants come to the UK as benefit tourists. The truth is that only 38,000 claimants out of some 1.5 million people claiming jobseekers allowance came from other countries. Myth 2 is that immigrants are a burden on the UK economy. The truth is that immigrants contribute more than they take out of the economy—an amount that has been estimated at some £25 billion in the past decade alone. Myth 3 is that most immigrants to the UK are somehow unskilled. The truth is that 32 per cent of European Union immigrants and 43 per cent of non-EU immigrants held a university degree in comparison with 21 per cent of the UK population. Myth 4 is that most immigrants come to the UK and do not work. The truth is that, in 2012, labour market participation for foreign-born people was 73.7 per cent and their unemployment rate was 9.3 per cent—statistics that almost perfectly match those for the rest of the UK population. It is appropriate to have controls and to tackle illegal immigration, but we need a mature debate and policy that is based on evidence and understanding rather than ill-informed rhetoric.

I welcome Liam McArthur’s comments. Does he agree that the housing provisions in the Immigration Bill are inappropriate, and will he encourage his Lib Dem MPs to vote against them?

Are you going to continue it?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to tackle fuel poverty. (S4O-02730)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her response. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the recent fuel poverty figures do not take account of the energy price increases from the last quarter of 2012 or indeed the eye-watering energy price increases in 2013? Does she therefore agree that the level of fuel poverty is higher by almost 200,000 households than the level that she has specified in her report? On that basis, does the cabinet secretary believe that her Government will fulfil the commitment to end fuel poverty by 2016—a commitment that we, across the chamber, agreed to without qualification?

I, too, congratulate John Wilson on securing the debate and on his thoughtful and considered speech. As others have pointed out, the debate follows last week’s excellent debate led by my colleague Kez Dugdale on the regulation of payday lenders. It is fair to say that Ms Dugdale has led the debtbusters campaign in Scotland to considerable effect, highlighting the scandal of payday lending with companies charging extortionate rates of interest and taking advantage of people in recouping that loan. Clearly, as far as the minister is concerned, persistence works but I encourage him not to wait quite so long before responding to Ms Dugdale’s letters, e-mails and suggestions. In the past year, a number of payday lenders have sprung up in my local area—in fact, it is about the only growth in the high street—and they are charging a frankly outrageous annual percentage rate of almost 4000 per cent. We are facing a huge cost-of-living crisis of a kind that we have not seen for very many decades. Incomes are declining in real terms, costs have risen by more than 30 per cent in the past five years and people are in difficulty. There are alternatives, but we need to do more to raise awareness and point people in the right direction. As a result, I very much welcome the Scottish Government’s 12 days of debtmas campaign, which highlights credit unions’ valuable role in providing access to low-interest loans. The two credit unions in my area—Dumbarton Credit Union and the Vale of Leven Credit Union—do a fantastic job. Very much rooted in their communities, credit unions are member-owned co-operatives whose aim is to develop a responsible approach to money and encourage all of us to save. With their low-interest loans, which are usually repayable over a long period, they are growing all the time. Across Scotland, there are 108 credit unions, some based on a workplace, others based on where people live, and as many as 350,000 people have joined them. However, they have so much more potential, and that is the issue that I want to explore with the minister. I will digress for a minute, however, and mention that in the House of Commons Gareth Thomas MP has tabled a 10-minute rule motion that seeks to create a credit union for military personnel who are increasingly turning to payday loans to get by. I hope that Scottish National Party MPs and, indeed, Conservative MPs will support that, as it is particularly important. In my local area, we asked the council to advertise the credit union on its council tax notices, which are received by every household. It is considering that. We have also asked it to promote the super savers scheme, which gives every primary school child a credit union account with a small sum of money—£10, say—to kick off their saving habit. That, coupled with financial education that is provided by the credit union, can be a powerful tool to change habits in the next generation. A small sum of money could prevent a future spiral into debt. The Scottish Government should consider ways of promoting credit unions, perhaps on television or radio, that would support local activity at this time of year and all year round. I recall that the previous Scottish Executive had in place a credit union development plan entitled “Unlocking the Potential: An Action Plan for the Credit Union Movement in Scotland”, which was backed by considerable resources. I suspect that the current Scottish Government has also provided funding, but if we are to make a quantum difference to financial exclusion, we need to do much more to sustain credit unions. What specific measures will the minister implement to do so? In the short term, what about providing credit unions with assistance through a loan guarantee fund to enable them to offer more instant loans? In the long term, how can we encourage community credit unions to have people from all walks of life as their members? I look forward to the minister, in the spirit of Christmas, outlining the further measures that he will implement now to support credit unions.

I very much regret the necessity for the debate. I believe that all members across the chamber regret the fact that, in 21st century Scotland, we are still debating the increasing level of violence against women and the actions that must be taken to tackle its consequences. The abuse of women—whether domestic or otherwise—is rooted firmly in gender inequality. It is overwhelmingly perpetrated by men and, although it is often blamed on drink, drugs or the results of old firm games, we know the truth: the root cause is wider gender inequality. Such abuse is ultimately an abuse of power. We see that imbalance of power all around us—in the underrepresentation of women in the chamber, in the boards and senior management teams of our public bodies and in our justice system, to name but a few. While that imbalance of power continues, so will acts of violence against women. Members should make no mistake—abuse is no respecter of money or class; it can happen to any woman at any time. The behaviours that constitute abuse are not simply forms of physical violence; they also encompass mental and emotional abuse. Ultimately, that is all about control. We need to recognise that there is a continuum of abusive behaviour, which includes not only domestic abuse but stalking, harassment and other actions. The issues are interconnected and complex, but we need to be clear that whatever solutions are arrived at are firmly rooted in recognising that the issue is about gender inequality and an abuse of power. Unless we address that, we will—ultimately—not succeed. I will illustrate the continuum with the case of a paramedic called Maureen Gordon, who experienced abuse not just at home but at work. She worked for the Scottish Ambulance Service and so did her ex-partner, who was a manager. He engaged in what can only be described as a campaign of terror. He hounded her at work, tried to run her over in an Ambulance Service car, threatened to chop her head off with an axe and engaged in a range of other intimidating behaviours of which there are too many to name. Shop stewards in the GMB union complained to managers 29 times—and Maureen lost count of how many times she did so—in a two-year period, but the only result was that no apparent action was taken by the Ambulance Service. She had to take a case to the courts, where her ex-partner received a custodial sentence and the sheriff slammed the Ambulance Service for failing to act on her complaints. That should not happen in any workplace, never mind in a public sector organisation such as the Scottish Ambulance Service. I ask the Minister for Communities and Sport—or the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing—to meet Maureen Gordon and her trade union, the GMB, to discuss her experience as a matter of urgency. I think that we would all agree that her experience is a disgrace and must not be allowed to happen in the future. Maureen Gordon’s partner is now out of prison with a tag, having served only a matter of months. He has been seen waiting for her to show up outside her mother’s house and elsewhere. She appears to have been failed by her employers, and now by a justice system that allows her ex-partner to be out and about. Maureen’s experience is not isolated; the numbers of women who are experiencing domestic abuse are rising. In 2003-04 there were 40,000 incidents of reported domestic abuse, but by 2013-13 that figure had risen to 60,000, which we know is probably just the tip of the iceberg. The detail that lies behind the 2012-13 figures is worth considering. Of all the reported cases, 61 per cent involved repeat victimisation. Of that number, 30 per cent had experienced a single incident, another 30 per cent had experienced two or three, and 39 per cent had experienced four or more previous incidents.

I absolutely do, and I will talk about Police Scotland in a minute. Scottish Women’s Aid tells us that two women will be murdered each week by their partner or ex-partner, and Zero Tolerance backs that up with the very chilling statistic that for those in the 15 to 44 age group, men’s violence kills or incapacitates more women globally each year than cancer, malaria, road traffic accidents and war combined. It is clear that the scale of the problem remains. We used to talk about the three Ps—prevention, protection and prosecution—and I will address those elements in reverse order. On prosecution, we know that the domestic abuse courts are struggling, the case load is increasing and there is no additional resource to cope. There have been no prosecutions for female genital mutilation or for forced marriages, and there are very low numbers of prosecutions for trafficking, even though we know that those problems exist in Scotland. I very much welcome Police Scotland’s renewed focus and the priority that it places on tackling domestic abuse and rape, but we need to be sure that the courts have the capacity to back up its work. I hope that the minister shares that aspiration. On protection, I note that services are being cut despite demand increasing year on year. Women’s Aid reports that 92 per cent of its services are working with reduced budgets, a third have had to make cuts and a quarter have had to make staff redundant. The impact of that is that women are increasingly being turned away as refuges have closed or reduced their capacity. If we are to encourage women to leave their abusers, we must ensure that there is sufficient resource in place. Notwithstanding what the minister has said, I urge her to address the matter alongside the strategy with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Finally, prevention is where the real prize lies. Changing attitudes and cultures takes time, but it is absolutely where we need to be, and that is the type of action that we need to take. A 2005 survey on young people’s attitudes to gendered violence found that one in five young men believed that women provoked violence, and that one third of young men and one sixth of young women thought that using violence in an intimate relationship was somehow okay. The challenge that we face is changing their attitudes and culture so that we can change the acceptance of gendered violence in the next generation. While I note the delay in publishing the strategy for consultation, I hope that the minister takes the time to get it right. I know that she will bring all her skills to the task, and we are committed to working with her in doing so. We need nothing short of a revolution to end the abuse of women, and I look forward to the strategy providing the framework to do just that. I move amendment S4M-08612.2, to insert at end: “against a backdrop of an increase in the total recorded number of domestic abuse incidents.”

The paucity of the SNP’s ambition in housing policy is deeply depressing. We have heard again the tired old mantra that, if only we had independence, everything would be better—the sun would shine, Scotland would win the world cup and housing would be improved. However, responsibility for housing is devolved, so there is nothing to stop the SNP taking action now. Like Patrick Harvie, I will focus on what the Scottish Government can do. Since the advent of devolution, the Scottish Parliament has passed some of the most progressive homelessness legislation in the world. Along with ending child poverty, eradicating rough sleeping and tackling homelessness were major objectives of the first Labour Scottish Executive. We established a homelessness task force to review the nature and causes of homelessness, and its recommendations fundamentally changed our approach. For the first time, we delivered a rights-based framework that put us at the forefront of the global fight against homelessness. We phased out priority need, although they told us that we could not do that. No longer are homeless applicants assessed and categorised regardless of the underlying cause of their homelessness. All are now entitled to settled accommodation. The current Government has built on that and has introduced housing options. On the face of it, that approach is needs based and rooted in prevention. However, I say genuinely that there is a sneaking suspicion that it is masking the true level of homelessness and that the figures are being massaged. Whether or not that is right, I hope that the minister will commit to urgent research on the subject, because the SNP must not be complacent about that. I am proud of our achievement, but it is not a case of job done. Huge challenges are ahead. As the cost of living increases and as incomes decline in real terms, more people and families will be plunged into crisis. For some, austerity will mean being driven from their homes by mortgage repossessions; others will just be unable to sustain their tenancies. Anecdotal evidence suggests that more people are sleeping rough on our streets—contrary to what the minister said. I hope that I do not need to tell her how brutal an existence that is. Suffice it to say that a man who was sleeping rough outside Glasgow Central station a few weeks ago died of hypothermia. This is 21st century Scotland—the SNP must do better than that. I want the SNP Government to instruct a count of rough sleepers and I have asked the minister to do that. Why will the Government not do that? The minister sticks her head in the sand, in denial that there is a problem, but the problem is growing. There is no data to inform action and the Government is taking no specific action on rough sleeping. An overview of homelessness data in the past 10 years, which I commend to the minister for careful consideration, shows that, although the number of applications and homelessness assessments has reduced, the number of households that are assessed as intentionally homeless has increased. The most recent quarterly data on homelessness reported that, of the 5,500 unintentionally homeless households whose case was closed, 76 per cent secured a local authority, housing association or private let as an outcome. That is welcome, but it means that 24 per cent did not achieve a positive outcome. That proportion has remained the same for the past six years. What is happening to those people? The Scottish Government does not know. The minister requires to take urgent action on the issue. That is her responsibility and the Scottish Government’s responsibility; it is not the responsibility of Westminster or anybody else. It is in the Scottish Government’s power to do something now. We know that changes to housing legislation—along with the lack of social housing and an increase in demand—have triggered an exponential increase in the number of households in temporary accommodation. According to the Government’s statistics, as of June of this year there were 10,494 households in temporary accommodation. That is a significant increase since 2007 and we need to understand why. Those households in turn contain 4,574 children. That is 1,000 more children in temporary accommodation than there were a decade ago. I said earlier that homelessness is not simply about bricks and mortar, but we have to ask serious questions of the Government when it has taken decisions to slash the house-building budget in recent years by tens of millions of pounds. While the number of temporary households remains so high, those genuinely seem to be perverse decisions to make. Temporary accommodation will, for many, represent that crucial first step away from homelessness and towards a home. If we are to minimise the trauma that we know is associated with becoming homeless, we have a duty to ensure that the standard of temporary accommodation is as high as possible, especially when we consider that many individuals and many families can spend not just months but perhaps even years in temporary accommodation. The evidence is there. We know the serious impact that temporary accommodation has on a child’s development and wellbeing, so I genuinely say to the minister that in light of the growth of temporary accommodation, it is absolutely critical that the Scottish Government does not delay further and introduces statutory standards for temporary housing. Housing in Scotland is in crisis. There is urgent action that the Scottish Government and the minister can take. The minister has demonstrated breathtaking complacency. I hope that she will finally take the veil from her eyes and do something to help people in Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

How about standards for temporary accommodation? How about actually looking at what is going on with the homeless register? How about actually dealing with rough sleeping, which the member’s Government is doing nothing about? How about that?

Will Mike MacKenzie take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

The Deputy First Minister will know that pensions make up about 40 per cent of the social security budget, but there was not one word about pensions in her statement. Is that because she has no answers? There are no answers on how cross-border pension schemes will be funded, no answer to the fact that pensions will cost more in Scotland due to the population ageing faster and no answer on the cost of pensions overall. [Interruption.]

Is it not the case that the Office for National Statistics, the National Records of Scotland, the Institute for Fiscal Studies, the Scottish Government’s fiscal commission and even John Swinney have acknowledged that maintaining pensions in an independent Scotland would present a huge problem? Is it not true that the pensioners in Scotland face a stark choice? They can either believe the facts from experts or believe the assertions from the SNP.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the effectiveness of the national 5 and higher mathematics unit assessments. (S4O-02598)

The minister will of course be aware that concerns have been raised about the effectiveness of the unit assessments in the national press and, perhaps more important, by individual teachers. A number of teachers have commented to me that the documentation for assessment is ambiguous and repetitive, layout is poor and marking instructions are poorly designed. Does the minister agree that the lack of detail is worrying in terms of consistency of marking across centres? What action will he take to ensure that the assessment process is improved?

I am pleased to participate in this stage 1 debate on the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill. At the outset, I commend the Scottish Government unreservedly—not something that I do terribly often—for its work on the bill. I also commend the members and clerks of the Equal Opportunities Committee for their diligence in scrutinising the bill at stage 1. I associate myself with the cabinet secretary’s remarks about Mary Fee, the former convener of the committee, and Margaret McCulloch, the current convener. Undoubtedly, there has been a volume of evidence in favour of and against the bill, and the committee’s stage 1 report is a comprehensive record of that evidence and the process of the committee’s consideration. The report notes that the majority of the committee supports the general principles of the bill, but the convener was right to remind us that the decision will be a matter for individual members, as I believe that all parties have agreed that there will be a free vote. Ultimately, it is a matter for each of us in the Parliament. I therefore recommend that all members read the stage 1 report. I know that it is long, but it helpfully sets out the arguments and, where there are concerns, the scope for amendments. I will come on to consider some of those concerns. For me, though, the bill is about equality, fairness, social justice and the values that were instilled in me by my parents, my community and society. For many of us, the bill is also about how we see ourselves as a nation and how others see us. It is about the values that we hold and whether Scotland is indeed a confident progressive nation where equality is truly valued. Most members will have received a considerable volume of correspondence on equal marriage, both for and against. Many of the arguments are detailed and the views are passionately held. Some members even received emails as we were walking into the chamber, never mind late last night. I thank people for giving their time and energy to inform the debate. It is true that attitudes in Scotland are changing. The Scottish social attitudes survey in 2002 showed that 41 per cent of people were in favour of same-sex marriage and 19 per cent were against. In the same social attitudes survey, but this time in 2010, the proportion of people who were in favour of same-sex marriage had risen to 61 per cent. A shift of 20 per cent in opinion on any issue in such a short space of time is, frankly, astonishing. If we begin to unpack the detail, we find that support for equal marriage can be found in those who are religious, in people from across all income groups and all geographic areas of Scotland. The support cuts right across our country and right across our society. In the survey, 55 per cent of those who identified themselves as Catholic supported same-sex marriage and 21 per cent were opposed. Among Scottish Presbyterians, 50 per cent supported same-sex marriage and 25 per cent were against. Of those living in the most deprived areas, 67 per cent support same-sex marriage, while the figure for those who live in the most affluent areas is 63 per cent. Frankly, it makes no difference whether someone lives in urban or rural Scotland, because support for same-sex marriage is roughly the same and consistently above 60 per cent. There is no doubt about current public attitudes. I read with much interest the evidence to the committee from Professor John Curtice, whom many members will know better for inhabiting television studios in the wee small hours of the morning, sharing his wisdom on elections and voting behaviour. He described to the committee a cultural shift in Britain over the past 30 years. According to Professor Curtice, in 1983, 62 per cent of the population believed that same-sex relationships were mostly or always wrong. That figure has dropped to 28 per cent, which is quite extraordinary. His explanation for that shift is that it is young people who increasingly support same-sex marriage. The Equality Network backs that up and tells us that support for same-sex marriage is highest among those who are under 55. I, like many in this chamber, take it as a compliment that being under 55 is still considered to be young. Joking apart, there is robust and credible evidence of changing views in our society and support for equal marriage. It is also useful to consider what has happened in other countries that have legislated for same-sex marriage. In Europe, since 2001, we have seen the Netherlands, Belgium, Spain, Portugal, Norway, Sweden, Iceland, Denmark, France, and, most recently, England and Wales, provide equal marriage rights for same-sex couples. In Canada, South Africa, Argentina, New Zealand, Uruguay, Brazil and 17 states in America, equal marriage is the norm. I know Portugal quite well. Like Christian Allard, one of my parents was Portuguese. Eighty one per cent of Portugal’s population describe themselves as Catholics, which is a huge proportion of any country and is, without doubt, a significant number. In 2009, Portugal passed its law to allow same-sex marriage. There is no doubt that that was hotly contested, and it was passed to the constitutional courts for review. In 2010, those same courts said that the law was perfectly legal and the then president, Cavaco Silva, signed it off and there have been same-sex marriages ever since. Interestingly, when I asked one Portuguese friend, who is quite religious, about the legislation he said, “It is about love. There should be no difference whether it is a man or a woman or they are the same sex; it is whether they love each other that really matters.” When the Parliament passed a law on civil partnerships, we took a huge step forward. Same-sex couples had the legal rights associated with marriage. However, I recognise that that, for some, falls far short of marriage in which their love and commitment is fully recognised. The Equality Network talks about a gold standard; for me, it is a matter of equality and fairness. For a host of reasons, I believe that equal marriage is an idea whose time has come and I will support the general principles of the bill. That said, very few in this chamber are deaf to the concerns that have been raised. The principal area of concern appears to relate to the protections put in place by the Scottish Government. It is the case that no religious or belief body can be forced to perform a same-sex marriage. It is also the case that celebrants will not be forced to perform a same-sex marriage if it is against their beliefs. I agree. Those are matters of doctrine and belief that are properly for the church and not the state.

I will in a second. Religions can and do refuse to marry people. That is a matter for them; it is not proposed that that will change.

I am never keen to give up time to the member, but I am glad that we are in agreement. I welcome that point because it is important. However, I acknowledge that some people are concerned that even those protections might be challenged in the courts. I therefore very much welcome the arrangement between the Scottish and UK Governments to amend the UK Equality Act 2010. The 2010 act contains provisions about not discriminating when providing a service, with exemptions for religious and belief bodies that apply in certain circumstances. The Scottish Government has rightly sought the protection to be more comprehensive by asking for a further amendment that would help to allay fears about challenges being brought on grounds of discrimination. It is helpful that an agreement has been reached with the UK Government on that point. Concerns have also been expressed about whether it would affect someone’s employment if they held views that were opposed to same-sex marriage. The example most often cited is that teachers would be somehow forced out of their job if they refused to teach about same-sex marriage because they were fundamentally opposed to it. I think that we all acknowledge that teachers deal with difficult situations every day in schools. In the main, they do so sensitively—they balance their beliefs with the needs of the child or children before them. It would be wrong to put something in the bill when education circulars and guidance have served us extremely well in the past. Existing legislative provision allows parents to withdraw their children from religious education. Existing guidance allows parents to withdraw their children from sexual health education. I welcome the Scottish Government’s proposal to update that guidance to reflect the introduction of same-sex marriage. Faith aspects of the curriculum in Catholic schools will continue to be a matter for the Scottish Catholic Education Service. However, it is important for the Scottish Government to review any suggested impact on education, to make doubly sure of the position. Like many other members, I have received thoughtful letters from teachers who support the proposal and teachers who are concerned about how to deal with same-sex marriage, so updated guidance will undoubtedly be helpful. I have no doubt that amendments will be lodged with the aim of respecting the right of those who, as a result of their religious beliefs, take the traditional view of marriage as being between a man and a woman. Concerns have also been highlighted about freedom of speech. I note that the Lord Advocate has published guidance on the matter, which refers to provisions in the European Convention on Human Rights and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union on the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, along with freedom of expression. However, concerns remain. It is right for the Parliament to explore the subject again and ensure that the arrangements are robust. The committee has also asked the Scottish Government to look again at the gender recognition provisions in the bill and at policy areas such as gender-neutral language and spousal consent for gender recognition. I have not had time to explore in detail all the issues that the committee raised but, Presiding Officer, you will have the fortune—or misfortune, depending on your view—to hear from me again in the closing speeches. I hope that members will support the bill’s general principles at decision time. We and the Scottish Government have work to do to improve the bill and make it more robust. We must have adequate protections that genuinely address people’s concerns, but it is time for change. It is time to support equal marriage.

In the main, this has been a good and mature debate. I was struck by many of the speeches, as I am sure that many members were. Some members spoke from a very personal perspective and others made humorous speeches. I have no time to mention them all, but I will attempt to cover some of the territory. Ruth Davidson was right when she said that marriage is a good thing—I have been married for almost 30 years, and I keep telling myself that it is a good thing. She was right to talk about the value of extending marriage as an institution. She made a personal and powerful contribution to the debate, which should give us all pause for thought. What we do tonight matters for the future nature of our country and for our young people. Marco Biagi talked about how he felt as he grew up. I know the area where he grew up, and it can sometimes be pretty unforgiving. He talked about how he was made to feel different and somehow less deserving. His testimony of his personal journey richly informed our debate. I will disagree with Mary Fee, which is always a dangerous thing to do. She said that attitudes are changing at a snail’s pace. I think that she is wrong. Society’s attitudes are changing much faster than we are able to keep up with them. In the 2002 Scottish social attitudes survey, 41 per cent of people were in favour of same-sex marriage. By 2010, a mere eight years later, 61 per cent favoured same-sex marriage. A 20 per cent shift in opinion, on any issue, in such a short time is hugely significant. John Mason talked about the importance of tolerating different points of view. Our debates in the Parliament are often robust, and rightly so, but we need to move forward together. His concern, which is shared by some people inside and outside the Parliament, is that the protections are not sufficiently robust. I might well think that they are sufficiently robust, but I know that the cabinet secretary will want to look at the matter, so that we are assured that the provisions that he makes with the UK Government to amend the Equality Act 2010 are indeed sufficiently robust. However, I am mindful that in the 10 European countries that I listed earlier—the Netherlands, Belgium, Spain, Portugal, Norway, Sweden, Iceland, Denmark, France, and, most recently, England and Wales—which have all passed same-sex marriage laws, no religious or belief body or celebrant has been forced to conduct a same-sex marriage. I accept that same-sex marriage legislation was introduced only recently in England and Wales, but no such claim can be made of the other countries. Same-sex marriage legislation was passed in the Netherlands in 2001, in Belgium in 2003 and in Spain in 2005—I could go on, but just in the countries that I mentioned the laws were passed 12 years ago, 10 years ago and eight years ago respectively, which is quite a period over which to be able to judge whether the protections are sufficiently robust and whether any church or celebrant has been forced to do something.

Many countries are moving in the direction of wanting to ensure that there is more equality and are taking appropriate steps forward, but ultimately it is a matter of equality. Of course we need to ensure that protections are in place, but that does not remove the need to ensure that we operate as an equal nation. Some members, such as Elaine Smith, Richard Lyle and Margaret Mitchell, have spoken against the bill. I respect their right to hold a different view, but I think that they are—quite simply—wrong. Margaret McCulloch spoke about agreeing to differ, and Joan McAlpine rightly picked up on that theme. Our society is actually quite mature. We do not always agree with one another—one needs only to look at the chamber to see the truth of that—but we can walk out of the chamber and still work together.

I will in a moment. Joan McAlpine was right to reflect that our society will do just that. We are tolerant of one another, and we come to accommodations with one another—that is life, and that is how we live it. I am happy to give way to Bob Doris.

I could not agree more. Jim Eadie, like Bob Doris, set out—in a very powerful speech—how the bill will expand freedom for belief organisations that want to marry same-sex couples, and how it will strengthen marriage. I agree completely with Bob Doris, which must be a first for him. Drew Smith and Patrick Harvie spoke about repealing section 28 and our pride in doing so; I thank Drew for making me feel old and reminding me that he was at school then. He is right to remember that the repeal of section 28 was not without consequences—often serious—for members of the LGBT community, as they had to deal with some of the hysteria and homophobic bullying that surrounded it. We need to ensure that that does not happen again. James Dornan mentioned the bill’s ability to strengthen marriage and spoke about the experience of his brother Michael; we all look forward to receiving our invitations to the wedding in Lisbon, now that we know about it. The debate has been extraordinarily interesting. Elaine Murray and Patrick Harvie remarked on how extraordinary it was that there was agreement across the chamber—indeed, Patrick noted that it was probably the first time that he has applauded Ruth Davidson with such enthusiasm. That may well be true for many of us. It is not often that I find myself in complete agreement with Alex Neil and Mark McDonald—and even, for goodness’ sake, Kevin Stewart; it must be a truly historic day. Elaine Murray was right to remind us about the glorious diversity of human beings, even those whom she described as being vertically challenged. We are all different, and that is what makes us all so interesting. Whatever that difference is, we should be tolerant of one another, but we should respect and celebrate our difference, because that is the tapestry of our nation. For me, and for many members on all sides of the chamber, the legislation is about equality, fairness, social justice and values that I believe we all share. I know that some may be hesitating tonight, but I ask them to think for a moment. What if your son or daughter is unsure about their sexuality? What if they have a same-sex partner? Do you really want to deny them the opportunity to marry? I hope not. I urge all members to support the general principles of the bill to ensure that the next generation can marry the person they love.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will George Adam give way?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it can provide from the culture and external affairs budget to the paddle steamer, the Maid of the Loch, so that it can sail again on Loch Lomond. (S4O-02580)

I thank the cabinet secretary for what I thought was getting to be a positive response. If she cannot manage anything this year, I am happy to wait until next year. The cabinet secretary will be aware that the Maid of the Loch’s owners started an appeal earlier this year to try to get the Maid to sail again on Loch Lomond. It is without doubt an iconic heritage attraction that will help position not just Loch Lomond but Scotland as an international destination. I am aware of yesterday’s meeting, but I wonder whether I could press the cabinet secretary just a little bit more to talk about what support can be offered. Indeed, I invite her out to the constituency to see the progress on the Maid.

I congratulate Dennis Robertson on securing debating time for this issue and on the power of his contribution. We know that hundreds of people seek assistance every year from the national health service for eating disorders, and we also know that they are predominantly but not exclusively women. That said, we do not actually know how many people are suffering in silence without any support. The size 10 model or mannequin is not the sole reason for eating disorders—Dennis Robertson said that very well—but it has an impact by playing into the gender stereotype of the so-called perfect woman. The dimensions of that perfect woman bear little resemblance to reality, and I will return to that issue later. There is an impact. The Royal College of Psychiatrists published a report on eating disorders and media influence in 2010. It found that images of the perfect, airbrushed, pre-teen body type as something that is attainable and the marginalisation of eating disorders are the norm in the media. There was clear evidence of the propagation of unattainable body ideals. Size 10 mannequins and models are the fashion industry’s expression of that. However, it has to be said that mannequins were not always that skinny. They have lost weight over the years. Let us not forget that the mannequins of the 1950s and 1960s all portrayed a far more curvy female form than they do today, such as that of Marilyn Monroe. Nowadays, even supermodels are considered to be insufficiently skinny. Look at what happened to supermodel Christy Turlington—the mannequin that was based on her body size was slimmed down, which is entirely ridiculous given how slim she is already. With due respect to our supermodels, none of them resembles the real women whom we see on our high streets, in our communities or, dare I say it, in this chamber. I hope that retailers are beginning to understand that. I join in the chorus of congratulations to Debenhams on using size 16 mannequins, starting with its shop in Oxford Street. Like Dennis Robertson, I hope that that will spread nationwide. We know that Marks and Spencer and TK Maxx have already taken steps to promote body confidence through marketing, and that is great. There is a clear business case for using mannequins and models that are over size 10. There is interesting research out there, but the results are not really surprising when we think about them. That research, from the University of Cambridge, suggests that—surprise, surprise—women are more likely to purchase clothing if they see models who are the same size as themselves. That seems to be common sense, but the data are staggering. Women’s purchasing intentions increased by 200 per cent—and believe me, we are ready to shop at the drop of a hat anyway—for same-size models, and dropped by 64 per cent when the models were just too skinny. I described it as the imagine-yourself-in-that-outfit effect. Same-size models make business sense for retailers. I am told that the average dress size in the United Kingdom is a 16, but many mannequins are a size 6 not a size 10, and I do not even begin to understand what size zero is all about. I will finish with some information about the Barbie doll, which I thought was fascinating. Every second that passes, two Barbie dolls are sold worldwide. The target market is young girls aged from three to 12. It is a multibillion pound industry each year. Barbie is 5 foot 9 inches tall, she has an 18 inch waist and her ideal weight is 110 pounds. Slumber party Barbie, introduced in 1965, comes with the bathroom scale permanently set at 110 pounds and a book entitled “How to lose weight”, with directions inside simply stating, “Don’t eat.” Let us not make the same mistake with the next generation of women; let us stop objectifying them and understand that we all come in different shapes and sizes.

I hope that the minister is aware of the help us be spontaneous or HUBS campaign, which was launched by young members of Enable Scotland. They lodged a petition with Parliament about reducing the notice period for disabled passengers who wish to travel by train. What more can the minister do to make freedom of travel a reality, and assist disabled people to live independent lives?

Who can forget the excitement of the Olympic games? Just last year, in homes throughout the country, we witnessed the dedication and achievement of our British athletes. We cheered them on, whether it was Andy Murray winning a gold medal for tennis, Sir Chris Hoy winning gold for cycling or Jessica Ennis winning gold in the heptathlon. What achievements! I remember, as others will, the wall-to-wall coverage in our broadcast and print media. It was one of our most successful games ever and we rightly celebrated. In that context, 36-year-old Lucy-Anne Holmes, an actress and writer, noticed that the largest female picture in The Sun on the day was not of Jessica Ennis celebrating her gold-winning performance, but of a topless page 3 model. Lucy-Anne wrote to the editor of The Sun, calling on him to drop the feature, and her letter soon became an online petition that has garnered more than 122,000 signatures. I welcome supporters of the no more page 3 campaign to the gallery this evening. The campaign’s slogan is, “Say no to the wrong things and the right things will happen.” Today, we are saying that there should be no more page 3 in Scotland. I hope that the editor of The Scottish Sun, Gordon Smart, will do the right thing. I strongly encourage him to take his newspaper into the 21st century by consigning page 3 to the dustbin of history.

I thank Annabel Goldie—I will take all supporters. The Scottish Sun is one of the biggest-selling daily Scottish newspapers. It is read by hundreds of thousands of people every day, all of whom are subjected to a picture of a half-naked woman over their cornflakes, on the train or bus to work or in their workplace. The picture is not just on page 3, either, because the model is sometimes advertised on page 1, so there is no getting away from it. I am told that The Sun does not print pictures of half-naked women at the weekends out of consideration for children. Where on earth does it think those children are during the week? Page 3 is a throwback to the 1970s. It is a relic of the male-dominated, smoke-filled press room that rightly belongs in the past. It belongs to a long-gone era, and it is well past its sell-by date. “Tired”, “demeaning”, “depressing”, “disrespectful” and “embarrassing” are just some of the terms that are used to describe page 3. Women are not objects, so I ask The Sun to stop treating us as though we are. Men are usually portrayed in the media as doing things, achieving things and conveying important information, and they do not do any of it half naked. Page 3 not only objectifies women, but glorifies and celebrates the objectification of women. The Sun cannot style itself as a family newspaper and pretend that female nudity is just a bit of harmless fun. Objectification is all about power: the strong objectify, and the weak—or those who are perceived to be weak—are objectified. Page 3 perpetuates defunct and discredited gender stereotypes that portray women as the weaker sex, sweet and silent—although members will find that hard to believe about me. When we stop and think, we see that page 3 feeds into the wider narrative of gender inequality. Yesterday, we rightly debated domestic abuse and identified that abuse, at its root, as an abuse of power. That abuse of power arises from inequality between the genders, and page 3 affords inequality mainstream legitimacy. Some of us are old enough to remember Clare Short trying to introduce legislation to ban page 3 in 1987. She was vilified. The Sun and others described her as—wait for it—“fat”, “ugly” and “jealous”. However they describe those of us who contribute to the debate this evening, we should make no mistake that there is a movement of men and women, young and old alike, who want to see an end to page 3. I will give members an idea of the campaign’s supporters. The organisations include Girlguiding UK, the Girls Brigade, the British Youth Council, Women’s Aid, Rape Crisis, Unison, the National Association of Teachers, the National Association of Head Teachers—the list goes on and on. The National Assembly of Wales has already backed unanimously a motion to demand an end to page 3. Rebecca Evans AM, said: “Page Three normalises the trivial objectification of women, entrenches inequality and sexist attitudes, and, well, quite simply, half-naked women just aren’t news!” I could not have put it better myself. Let me be clear that support for the campaign is not only from politicians. Girlguiding UK said: “The Sun is a family newspaper. Anyone can pick it up, turn to Page 3, and think that it is normal for young women to be treated as objects. This is just wrong. It is impossible to nurture your ambitions if you are constantly told that you aren’t the same as your male equivalent. It is disrespectful and embarrassing. We need to get used to the idea that women are not for sale.” Let me tell members about Terri Smith. She is a member of the Scottish Youth Parliament for Edinburgh North and Leith who lodged a motion calling for no more page 3. The motion was passed overwhelmingly and is now SYP policy. That is the next generation of newspaper readers making it abundantly clear that they do not support page 3. I ask Gordon to do the “Smart” thing and remove page 3. The Irish Sun has done so; The Scottish Sun can do likewise. Page 3 does not sell newspapers; news content sells newspapers. I hope that the minister will confirm the Government’s support for the campaign. Let us together consign page 3 to the dustbin of history, where it rightly belongs.

I congratulate Sandra White on securing this debating time and on the subject of her motion. I also congratulate Glasgow Women’s Aid on its 40th anniversary. Sandra was right about Edinburgh Women’s Aid: one of her colleagues lodged a motion today that congratulates it on its 40th anniversary, too. We have come a long way since those early days, but it is a matter of considerable regret that domestic abuse is very much still with us. Like many colleagues in this chamber, I have participated in many debates in which we hear people assume that domestic abuse is somehow caused by drink, drugs or stress. I am in no doubt that those factors can contribute, but let us be clear about the root cause. It is not exclusively a problem for women from poorer backgrounds; domestic abuse is not a respecter of class or income. At its root it is an abuse of power, and while men still hold more power than women in our society, unfortunately the problem will continue, as that disparity means that women are somehow viewed as having fewer rights than men. It is essential that our approach is about both challenging society’s view and that imbalance of power, as well as practically helping women and their children leave abusive partners. I remember volunteering for Strathkelvin Women’s Aid a very long time ago indeed. At that point there was limited refuge accommodation, little dedicated support for the children and little follow-on support for the women themselves. The services were patchy right across Scotland. That experience has now been transformed. In Glasgow, for example, there is now practical support with benefits advice, access to lawyers, and support plans that consider emotional needs as well as practical and financial needs. There is also follow-on support to help women in new communities, so that the transition from the refuge to a new home is as smooth as possible. Accommodation has also been transformed. Glasgow Women’s Aid now offers self-contained flats, shared accommodation and satellite flats. That is a long way from its starting point, which Sandra White outlined. I well remember our £10 million capital fund to increase refuge accommodation so that wherever in Scotland someone lived, they would have access to a refuge place. I credit all successive Governments, whether Labour or the Scottish National Party, because funding has increased year on year. We need to continue to provide that level of support, because the incidence of reported domestic abuse is increasing. I hope that that is because more women feel able to come forward and that the numbers are not increasing overall, but we need to keep a close eye on things. Labour established domestic abuse courts in Glasgow in 2005 and there was a second pilot in Edinburgh and clusters elsewhere, but we need to be vigilant. The courts are becoming overloaded, particularly in Glasgow, and they must be afforded the capacity to deal with the volume of cases presented. In 2012-13 there were 60,000 reported cases, which is up from 53,000 in 2008-09. Importantly, the number of cases then reported on to the Procurator Fiscal Service has risen from 51 per cent in 2003-04 to 78 per cent last year, so we see the pressure. Many of those cases—as much as 61 per cent of cases last year—involved repeat offenders, and that is the challenge. Despite the hard-hitting advertising campaign and the success of women’s aid, the need for what it does remains to this day. When we look at the figures for repeat offenders, it is evident that we need to do much more to challenge the imbalance of power, and to challenge those in the next generation who think that it is okay in certain circumstances to hit a woman. Changing attitudes and culture is of critical importance to this agenda and we absolutely need to bring renewed focus to our work, particularly with young people, to bring about that shift in a generation’s attitudes. Sandra White was right to say that prevention is key. Finally, I congratulate Glasgow Women’s Aid and all the women’s aid groups across Scotland. What they do is critically important but we need to look at what we can do to support them in their endeavours, and we need to increase the amount of support that we give them. Sandra White is absolutely right to say that we need to increase our focus on prevention.

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take to deal with the reported underrepresentation of women on the boards and senior management teams of public bodies. (S4F-01642)

As ever, I thank the First Minister for that response. Increasing female representation on boards and in the senior management teams of public bodies is a shared ambition across the chamber. However, I have to say that it is disappointing that the Scottish National Party and the First Minister default to their usual position that they do not have the powers, because there are things that we can do. Can we assume that the First Minister supports his own Government’s diversity strategy, which was launched five years ago and includes a target—[Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Can we assume that the First Minister supports his own Government’s diversity strategy, which was announced and launched five years ago and which includes a target of 40 per cent of applications for board appointments coming from women? Will he tell us why his Government failed to reach that target, with the number of applications short by something like 25 per cent, given the fact that he already has the powers to do something about it?

I join other members in congratulating Jim Hume on securing time for the debate and on his very thoughtful speech. It is appropriate that we recognise the work of the citizens advice bureaux and Citizens Advice Scotland. They deliver front-line, essential advice to many people, both young and old, in our communities across Scotland. With the serious cost-of-living crisis that people face, the numbers who are appearing at their doors is increasing exponentially. Apparently, there have been half a million new inquiries from more than 200,000 clients just in the past year, and the figures will undoubtedly go up. Jim Hume rightly praised the work of Roxburgh and Berwickshire CAB. We have received a briefing on Motherwell and Wishaw Citizens Advice Bureau’s reachout project for young people, and members have spoken positively about their local services. I will join in, as I want to speak in equally positive terms about West Dunbartonshire Citizens Advice Bureau. Not content with providing advice on a range of issues, from out-of-work benefits to disability allowances, child tax credits and pensions—all CABx do that exceptionally well—CABx go further. That illustrates their creativity in responding to local needs, as has been done in Roxburgh and Berwickshire. They look beyond the immediate problem and focus on practical solutions. Their hallmark is that they work in partnership with others in our local areas to help some of the most vulnerable people. I will give a couple of examples of what we are doing in West Dunbartonshire, starting with food banks. West Dunbartonshire CAB is at the forefront of organising and supporting volunteers for the food bank in our area. Staffed by volunteers, many of whom are young people, and working with the churches, the CAB has helped to organise food collections, bag packing to raise money to expand what it can do, and the distribution of parcels to those who are most in need. The CAB has done those things because it has recognised that there is a growing need for the service in its area. We know that the numbers of people who use food banks have increased enormously. Figures produced by the Trussell Trust show that 4,500 families in Scotland used food banks a year ago, but the number has increased to almost 15,000. The trust provides only a proportion of those food banks, and we know that there are different local arrangements across Scotland. Of those who depend on food banks, about a third are children and about a fifth are employed. It is increasingly clear that we are facing a cost-of-living crisis—that is something that the CAB is taking action on, and it affects young people, too. Then there is the CAB’s activity on payday lending. On our high street we have four payday lenders, which charge huge interest rates—in one case, rates in excess of 3,000 per cent. I sent my staff to check that figure again because I thought that there was a typing error, but it is indeed 3,000 per cent. Such rates suck people into a spiral of debt from which there is little real chance of escape. Some young people who are in work are having to go to payday lenders because, they tell us, the salary that they get, whether it is weekly or monthly, does not last as long as it did previously. It is just not going far enough because their incomes have declined in real terms and the costs of basics have risen by some 25 per cent in the past five years. Providing practical advice is important, but so is providing practical support for people in the community who are struggling, and that is where the reach out project in Motherwell and the youthinfo@CAB project in Roxburgh and Berwickshire come into their own, because they recognise the need for advice and support for 16 to 25-year-olds. Whether they relate to money, housing or jobs, preventative advice and information are critical at a time when unemployment is rising. It is difficult enough for people to negotiate what is a changing workplace, never mind a changing community. We all owe a debt of gratitude to citizens advice bureaux and their volunteers, young and old alike. We thank them for their efforts on our behalf.

I apologise to you and to members, Presiding Officer, for missing the start of Nigel Don’s excellent speech. I was in a car park called the Forth road bridge: nothing was moving very fast at all. As others have done, I congratulate Nigel Don on securing this slot. I have to declare an interest; I have already been outed as one of the two honorary vice-presidents of Energy Action Scotland. I should warn Nigel Don, though, that the previous honorary vice-presidents—certainly on the Scottish National Party side—have ended up becoming ministers. Indeed, I believe that his predecessor was Alex Neil, who did not last long before he was enjoying ministerial office. I look forward to that happening to Nigel Don, too. As other members have done, I pay enormous tribute to the work of Energy Action Scotland. It is a superb organisation, and Parliament has been united in praise for it. Whether it is about getting its voice heard on the key issues of fuel poverty, about making a difference with the “Keeping Warm, Keeping Well” leaflets, which are distributed through general practitioners for the benefit of people who are struggling to keep warm at home, or about its strategic affordable warmth fund, through which it is helping six rural housing associations, it is making a huge difference in communities throughout Scotland. Energy Action Scotland does not just talk about it; it is interested in developing solutions to deal with the problem of cold, damp and expensive-to-heat homes. It sits on the Scottish fuel poverty forum and I am sure that it will be a critical friend to the minister, because it wants to strive to achieve even more. Its members include housing associations, local government, energy utilities, advice agencies, manufacturers, insulation installers—the list is endless. As members have already heard, as honorary vice-president, I am sponsoring an event to which everyone is invited later this evening. It is the Energy Action Scotland business supporters group. I hope to see everyone there. It is at this point that my consensual tone ends. I am sorry about that. We spent last week debating the cost of living. I represent probably some of the poorest communities in Scotland. Fuel poverty stands at 900,000 households—not 900,000 people, but households. That is one in three households, which is frankly, a national scandal. We have seen huge fluctuations in the price of fuel. Prices are very quick to go up and extremely slow ever to reduce. I am proud that the Scottish Parliament set an ambitious target; we all supported it. We did not say at the time that we did not have enough powers. Every single party in this place supported the pledge to end fuel poverty by 2016. We are three years away from that, so we face a huge challenge. I ask cabinet secretaries about it. I ask ministers. Margaret McDougall asked John Swinney at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee last week, and I have asked Margaret Burgess. Nobody can tell us the answer. That might be because they do not think that we should know, but I think we should be honest about the challenge that we face. The budget at one stage—I think it was in 2010-11—was down as low as £40 million at the start of that budget year. It is now up to £79 million, but it dropped again. I thought it was £74 million, but Murdo Fraser seems to think that £10 million has been whipped away. There was the announcement about a helpline. Forgive me, but I am not sure whether there is a new helpline or the announcement was about the existing one. If we are going to strain every sinew to end fuel poverty, we really should not be reheating old announcements. I am much more interested in talking about the solutions; I am much more interested in looking at how we get beyond the poverty of ambition that was referred to by Mike MacKenzie. We agreed the pledge, so it is not good enough to then blame somebody else. Ed Miliband’s price freeze is practical and will help people who are struggling. The Scottish National Party’s response has been a bit like a yo-yo. Mike Weir says “No.” Angela Constance says in the chamber, “Well, maybe—but let’s see the detail”, and then we have Fergus Ewing saying not just “No”, but “The lights are going to go out.” When are we going to get serious about this? Now the issue is parked with the expert commission on energy regulation. I do not know when the commission will report and I do not know what it is going to say, but I can say that people are suffering now. I hope that Energy Action Scotland is still around to push us all to go a damned sight further than it already has.

I regret that I missed the announcement about the commission—it seems to have been hurried out. Can the minister tell me the commission’s remit and when it will report?

I could not agree more with what the minister said about raising awareness, but does she accept that the initiative was presented as something new, when it is an existing helpline?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the decision that was taken at the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities leaders meeting to back the petition from the no2bedroomtax campaign calling for £50 million to mitigate the impact of the so-called bedroom tax. (S4F-01596)

As ever, I thank the First Minister for his response, but he can do something more. He already has the power to pay local government and housing associations. It is really very simple, and if there is any confusion on his part, he should move over and we will show him exactly how to do it. The First Minister will be aware that only the Scottish National Party and the Tories have voted against the budget call for £50 million to mitigate the effect of the bedroom tax. Is he aware that COSLA leaders have also agreed to back my proposed member’s bill to protect all social tenants from eviction? Will he join COSLA, the Church of Scotland, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the Poverty Alliance, the no2bedroomtax campaign and many more besides, in backing the bill, or are they all wrong?

It gives me great pleasure to debate the motion to highlight Scotland’s first challenge poverty week. I thank members for the cross-party support, and I thank the many organisations that are behind the challenge poverty week and which have provided us with briefings for the debate. The organisations are too numerous to mention, but include the Poverty Alliance, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, Oxfam and many children’s organisations, besides. The rationale for holding a challenge poverty week is twofold. First, the United Nations international day for the eradication of poverty takes place each year on 17 October, and the aim is to highlight the reality of poverty throughout the world and build a greater momentum for action. Secondly, there is no doubt that child poverty is likely to rise, so we need to galvanise public opinion and policy makers to do more to tackle the challenge. Between 13 and 19 October, a wide range of organisations and individuals will come together to do four things: first, they will highlight the reality of poverty; secondly, they will demonstrate what is being done to address poverty by the Government, local authorities, health boards, voluntary organisations and communities; thirdly, they will address the stereotypes about poverty, which I will say more about later; and, fourthly, and perhaps most important, they will create support for action to address poverty. At the heart of all of that is the desire to ensure that the voices of people who are experiencing poverty are heard, and that they are central to sharing and shaping our approach as we move forward. I hope that politicians at all levels will engage positively with the challenge poverty week, whether at national events or at local dialogue meetings that are being arranged by the Poverty Alliance. Only yesterday, we debated the cost-of-living crisis. Although at times the debate was very robust, there is no doubt in anybody’s mind about the scale of the problem that we face. With declining incomes and rising prices, people and families on low incomes are struggling. Let me stress that this is not just about people who are unfortunate enough to be unemployed; among them are people who are in employment, too. We clearly need to address in-work poverty and to make work pay. We have proposals to strengthen the national minimum wage and to embed the living wage in the forthcoming procurement bill. About 400 employers throughout the United Kingdom are now living-wage employers and I congratulate them. However, only a tiny handful are Scottish employers and there is much that the Government can do to improve that situation.

We have a national minimum wage that is a matter of statute. The issue is to ensure that it increases at a rate that is commensurate with the rate of inflation, so that its true value is felt. Under the Conservative Government, it has declined substantially—to 2004 levels, which is shocking. A truly appalling statistic that we heard yesterday suggests that in July, one in 10 people in Scotland had to borrow money for food. That is more than 500,000 people. Some borrowed from family and friends. Others, however, borrowed from payday loan lenders money that they will be unable to pay back due to exorbitant interest rates. Food banks are being set up in our communities by a number of voluntary organisations. We are grateful for their efforts, but in 21st century Scotland that should not be happening. We have an ambitious pledge to end fuel poverty by 2016, but I do not know whether we are on track to deliver that because the Scottish Government will not say. We have 900,000 households in fuel poverty, which is a huge national scandal that we can and must tackle. Ed Miliband announced a proposal to freeze electricity and gas prices until 2017. That would be a practical measure that would speak to the reality of the challenges that are facing people in communities throughout the country. Yesterday, however, that suggestion was met with either deafening silence or sharp criticism. Today, Fergus Ewing gave the game away. None of the SNP MSPs agrees with it and they are on the side of the energy companies and not on the side of ordinary people. Instead, budgets for fuel poverty have been cut. Yesterday, I spoke about the efforts that have been made to tackle child poverty in Scotland. It is a fact that Scotland achieved a greater fall in child poverty than anywhere else in the UK. By 2007, we had the lowest rates of child poverty in the country. I am not complacent—they were still too high—but it is a fact that, during Labour’s period in office from 1999 until 2007, we reduced relative poverty by a third and absolute poverty by two thirds. Since then, progress has stalled. The real and pressing concern is that poverty levels are now rising. We see the evidence of that in our communities, and we need to act now because we know that the consequences of child poverty are truly severe. A child who grows up in poverty is likely to suffer from poor health, lower educational attainment and unemployment, to experience financial hardship, food poverty and fuel poverty, and, ultimately, to die younger. Their life chances as adults may well be shaped before they reach the age of three, so it is critical that we intervene, and that we intervene early. Poverty is not inevitable; real change is possible. The Scottish Government has a child poverty strategy, but progress in implementing it has been slow. I welcome the commitment to refresh the strategy, but there is also a need to refresh the “Achieving Our Potential” framework. It was developed in 2008, before the recession really hit, and it needs to be updated to reflect the current crisis in respect of living standards and poverty. It needs to be a driver for change at all levels of government. I hope that the minister will tell us that the Scottish Government will ensure that that happens. I turn to the Scottish welfare fund. It is disappointing that only half of what could have been spent has been spent; I am sure that the minister shares that disappointment. There is no doubt about the level of need that exists, so I urge the Government to work with local authorities to identify whether there are unintended barriers to people accessing much-needed support from crisis grants. I do not think that any one of us underestimates the scale of concern that exists about welfare cuts, including the bedroom tax. The Welfare Reform Act 2012 is a flawed piece of legislation that assumes that sufficient one-bedroom properties are available to enable the bedroom tax to work. Frankly, that is nonsense. I hope that the Scottish Government will see its way to supporting the call for £50 million—and protection for social tenants—to be provided. Finally, I want to talk about perceptions. In recent years, the debate about poverty has been characterised by negative language. Terms such as “shirkers” pepper the speeches of some politicians. Public opinion suggests that people think that the unemployed are lazy or lack willpower, although there is hope, as the recent British social attitudes survey suggests that that might be changing. We have a responsibility to take the lead in ensuring that there is better understanding of the reality of poverty. Such understanding is obtained by listening to people who have experienced, or who are experiencing, poverty. We face a crisis in the cost of living and levels of poverty are increasing. A decade of progress in reducing child poverty and family deprivation is being reversed. Challenge poverty week is a wake-up call for all of us. Let us match that call with action now to tackle poverty in Scotland.

I accept what the minister says about what the Scottish Government is doing; indeed, I acknowledge what local government is doing, too. However, will the Scottish Government take the opportunity presented by its proposed procurement reform bill to ensure that we spread that good practice to the private sector as well?

Spare us!

There can be no doubt in anyone’s mind that times are tough, but times are much, much tougher for some people than they are for others. I am not often given to quoting David Cameron, but this will not be the first time that I have done so and I am sure that it will not be the last. I remind all members that at a previous Tory conference he said, while talking about the recession and the United Kingdom plan for recovery, “it’s fair that those with broader shoulders should bear a greater load.” What a shame it is that he did not believe his own rhetoric. It took him less than a month to forget his promise and embark on swingeing public sector cuts of £81 billion, including £18 billion of cuts to benefits—all that while the most affluent avoid paying taxes to the tune of £120 billion. The reality of the Tory-Lib Dem coalition Government is tax cuts for millionaires—of which at least eight sit around the Cabinet table—and hedge funds and the ultimate scandal of Tory ministers scurrying to Brussels to protect bankers’ bonuses.

No. We have heard enough from you. [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The last time I looked, it was millionaires and bankers who had the broadest shoulders, but members should not kid themselves that those people are feeling the pinch or bearing a greater load. It is families in my constituency and throughout Scotland who are bearing the burden and struggling to make ends meet. Those are the people who are increasingly out of pocket, while David Cameron is increasingly out of touch. People who are paid weekly do not have enough money to get them through the final couple of days. People who are paid monthly struggle to have enough money to make it through the final week. I am talking not just about people who are unemployed and families who are on benefits but about working families. Many people who work hard but are on low wages are appearing at food banks so that they can feed their children, seeking out payday lenders, which they cannot afford to pay back, and running up rent arrears and defaulting on mortgages as they make decisions about priorities for their families. The reason why the problem is so acute is that the cost of living is rising at the same time as income is declining in real terms, and people cannot afford to make ends meet. Let me illustrate that. Since 2010, wages in Scotland have fallen in real terms by £27.30 a week. That is £1,420 a year, which is a lot of money for someone who is low paid. In fact, wages have fallen in 36 of the 37 months in which David Cameron has been Prime Minister. The Low Pay Commission has noted that the minimum wage has not kept up with inflation and the real value is lower than the increase in the consumer prices index and the retail prices index. The commission suggested that the value of the national minimum wage at October 2012 was at a level that had not been experienced since 2004, some eight years ago.

That was an interesting intervention from John Wilson. Aside from the fact that Labour ensured that the minimum wage was uprated adequately, I recall that the Scottish National Party slept through the debate and the vote on bringing in the national minimum wage. I will take no lessons from John Wilson now. The Tories have squeezed the minimum wage and reduced its value in real terms. In contrast, Labour would strengthen the minimum wage and end the scandal of the abuse of zero-hours contracts. The real-terms reduction in public sector pay is in its fourth year, which is taking its toll on staff and their families. There is no doubt that there is a real squeeze on incomes among people who are low paid—never mind the cuts to benefits, which I will come on to. That is bad enough, but people who are struggling to make ends meet face a double whammy, because prices are rising at the same time as incomes stagnate. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation report “A minimum income standard for the UK in 2013” highlighted the fact that the cost of a basket of essential goods and services has increased by nearly 25 per cent in the past five years. That is staggering. The cost of bread is up, the cost of milk is up and the costs of electricity and gas are up. Over the past three years, since the Tories came to office, prices have risen faster in the United Kingdom than in any other G7 country. We face a cost of living crisis of enormous proportions with really harsh consequences for people and families on low incomes.

That is just ridiculous. If we examine the SNP’s record, we can see that it is the SNP that is taking money away from low-income families by not targeting their needs. We have also seen cuts in benefits including the bedroom tax and the shift from disability living allowance to personal independence payments, assuming a reduction of 20 per cent in the budget at the outset. Perhaps the most concerning cut is the reduction in children’s benefits. There is a freeze on child benefit and tax credits are soon to be rolled up as the universal credit, but children’s benefits are, overall, falling in real terms because the cost of bringing up a child is increasing. A decade of progress on reducing child poverty and family deprivation is being steadily reversed. Donald Hirsch, a director of the centre for research in social policy at Loughborough University, who leads the work on the minimum income standard, had this to say: “This trend differs from anything seen in my lifetime—including in the 1980s, when the poor were standing still as the rich progressed. Now, absolute living standards have declined over a sustained period, including for those who started out with least, for the first time since the 1930s. It’s the first time since that decade that basic safety-net benefits have been cut in real terms.” If we have to go back more than 80 years to experience anything as bad, that must surely be a wake-up call for all of us. Let me turn to the Scottish Government. I know that the SNP’s take on this will be that it is Westminster’s fault and that the only way out of the situation is to vote for independence, but that is lazy and sloppy thinking. It is not the fault of an institution; it is the fault of the Tories. If the people disagree with what the Tories are doing, there is a clear choice: they can vote Labour at the general election. There are things that the SNP Government can do if it so chooses—things that are well within the Government’s and the Scottish Parliament’s powers. However, instead of focusing on what matters to hard-pressed families and communities, SNP members have only one focus, one obsession and one thing that commands all their attention: independence. The SNP is guilty of putting Scotland on pause and doing little to tackle the most acute cost of living crisis in more than 80 years.

I have not got time. I campaigned for a Scottish Parliament because I realised the Parliament’s potential to help people at times such as this. Just as the late, lamented Strathclyde Regional Council had a social policy that prioritised and targeted support at many of those struggling in our communities, so a Scottish Parliament could take action. I am, therefore, disappointed and ashamed that little is being done. The SNP stands accused of being so cynical and shameless that it will prey on people’s misery to get them to vote yes in the referendum rather than take action to help now. Let us look at some of the areas that the SNP could tackle, starting with childcare. The most recent Scottish childcare report by Children in Scotland reported that nursery costs for a child under two are now more than £100 a week, which is a lot of money for someone on a low income. Childcare costs for the over-fives see parents paying an average of £50 a week for an after-school club, and those costs are rising by more than the rate of inflation. Childcare in Scotland is the least affordable in the UK aside from that in the south-east of England. Save the Children is also clear in its belief that childcare has a key role to play in tackling early inequalities between children and reducing child poverty. Quality, affordable childcare is key to helping parents to access and sustain employment and training. However, Save the Children had this to say about the provisions of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, which seek to extend childcare: “they represent baby steps compared to what needs to change to ensure that every child and family can access suitable childcare.” Last week, Ed Miliband pledged that childcare would be extended to 25 hours a week for every three and four-year-old of working parents and that childcare would be guaranteed for all primary school children from 8 am to 6 pm. That is what Labour would also deliver in Scotland. Will the SNP match that or is it content to leave Scotland on pause?

I genuinely do not have enough time. What about food banks? The Trussell Trust reported in April this year that the number of people in Scotland using food banks has risen by 150 per cent to a staggering 14,318, of whom one third are children and one fifth are in full-time employment. The latest research from Debt Advisory Services (Scotland) shows that one in 10 Scots—500,000 Scots—borrowed money to pay for food in July. If members need any more evidence of a cost of living crisis, there it is. We are all grateful for the work of the volunteers in communities across Scotland, but what a damning indictment it is of us all that food banks even exist. It appears from anecdotal evidence that some local authorities have sent people to food banks rather than provide a crisis grant. Crisis grants and community care grants are part of the Scottish welfare fund, which is hugely underspent. Only half of what could have been allocated has gone out the door at a time when the need is self-evident. It is astonishing that after a direct transfer of power to the SNP, which it wanted, it cannot even spend the money. That is another example of Scotland on pause when ministers are not interested in getting their day jobs right. The pledge made by Labour and agreed by the Parliament was that we would abolish fuel poverty by 2016, yet when I ask ministers whether we are on track to do so I do not even get an answer. Let me try again: will the Scottish Government succeed in realising our collective ambition to end fuel poverty in three years’ time? The ministers’ heads are down and there is no response. Using the Government’s own measures, Energy Action Scotland estimates that the number in fuel poverty stands at some 900,000 people. Over the past five years, energy costs have increased by 39 per cent and average household spend on fuel has reached a high of 14 per cent. If members need any further idea of the scale of the cost of living crisis they need look no further. What does the Government do? It has a £79 million budget and relies on £120 million coming from energy company obligations to make that up. That budget is underspent this year—yet another example of the SNP not getting the money out the door to the people who need it the most. Last week, Ed Miliband proposed to tackle rising energy bills by pledging that the next Labour Government will freeze gas and electricity prices until the start of 2017. That will provide real relief for hard-pressed families and older people, and it is time that the Tories stopped laughing and took action to protect people. Does the SNP support that proposal? I listened to SNP MP Mike Weir a few nights ago when he said that it does not. Is the SNP really not prepared to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with families who are struggling? The SNP should not blame somebody else. Its own fuel poverty forum has told it that it needs to do more. That is another case of Scotland on pause while the SNP plays constitutional politics. I can see that I am rapidly running out of time. Members: Hear, hear.

It is depressing the SNP chooses to play constitutional politics instead of thinking about the real issues affecting people in Scotland. I have already said enough to this SNP Government about the bedroom tax. I hope that it does not make a deliberate decision not to use the powers it has to protect people from the bedroom tax now. I will conclude on child poverty. I am very proud of the progress that the Parliament made. We saw lowest level of relative and absolute poverty in the first years of the Parliament, up to 2007. Sadly, under the SNP, progress has stalled. The SNP needs to wake up. Many families in communities across Scotland have a real cost of living crisis. Those families need and deserve our help now, but the SNP puts Scotland on pause. It is guilty of the most shameless politics that puts the referendum first, before the interests of the people of this country. I move, That the Parliament notes the decline in real wages for people in Scotland at a time when living costs are rising; understands that the cost of essentials such as food, childcare and energy has risen and the report by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, A Minimum Income Standard for the UK in 2013, shows that, over the last five years, the cost of essential goods and services has increased by nearly 25%; is concerned at the increases in the number of people in fuel poverty and using food banks; notes that, in 2011-12, there were 950,000 people living in absolute poverty in Scotland, 220,000 of whom were children, and believes that both the UK and Scottish governments must act urgently to tackle these issues.

Will the minister give way?

I will indeed be brief. Does the minister support Ed Miliband’s energy price freeze?

But does the minister support the principle?

Does the member not agree that it is actually quite progressive to share the risks and rewards across the country and redistribute some of the wealth in the south-east up to Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

I would like to ask Gavin Brown a question. How can you stand there when you know that 500,000 people needed a loan to buy food in July? Does that not embarrass you?

Will the member give way?

Does Annabelle Ewing acknowledge that child poverty fell by a greater extent in Scotland in the first two sessions of the Scottish Parliament than it has done since, and that it is therefore not just about powers but about the priorities that Government applies to things?

Will Mark McDonald take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I want to talk about the SNP’s wasted years. Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that, in the first eight years of the Parliament, relative child poverty fell by a third and absolute child poverty fell by two thirds? Under his Government, the figures are flatlining and progress has stalled.

The minister will be aware of the increasing number of people who are using food banks. What action is the Scottish Government taking to monitor that increased usage? Does the Government plan to publish official statistics? Can the minister outline the assistance that the Government provides for food banks?

I very much welcome the transitions to employment project. There is no difference between us on that front. It will ensure that more people have positive outcomes. Would Joan McAlpine nevertheless accept that there are fewer college places and less money going in, and that if we use money to fund more of the transitions to employment projects, we could get better outcomes? It is not either/or; we really need both.

Like others, I welcome the opportunity to debate the new learning disabilities strategy. I am not sure whether I require to declare this as an interest, but I am very proud to be the convener of the cross-party group on learning disability. I join my colleagues Jim Eadie and Joan McAlpine in taking an active interest in the group. I welcome the minister’s acknowledgement that much was achieved with the previous strategy, “The same as you?”, such as the closure of long-stay institutions such as Lennox castle, which meant that more than 1,000 people moved into homes in the community. That strategy led to many more people with learning disabilities having the opportunity to go to college and to access and sustain employment than was ever the case in the past. For me, one of the most important things about “The same as you?” was the approach. I remember the early draft, which Iain Gray tore up. He tore it up because we failed to engage directly with those with learning disabilities and their families. The strategy went back to the drawing board, and there was then complete involvement and engagement of people with learning disabilities in shaping the policy and the services—in short, in shaping the kind of future that they wanted to see. The slogan “nothing about us without us” should underpin everything that we do in this Parliament. Therefore, while welcoming the new strategy, I gently register my disappointment that it was not developed in such extensive consultation with people with learning disabilities and their families. There was no public engagement that we were aware of—certainly not in my community and certainly not with the cross-party group. I think that we would all agree that solutions that are bottom-up are always better than solutions that are top-down. I urge the minister to look at ways to ensure that people with learning disabilities and their families are involved in overseeing the implementation of the strategy and to make co-production a reality for them all. I will deal with process at this point. I remember—albeit vaguely—how Government works from my time as a minister. Let me share some important lessons that I learned. Much has been made of the fact that the strategy contains 52 recommendations—some more substantial than others—but where are the action plans, the measurable targets and the milestones? We need those if we are to be able to measure progress and success. It is the Government’s responsibility to ensure that aspirations are turned into action. How will the minister monitor implementation and secure agreement from partners such as colleges and local authorities? Are there even measures for people with learning disabilities in some of our local authority single outcome agreements? If we are to make a difference to the lives of people with learning disabilities, we must focus on what matters. I urge the minister to ensure that this is not another strategy that is left on the shelf to gather dust. Please, please put in a monitoring framework and give it teeth. He will have our complete support if he does that. There is no doubt that, if implemented, many of these recommendations can make a difference. That is why it is so important that the Government monitors them. Like many others such as Bob Doris, Stewart Maxwell and Malcolm Chisholm—there are too many to name them all—I support the comprehensive recommendations tackling the appalling health inequalities for people with learning disability. I support, too, the approach that puts equality and human rights at the heart of everything that we do, because this is a fundamental matter of rights. It is important to recognise the challenges, of which there are a number. Let me touch briefly on four. The first is welfare cuts. This might be uncomfortable for members of parties in the United Kingdom coalition, but I am clear that the sweeping changes being made to our welfare system are having an absolutely disproportionate impact on disabled people. Whether in relation to the bedroom tax or changes to disability living allowance, there is real fear about what lies ahead. Many are already accumulating rent arrears because of the bedroom tax. With the removal of the lower rate of the daily living element of disability living allowance, many will lose some of their income. We need to address those fears because they are becoming people’s realities. The second area that I want to touch on is college cuts. Joan McAlpine was absolutely right to praise the work of the transitions to employment project that Enable and the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability are taking forward. I do not think that anybody would disagree with that, but, as I have said, it does not plug the cuts to college funding. By all means, let us join together to improve quality, but let us not cut resources at the same time—and there have been cuts. I am saying that not to score points, but because I believe that it undermines the strategy that the minister is trying to implement. Enable undertook a survey of colleges in 2012, and it tells us that college courses have been cut by more than 46 per cent in the past two years. The number of teaching staff for people with additional support needs has been cut by 16 per cent in the past two years, and there has been a 20 per cent cut in the number of adults with learning disabilities who are attending college. None of that should make us happy. The third challenge is employment. An increasing number of adults with learning disabilities are failing to secure employment. Indeed, the number fell by 16 per cent in 2012 and the trend seems to be downward. That is in the context that the number of those people in employment in the first place is relatively small. The fourth challenge is social care. Members will be bored of hearing me talk about this. Throughout Scotland, there are still different charges and the postcode lottery of care still exists. Not only are there different charges; there are different eligibility criteria and 32 different ways of doing things. Although I believe absolutely in the ability of local authorities to do the best for their local communities, Scotland is frankly not big enough to have such wild variations, which I will touch on in a minute. More than two years ago, the Scottish Government and COSLA set up a working group to deal with the problem, yet disparities remain. I once jokingly said that if they were on performance-related pay we would be withholding their payment—I am not joking any more. Neil Bibby pointed out the truly shocking statistic that people living in 25 out of our 32 local authorities are being charged for their care at a rate that is higher than the top rate of income tax for the wealthiest in this country. I will give members some examples of the disparities. One council charges £111 for a single day at a day centre while another charges just £6. One council charges £8.28 as the hourly rate for home care while another charges £23.70. Scotland is not such a big country that that variation can be allowed to continue. Ken Macintosh was, in part, right. It was in fact David Cameron who said that the burden of austerity would fall on those with the broadest shoulders. He clearly then just ignored his own words, because the burden has not fallen on the bankers or the millionaires in his Cabinet—they get off scot free. The burden has truly fallen on the poorest in society. I support the Government’s motion and the strategy, but we need robust implementation and monitoring arrangements if we are truly to make a real difference.

We substantially agree on the need to improve quality and have positive outcomes that lead people into employment. However, given the cuts, will the minister make a commitment today that we will provide for the same number of learning-disabled people—or, indeed, more—to experience the new quality service?

Thank you.

I know that the First Minister is fond of pointing a finger at others as a diversion rather than addressing the powers that the Scottish Government has now, but let us try again. He will be aware that £20 million represents less than half of what is required and that no budget is set aside for next year. Does he agree with his Deputy First Minister—she is whispering in his ear—who has refused to support a bill to protect people from evictions, because she says that it is unnecessary? Is he confident that no cases are in our courts this week to commence the process of eviction because of bedroom tax arrears?

I congratulate James Dornan on securing the debate and on his excellent and considered speech. Like he did, I see many friends in the public gallery. As I have only four minutes for my speech, I will not name them all. I was struck by the fact that, as James Dornan said, one in five people is disabled. If Parliament truly represented Scottish society, at least 25 MSPs would have a disability, but I suspect that we are well short of that.

That is a timely reminder that some people with disabilities are not obvious and do not declare themselves as having a disability. The debate should not be just about representation for the sake of it. It is about what elected representatives can and should do to create a fairer and more equal Scotland that is fundamentally about social justice and equality of opportunity. I am offended when I see statistics that tell me that 47 per cent of families with disabled people live in poverty; that 33 per cent of disabled people live in fuel poverty; that 47 per cent of disabled people are unemployed; that 44 per cent report barriers in accessing justice; and that 74 per cent experience restrictions in using transport. Scottish Labour believes that equality of opportunity is a right, not a privilege. It is a basic matter of social justice and human rights, so it is incumbent on all of us to address the challenges that lie behind the statistics. Representation is, of course, part of that, but it is not everything. Having said that, I commend independent living in Scotland for producing the report and for hosting the “Solutions Series” of pop-up think tanks. I participated in one, which was much fun. We should support much that is in the report, and I hope that the minister will consider and respond to the recommendations. It is clear that we need to do more to break down the barriers to people standing for elected office, but our experience tells us that we need to effect change much earlier in the process. We support an access to elected office fund and believe that Scotland should have a dedicated fund. We support practical action, such as parliamentary internships for disabled people, and we agree that we need positive role models to inspire and challenge us to respond with a vision for the future. All of that is important. We should be honest and acknowledge that getting into politics is not as simple as a person turning up and saying that they want to stand; a long, hard slog is ahead of them. We have experienced that. The smoke-filled rooms might be gone, but getting into the informal networks can still be a bit of a mystery and a challenge. Perhaps our funding and efforts should be directed at engaging people much earlier in the process. There is a place for Government action, but political parties must do much more. That is why I am pleased to announce that, as a first step, the Scottish Labour Party will establish a disabled members’ network, to ensure that there is a real focus on policies that meet the needs and aspirations of disabled people and, in addition, to ensure that we actively encourage representation at every level of elected office—in local government, in this Parliament and in the United Kingdom Government. Dame Anne Begg, MP for Aberdeen South, is a real inspiration and a trailblazer and is the first permanent-wheelchair-user member in the House of Commons. Nobody would deny that her contribution to the whole country has been immense. What are we waiting for? We need to take the recommendations, use them as a framework against which to measure progress, and do so in partnership with disabled people’s organisations. Then and only then will we begin to make a difference.

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take to address child poverty, in light of the findings in the “Annual Report for the Child Poverty Strategy for Scotland 2013”. (S4F-01538)

I agree with much of what the First Minister said, but the child poverty report tells us that the progress made by Labour in slashing child poverty has now stalled. I think that we all agree that more needs to be done. Does the First Minister agree with the words of John Dickie of the Child Poverty Action Group, who said: “it is absolutely critical that government in Scotland moves beyond describing existing policies and sets out how actions that can be shown to reduce child poverty are ratcheted up and rolled out across the whole country”? What new action will the First Minister and his Government take now to tackle child poverty?

I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing time for this important debate and I commend her on a very thoughtful speech. I join her in commending Scottish Women’s Aid for its campaign, which I understand is probably the first in the world. We can all agree that revenge porn is an unwelcome phenomenon of the digital age. It is shocking to see the extent to which domestic abuse can be perpetrated using social media and new technology. We know that domestic abuse is about power and control and that the consequences can be physical, sexual or emotional harm, but it would seem that power and control now extend to new forms of communication, whether Twitter, Facebook or other social media. The distribution by a partner of sexual or intimate images to strangers and in public in order to threaten, intimidate and embarrass is frankly abhorrent, but it is a new form of the exercise of power and control. I ask members to imagine for a minute what it must feel like for someone to have such intimate images shared with all and sundry, and the horror when other people think that it is okay to then abuse them, in turn, because of images that a former partner has posted. That betrayal of trust is truly awful. People who are subjected to revenge porn are victims. Christina McKelvie was right about that. They deserve our sympathy and our support. We should also be angry on their behalf. We must do all that we can do to stop this insidious new form of abuse. We must ensure that revenge porn has no place in our society. Collectively, we need to create the conditions in which women and others can come forward to report abuse, knowing that they will be given support when they do so. It is equally essential that staff in agencies that are likely to deal with the consequences of revenge porn, such as local authorities and the police, are appropriately trained and are sensitive to victims’ needs. Too often, they do not know what to do or what the legal framework is. There needs to be practical knowledge of support services and a clear understanding of the law and the protections that are in place, notwithstanding that there might be a need to look further. Existing legal remedies under the Communications Act 2003, the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 and the Protection from Harassment Act 1997 could be used. The question is whether we have used them. Have we measured their use? Have we begun to understand the scale of the problem and the barriers to reporting it? What more do we, collectively, need to do to ensure that there is appropriate action? I invite the minister to consider those points. What more can we do to ensure that the existing law is robustly enforced? Do we need to consider introducing legislation in the area? When I visited the stop revenge porn Scotland website, I was struck by victims’ stories. Let me share Holly’s story with members. She wrote: “He started posting explicit pictures and a video of me all over the Internet along with my full name, email address, job title, and specific details of where I worked and how far along I was in my PhD program. For 3 years damage control was a full-time job. I hired a lawyer to send him a letter. I begged and pleaded with 3 different police stations to file charges against him ... I hired an Internet specialist to help me take down the material. Ultimately, those avenues were dead ends”. We need to act on the stories of Holly and many other women. It is up to all of us to speak out. It is up to all of us to ensure that revenge porn is stamped out and has no place in 21st century Scotland.

I am sure that the minister will be equally concerned about threatened evictions in East Ayrshire and Clackmannanshire. I think that that makes the point. Will the minister take this opportunity to tell the Parliament whether the Scottish National Party will support my member’s bill to protect all tenants across Scotland from eviction arising from the bedroom tax—that is something that she can do now—or will she make people wait until 2017?

The First Minister will be aware that the Scottish welfare fund—the provision of community care grants and crisis grants is now devolved to Scotland—has the potential to impact positively on women. Does he agree that it is a matter of concern that the fund is underspent by almost five times the amount that was expected to be spent? What action will he take to ensure that women, who are indeed struggling, get the urgent assistance that they require?

I welcome the opportunity to close the debate for Labour on the Equal Opportunities Committee’s report on where Gypsy Travellers live. I congratulate the former convener, Mary Fee, and all members of the committee, on the comprehensive and inclusive approach that they took in arriving at their recommendations. As other members have done, I welcome Margaret McCulloch to her new role. She clearly has big feet—I mean big shoes to fill. [Interruption.] I know. It has been a long afternoon. As members said, this has been the third committee inquiry on the same subject and the same set of issues since the start of the Parliament. I struggle to think of another policy issue that has been the subject of three reports. It is clear that there is still much need for substantial improvement, as was made clear in virtually every speech that we heard this afternoon. In the main, the debate has been helpful and consensual. There is much agreement across the Parliament about what needs to be done. However, we all recognise that we need to move beyond that. I am not having a pop at the current Government. There is a problem for government in general, because we must surely ask ourselves this: if we all agree on what needs to be done, and we highlight our concerns and recommend potential solutions, why does nothing happen? That is a fundamental matter for members and for the Government, because there is little point in making policy decisions if they are not carried through. John Finnie was right to ask what is going on. Margaret McCulloch and Mary Fee vividly described the challenges that people face when they have no running water, overflowing septic tanks, children bathing in ice-cold water, no toilets—the list goes on. We should be angry about the conditions in which people are living. Members of all parties talked about the persistent problems of ensuring that children are appropriately educated and all members of the community have access to healthcare. Such access is patchy, to say the least, as John Mason said. There are 20 recommendations in the report, each of which presents a myriad of challenges. I will focus on just a few. If the Scottish Government can prioritise and deliver on the recommendation on accommodation, there is the potential to transform lives. Minimum standards for accommodation and housing services, which are monitored by the Government, are essential. I acknowledge the difficulty that is caused by Gypsy Travellers pulling on to roadside sites and the tension with people in the settled community. There are regular problems with seasonal unauthorised encampments in many areas of Scotland. However, the existence of sufficient well-serviced sites might help to make a difference. Many members this afternoon have highlighted the difficulties faced by local government in not only identifying but delivering actual sites. However, we cannot stand back and leave local authorities to do this alone. The EHRC suggested that we adopt a regional approach that would be sensitive to the community’s traditional travelling patterns, and the Scottish Government has a clear role in brokering that. The EHRC also mentioned resourcing. I recall that, under the previous Government, specific funding was available for local authorities to establish suitably serviced sites. However, that money has now been rolled up into local authorities’ general budget allocation and I have been told that not a single site has been established since. Again, the Scottish Government can play a clear role in that matter. I was very taken by the unusually thoughtful contribution from the unsophisticated right-wing Alex Johnstone—as he will now be known—who called for leadership on this issue from the Scottish Government and said that, instead of having any more discussion groups, there should be practical action. I think that John Mason also expressed frustration and wanted the Government to get on with this. However, we will also agree that we all have a part to play and that we should stand ready to lend our support. In a powerful speech, Christian Allard focused on challenging racism and discrimination against Gypsy Travellers and urged the Government to move quickly, and those points were echoed by Siobhan McMahon and Linda Fabiani. I also noted Mr Allard’s refreshing honesty about when he became a member of the committee; indeed, other politicians in this chamber would have claimed parentage of the report. The committee deserves our thanks for considering the position of Gypsy Travellers, and I hope that it comes back to this report in six months, 12 months or even two years from now to measure progress against each of the recommendations. Maybe—just maybe—we might then see change. Michael McMahon’s speech and analysis were striking. As the minister who responded to the debate all those years ago in 2001—I was younger then, Presiding Officer—I have to say that he was right. The Government was criticised—and rightly so—by the Parliament. At that time the received wisdom was that local authorities were best placed to deliver, but we need to learn the lessons from that experience. Responsibility is owned by too many, which means that people do not feel the need to deliver on it and, as we have heard, local authorities have experienced challenges in dealing with the issue. We need the Scottish Government to assume responsibility with one focus and one ministerial lead. I cannot think of anyone better than Shona Robison to see progress on this issue. If she takes up that challenge, even I will be happy to support her in taking forward this agenda.

15. To ask the Scottish Government how an independent Scotland would deal with the impact of European pension regulations. (S4O-02336)

I thank the cabinet secretary for a long response, which did not shed much light on the issue. He will of course be aware that Mr Salmond’s comment in the Scottish Parliament on 2 May, that “We are not seeking an opt-out from the EU regulations”,—[Official Report, 2 May 2013; c 19313.] is entirely incompatible with his comment on the matter in the Sunday Post on 4 August, when he said: “The way to deal with it is to get a derogation”. Which is it to be? Is this indicative of the mess that the nationalists have got themselves into on such an important issue in just three months, or was the First Minister perhaps just confused?

We on these benches welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement of additional funding to help refugees in Syria, and we commend the activities of the many charitable organisations across Scotland that are working on that. There were few surprises in the First Minister’s speech yesterday, nor was it surprising that he spent most of his time talking about independence. In fact, we are getting used to that now. Independence is about the only thing that SNP ministers and SNP back benchers talk about—it is in every speech, in every press release and in every question. [Interruption.] Wringing their hands, SNP ministers—who should pipe down a little—parrot the line that, if only we had independence and if only we had the power, they could then do whatever it is that they want. That covers everything from making the sun shine to Scotland winning the world cup. However, the majority of Scots have rumbled the SNP. They know that that is simply an excuse for doing nothing. It is entirely about putting Scotland on pause. Doing nothing when you have the power to make a difference to people’s lives is, frankly, shameless. Doing nothing because you want to feed off people’s misery to deliver a yes vote for independence is beyond cynical. Yesterday, Margo MacDonald said that the legislative programme is thin, and she is right. However, she also challenged all of us in here to work together. I say to the SNP that, if it wants to work on social justice, tackling poverty and creating a fairer society, Scottish Labour will work with it. We should pool our ideas and make a difference to people’s lives now. Let us not wait but act to alleviate poverty and suffering now. I will deal with the Scottish welfare fund first, because it is, frankly, extraordinary that some SNP back benchers chose to misrepresent my concern about the substantial underspend in the fund as somehow being an attack on it. Instead, they trumpet of the success of the fund, pointing out that it has helped 20,000 people. However, by the end of this month, it should have helped nearer five times that figure: 100,000 people. How can crisis grants be underspent at a time when we all know that families are struggling, the cost of living is rising and incomes are declining in real terms? There is no doubt in any of our minds that there are many people who are in increasing financial difficulty. It is simply not good enough to say, “We have a fund, let’s marvel at it” and stick our heads in the sand when it is not spent. That should be a concern for all of us across this chamber. Let us be clear: it is not the fault of local authorities, as some in the SNP would claim. Are they really suggesting that SNP-controlled councils such as Dundee City Council, which spent just 31 per cent of its allocation for one month, are somehow at fault? I do not think so. Where in the legislative programme is the ambition? Where is the hope? Where is the focus on tackling poverty and need? On child poverty, there was huge progress under Labour, but that progress has now stalled and is likely to start heading the wrong way. On fuel poverty, we have heard a pledge that no one in Scotland will live in fuel poverty by 2016, so that older people, in particular, do not have to choose between eating and heating. However, fuel poverty is rising—the estimate is that it affects almost 900,000 households in Scotland in 2013. Fuel poverty is not going down, and the SNP will not say whether it will meet its pledge or what further action it will take. On rough sleeping, the most extreme form of homelessness, the numbers are also rising. The fact that there are people sleeping rough on our streets because they do not have a roof over their heads is a disgrace, and it is our collective responsibility to do something about that. However, the Scottish Government does not do street counts any more. It does not know whether there are enough hostel places. We need that information so that we can do better because, frankly, we must do better. It is at times like these that people expect support from the Government. They expect leadership from the Government. They expect everyone in Parliament to work together and strain every sinew to help them. However, what some people say is that they see a Government that cares more about nationality than need, a Government that puts geography and the constitution before the needs of its people. We really must do better than that, by working together and focusing on the needs of people here and now, not on the needs of people at some time in the future. Nowhere is that more important than with the bedroom tax. We have all seen real-life examples of the distress and misery that has been caused by the bedroom tax in communities across Scotland. Of course we all want the Tories to scrap the bedroom tax—

In a minute. We all want the Tories to scrap the bedroom tax, but there is something that the SNP can do now to protect tenants and help councils and housing associations. The Scottish Government has the power and the resources to do so. It was for times such as these that the Scottish Parliament was created. It was for times like these that the Scottish people voted for a Scottish Parliament. Today, therefore, we proposed a package of measures that we hope that the SNP will support: a member’s bill to stop evictions as a result of the bedroom tax, giving effect to the Govan Law Centre petition; £50 million that was originally called for by Shelter to help councils and housing associations; practical support to deal with the spike in early years; and no evictions by Labour councils. It should not be down to individual councils. We need consistency across all of Scotland, not a postcode lottery. We need this SNP Government to act for all of Scotland and to actually show some leadership on the issue. We need it to show leadership for tenants, to remove the fear of eviction. We need it to offer practical help to councils and housing associations. Let us join together to work in the interests of people who are struggling. Let us use the powers of this Parliament—powers that we already have—to truly make a difference to the lives of people in Scotland.

Is it not the case that the cabinet secretary is arguing for people in Scotland to be put on pause—for people who are threatened with eviction because of the bedroom tax to be abandoned—and that the SNP Government will do nothing for at least three years? The Scottish Government has the power to do something now to protect tenants and to help landlords. Why will it not use the powers that it has now to help people in Scotland?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to support food banks.

I thank the minister for welcoming me to my new portfolio. I hope that, in a few weeks’ time, she does not regret doing so. I am most interested in the powers that the Scottish Government already has—powers that it should be exercising to protect the most vulnerable. Frankly, I am appalled that, in 21st century Scotland, we have food banks in our communities. According to the Trussell Trust, the number of Scots accessing emergency food banks over the past year has increased by 150 per cent, to more than 14,000 people. Almost one third of those people were children, which should concern us all. What more can the Scottish Government do specifically to help children who are experiencing such extremes of poverty that they have to depend on food banks?

There is no disagreement on this side of the chamber about the impact of the UK Government’s welfare cuts, but despite the actions that she has outlined we still see children queuing for assistance at food banks. The minister will be aware that, since the Scottish welfare fund was introduced to provide crisis grants, there has been a significant underspend in that budget. That goes against everything that we know about the level of need that exists in our communities—there is even anecdotal evidence that, having been refused crisis loans, people are being referred to food banks. What action will the Scottish Government take to ensure that, instead of there being an underspend in that budget, the people who need them most can access crisis grants?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the member for taking an intervention. The Scottish welfare fund has of course been devolved to Scotland by the UK Government. How can the member explain the fact that the Scottish Government cannot seem to spend it?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member not recognise that it is one thing to have a fund but that if you sit on the money and do not distribute it to those in most need, that is, frankly, extraordinary? [Interruption.]

I welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate and join others in congratulating Duncan McNeil on securing the time for it, albeit at the end of a long day. It is customary for members to agree with one another in members’ business debates, but I find it extremely difficult to agree with anything that Jackson Carlaw said. However, I will leave it at that; after all, we are here to celebrate ASH Scotland’s 40th anniversary and we can be in no doubt that they have been 40 years of very effective and successful campaigning to ensure that action is taken on smoking. ASH Scotland has been key in changing public opinion and challenging Government at all levels to be brave and to lead the way in tackling the consequences of smoking. We all know about the link between tobacco and ill health and, indeed, the abundantly clear link with cancer and we know that it increases the risk of a variety of conditions that I will not name in deference to the Presiding Officer and his wish that my speech be swift. The point is that there really is nothing good to be said about smoking. Equally, there is nothing quite like a convert. I gave up smoking something like a decade ago and have never looked back, and I would encourage others to do the same. It is right that we record the progress on this issue that has been made in both Parliaments. Tobacco advertising was banned first on radio and then on television; health warnings began to appear on cigarette packets; and the legislation to ban smoking in public spaces, which was an historic moment for this Parliament, has made a huge difference. I should perhaps put on record that, way back in 1983, George Foulkes was the very first person to introduce a member’s bill on this subject—not here, but in another place—and that he was very patient in waiting for legislation on the matter to be passed. Of course, Duncan McNeil was very successful in pushing through the Parliament’s committee system measures to raise the age for purchasing tobacco from 16 to 18. Then we had the ban on unstaffed vending machines and the changes to tobacco displays. As Mr McNeil pointed out, the adult smoking rate when ASH Scotland was set up was 50 per cent; according to the latest Scottish household survey, which is for 2011, that rate is down to 23 per cent. I welcome the Scottish Government’s most recent strategy on achieving a smoke-free Scotland. However, although we agree with the aspiration, we recognise that it will be a challenge to deliver and I hope that the minister will outline some of the action that the Government intends to take, particularly in deprived areas. After all, the prevalence rate of smoking in disadvantaged areas is 40 per cent; when we compare that with the rate for adults in the least deprived areas, which stands at 11 per cent, we realise that there is a huge job still to be done. The gap is just too big and is a major contributor to health inequality and mortality rates. If the minister is going to choose only one area on which we should focus, I plead with him that it should be that one. Most people I know experience a road to Damascus moment; in Duncan McNeil’s case, it was the road back from Dublin. I congratulate ASH not only on making us all brave and ensuring that we took that same road, but on ensuring that we continue to be brave in future.

I pay tribute to Dave Thompson for securing this debate and I commend the British Heart Foundation, the Scottish heart failure nurse forum and Chest Heart & Stroke Scotland for their briefing in advance of our debate and their report, which highlights the challenges that remain in securing the provision of heart failure nurses across every health board in Scotland. We know that heart failure is a life-limiting condition and that, unlike the prevalence of many other cardiac conditions, its prevalence is rising. It affects about 100,000 people across Scotland. I do not think that anyone inside or, indeed, outside the chamber would disagree about the value that is added by heart failure nurses to the experiences of patients and their families. As we have already heard from Dave Thompson, their contribution can also be measured in purely financial terms. They save an estimated £1,826 per patient, due to a 35 per cent reduction in hospital admissions. The importance of the role of heart failure nurses was identified in Audit Scotland’s report on cardiology services and the subsequent report from the Parliament’s Public Audit Committee. They made a number of recommendations, particularly about heart failure services for people from deprived and ethnic minority communities, but they also recognised that the NHS needs to improve services generally for people with heart failure. Way back in February 2007, SIGN guidelines were put in place under the Administration of the time, but the ambition was shared across the chamber. Those SIGN guidelines set out a ratio of 1:100,000 specialist nurses to population. That was the right thing to do then and it is the right thing to do now, but it is disappointing that, some six years on, only four health boards are meeting the standard and that, across Scotland, the number of heart failure nurses dropped from 51 whole-time equivalents in 2008 to 47 in 2012. I am very pleased that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, which covers my constituency, has achieved the ratio that is set out in the guideline. It is not used to my heaping praise on it, so it should enjoy it while I do so. However, I would always encourage it to do more. The review helpfully identifies the challenges that it needs to address, such as the lack of a class for patients with heart failure and the increasing demand that will continue to add pressure to services. I encourage it to look again at how to improve access to services in some of our most disadvantaged areas.

That is truly wonderful. We are nothing if not parochial. We have established that heart failure is rising, we agree that we need to try to ensure that services meet the growing demand, we acknowledge that specialist heart failure nurses make a real difference to patients and their families and ultimately to the efficiency of the NHS, and we have guidelines in place, but there is still a postcode lottery. The level of service and, indeed, whether people even get a service depends on where they live. That really is not good enough. We have had report after report that says the same thing, but progress has been slow. The challenge is for all of us actively to encourage our local health boards, but the challenge is also for the Scottish Government to ensure that the health boards meet the minimum standards that we have set for them. If the minister does that, he will enjoy support from across the chamber.

The pilot is of course welcome, but will the cabinet secretary consider the policy of increased use of salaried GPs in remote, rural and island communities?

5. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to improve detection of cervical cancer. (S4F-01460)

I associate myself with the First Minister’s response: early detection is, of course, extremely important. Does the First Minister agree that securing swift follow-up treatment is also key? Unlike in England, the Scottish Government has cancer waiting targets only for initial treatment. There is evidence that patients are waiting longer for follow-up treatment, but that is not recorded. Does the First Minister believe that that hidden cancer waiting list is acceptable?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Last week, I asked a question about the inappropriate payment of senior staff at the state hospital. Last week, the First Minister told me that, under the terms and conditions of the Scottish pay reference and implementation group in June 2005 and the terms and conditions for state hospital senior managers in October 2006, I was wrong and everything was fine. He believed that it was acceptable for senior managers to pay themselves as much as £7,000 each in back pay while the pay of front-line staff was frozen.

Indeed. I am just coming to it. Last week, I was clear that there is nothing in either document that would allow such payments and that, in any event, they would need to be signed off by the cabinet secretary, not by the chair or the chief executive of the health board—something that has patently not happened. That, Presiding Officer, was the position last week. This week, of course, the position has changed. Now, the chief executive has been moved and there is an internal inquiry not just about bullying but about shortcomings, procedures and governance processes. I published a letter from Gordon Craig today that is clear about the inappropriate nature of the payments.

So, Presiding Officer, I would be grateful to know whether it was in order for the First Minister last week to—perhaps unknowingly—mislead Parliament, or was he misled by his Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing? Will you invite the First Minister to amend the Official Report to correct his evident error?

Glasgow’s A and E waiting performance times are among the worst in Scotland. That is a matter for concern across the chamber. Some have suggested that the problem is in part due to staffing shortages; others point to a lack of beds. What does the cabinet secretary think the problems are and what action has he put in place to resolve them?

8. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met its national accident and emergency waiting time target. (S4O-02239)

Well, that was succinct. Clearly it is the case that the Scottish National Party has not met the A and E target across Scotland since 2009. By current performance, it would fail to meet its new improved and reduced target.

Indeed. Numerous reasons are given for the difficulties and commentators observe that winter pressures are now faced all year round. Does the cabinet secretary agree that as trolley waits increase, we need to address the problem urgently? Will he therefore agree to my call for Audit Scotland to consider the crisis in A and E so that we can learn lessons urgently?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is one of the worst-performing boards on the four-hour accident and emergency waiting time guarantee and that most cases of delay were due to a lack of beds. Will he tell me what action is being taken to increase bed capacity to deal with the problem?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on recruitment and retention payments paid to senior management at the state hospital. (S4F-01449)

I encourage the First Minister to read all of the letter from the Scottish pay reference and implementation group of 24 June 2005, because it makes clear that senior staff in the state hospital are not part of the agenda for change pay scales. Senior staff do not qualify for the special payment, which applies only to front-line staff, yet all of the senior staff at the state hospital received an extra £7,000, backdated to 2005, at a time when pay was frozen for everybody else. Does the First Minister share my anger that senior staff have taken it upon themselves to pay themselves more money, without knowledge or sign-off by the cabinet secretary, which is required? Will he therefore ensure that the matter is investigated independently of the state hospital?

I welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate, not just on behalf of my party but as one of three co-conveners of the cross-party group on chronic pain—the other co-conveners are Jackson Carlaw and John Wilson. I echo what the cabinet secretary said and welcome to the public gallery the many people from across Scotland who are part of the cross-party group. Some members might spot Dorothy-Grace Elder, a former parliamentary colleague, whose championing of the cause of chronic pain in the first session of the Parliament led to the cross-party group’s formation. The campaign is not new. Indeed, some of us think that it has been rather a long haul. Many of the campaigners who have been seeking change for more than a decade are impatient to see a difference on the ground. Over the years, there have been numerous helpful reports, commissioned by different Governments. Professor McEwen’s report, for example, was followed by the report, “Getting to GRIPS with Chronic Pain in Scotland—Getting Relevant Information on Pain Services: Benchmarking Chronic Pain Services in Partnership with NHS Boards, Patients and Service Providers”. All the reports highlighted gaps in provision. There has been frustration about the lack of action. We have a postcode lottery of care—whether someone receives a service depends on where they live. Much of what the cabinet secretary said is therefore most welcome. I think that Scottish Labour was the only party to pledge in its manifesto that it would create a residential pain centre in Scotland and end the ordeal of pain patients from Scotland being sent as far away as Bath, in Somerset.

I encourage the cabinet secretary to read the rest of our manifesto. If he delivered on all our manifesto commitments, I might have more praise for him. The cabinet secretary and I share the objective of setting up a residential service, because we often think about people who have to make a return journey of 800 to 1,000 miles to get a service. The distances can be even longer; I understand that one sufferer from Shetland was sent on a marathon return journey of more than 1,600 miles. The number of patients might be small, but the people who are subjected to such gruelling travel are perhaps at the most acute end of suffering. I therefore welcome the cabinet secretary’s promise to create a Scottish in-patient service. I sound a note of caution. Specialist provision, by its very nature, cannot be scattered across Scotland, especially when there are gaps in the most basic services, as we acknowledge to be the case. There has been a lack of action on the matter in the past, so I applaud the cabinet secretary’s determination to set up an in-patient service, which is in stark contrast with what went before. In the past few years, more than £1.1 million of Scottish taxpayers’ money has been used to send just 119 patients on long journeys, rather than spent on creating a Scottish in-patient service. Wales has long had an in-patient centre at Powys, and I commend that model to the cabinet secretary. Our amendment is about not bricks and mortar but recreating specialist provision in Scotland, which, because of its nature, I fear needs to be centralised. Members might know that Susan Archibald brought a petition to the Parliament on behalf of the cross-party group. She asked for residential services to be provided in Scotland, not Bath. She asked for improved and consistent access to pain services for patients throughout Scotland. As a severe pain sufferer, her evidence to the Public Petitions Committee was courageous and profoundly affecting. I do not think that anybody remained unmoved by her story. I am extremely proud of the campaigning by the cross-party group’s volunteers over the years because, despite obstacles, they have persevered to keep their focus on improving services. I turn to local services. The Scottish service model for chronic pain, to which the health secretary referred, was outlined by the late Dr Peter Mackenzie, our first lead clinician in chronic pain, in 2009. However, so far only six of the 14 health boards have the model in place. I accept that more are in the pipeline but how long do patients have to wait? I share the cabinet secretary’s desire to accelerate the rate of change. We now hear from the Scottish Government that it will hold health boards accountable for implementing the model. That is welcome, but real improvement cannot be implemented without funding. We know that 10 of the 14 health boards do not record a budget for chronic pain treatment. That is not me saying that; it is the campaigners who the cabinet secretary rightly praised a few moments ago. The previous health secretary declined to give any direct funding to stimulate the provision of chronic pain services beyond initial funding of some £50,000 for a managed clinical network in Glasgow. For the past few years, it appears that the Scottish Government has put chronic pain—which affects some 780,000 people in Scotland—in the slow lane. Now, at least, in complete contrast to his predecessor, we have a health secretary prepared to inject some momentum. Accelerating the pace of change is essential if we are to see a difference on the ground, but we also need transparency. Information on the true state of chronic pain services has not always been evident. I doubt that even the cabinet secretary has been told about some of the issues that have arisen. For example, was he told that NHS Lanarkshire, which has one of Scotland’s worst chronic pain rates, has only two part-time consultants working with pain? That is one whole-time equivalent for a population of 562,000, with an estimated 26 per cent of the population suffering from chronic pain. We know that Lanarkshire has had some small seed money for an improvement group, but the need is clearly far greater than that. We have consultants who are part time—they are also, in the main, anaesthetists. That also applies to people in multidisciplinary teams—the nurses, physiotherapists and clinical psychologists. In many areas, disciplines such as occupational therapy and physiotherapy are just not represented. I know that money is tight but the cabinet secretary needs to be aware that more than 50 patients were suddenly removed from NHS Lanarkshire’s waiting list last year, apparently without the knowledge of the doctors or the staff. They were sent to a private hospital for pain treatment but were not seen by a pain specialist. Making a waiting list look better is not confined just to a few areas. That money could have been better spent on securing more time for chronic pain treatment in the NHS.

There will indeed be standards, and the health boards will have a system that they operate. However, those are matters for clinical judgment rather than the judgment of politicians or bureaucrats. The health boards will have protocols that refer people to the right level of pain treatment. The cabinet secretary may be more knowledgeable than me on the issue. He might well place something in the Scottish Parliament information centre to advise us about that—I am getting the nod, so there is agreement there. I take members from NHS Lanarkshire to NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, which has had plans in place for years and staff who have worked incredibly hard to provide a service. I know that that service is widely appreciated by patients. However, just last year, the health board reported that the waiting time for patients for appointments to see a pain psychologist to help them to cope was “between 72 and 82 weeks.” I ask members to imagine someone in severe pain being informed in the winter that their next appointment would not happen in the current year or in the next year but that they would be seen the following year. That is quite shocking. I think that the cabinet secretary said that at present people are waiting 60 weeks, but that is still well over a year. I hope that the cabinet secretary agrees that there is a need to be transparent about the scale of the challenge that we face, so that we can accurately measure progress. In discussing transparency, I have to turn to Healthcare Improvement Scotland’s update report, which was widely attacked for whitewashing the bad news about chronic pain. The report omitted staff numbers, whole-time equivalent numbers and patient numbers; it also omitted to mention the fact that only four out of 14 health boards had a budget for chronic pain treatment. The information had been sent by health boards to Healthcare Improvement Scotland, so one can only presume that it chose to leave it out so that the picture would look better. We were told by HIS that the average waiting time for a first appointment at a pain clinic was 11 weeks. The report did not mention that six boards had not supplied information about waiting times, so it was not possible to give us the Scottish average. The answer to a freedom of information request that I sent to health boards last year showed that around 3,000 pain patients were on waiting lists: 1,866 were waiting for a first appointment and 1,082 were in the queue for a second appointment. Despite the hard work and innovation of staff to stretch services, the wait between first and second appointments was frankly appalling in some areas. We hear much about the need to transfer more chronic pain services to primary care. Many of us agree with that, as that approach brings services much closer to patients and allows patients increasingly to self-manage their conditions. However, we need to be wary. The British Medical Association has said: “Primary care already deals with the great majority of chronic pain cases. However, there needs to be the option to refer to a specialist pain service for particularly difficult cases. Any further transfer of work ... would have to be evidence based” and “be accompanied by appropriate resources”. There is a need to involve those with chronic pain in the design of services. I know that the cabinet secretary has already added one patient to the chronic pain steering group, which is welcome, and he has outlined a process of more systematic engagement. I support the cabinet secretary’s new approach. If we get this right, we are much more likely to design services that actually deliver for people. That surely is an objective that we all share across the Parliament. I move amendment S4M-06746.1, to leave out from “also welcomes” to end and insert: “calls on the Scottish Government to establish a dedicated NHS chronic pain residential treatment centre as a matter of urgency, and believes that NHS boards should be required to prepare a service delivery plan for all aspects of chronic pain as soon as possible and that regular monitoring of each plan’s implementation should be required.”

Will the member take an intervention?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what criteria are used to test patients to identify their genetic risk of developing breast cancer. (S4T-00360)

The cabinet secretary is obviously aware of concerns that women in Scotland might somehow be disadvantaged as a result of NICE’s decision to make more women in England with a genetic predisposition to breast cancer eligible for screening. I therefore very much welcome his confirmation that that will also be available in Scotland. That is very helpful indeed. Given that the cabinet secretary and I agree that early detection and treatment are essential in treating cancer, will he consider how we can work together to implement Labour’s policy of halving the current waiting time for seeing a cancer specialist and getting results in two weeks?

I share the cabinet secretary’s aspiration to do all that we can and very much welcome the additional staff who have been put in place. However, we can go further than that and I am sure that the cabinet secretary also agrees that swift treatment of those with cancer is essential the whole way through the system. Does he therefore agree that it is not acceptable for cancer patients to be left waiting for follow-up treatment with no guarantee of being seen quickly and no information on how long patients wait beyond that initial period of treatment, and does he agree that improvements should be made in this area?

Oh, come on.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its plans are to recognise and promote Scotland’s cultural achievers locally. (S4O-02108)

We are delighted to have that recognised locally. The cabinet secretary has also in the past visited the Helensburgh heroes project and she knows at first hand of its impressive work to recognise the great Scots from my area, including John Logie Baird. Does she believe that it might be useful to roll out a scheme to coincide with Glasgow’s Commonwealth games that would encourage tourists to visit surrounding areas, such as Helensburgh, and learn about our local heroes?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the reported comments of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing that “we are still going to need the same number of beds, the same number of hospitals, the same number of doctors and nurses just to stand still” in relation to an ageing population reflect Scottish Government policy. (S4F-01367)

The First Minister should be advised that the bed planning tool has already been renamed the bed cutting tool. Alex Neil made the promise about “the same number of beds, the same number of hospitals” and “the same number of doctors and nurses” to a Unison conference just two weeks ago. The following day, his civil servants were running around, forced to clarify and reinterpret his comments. Yesterday, not one back bencher defended his comments. Did Alex Neil actually mean what he said, or was he simply expressing his view in terms of the debate?

In relation to the recent scandal of doctored inspection reports—which resulted in a lack of confidence in Healthcare Improvement Scotland—and the forthcoming integration of health and social care, does the cabinet secretary agree with Labour’s proposals for a new independent scrutiny body?

The minister will be aware of my support for extension of the vaccination programme. Is he also aware of comments by Alan McDevitt, who is chair of the British Medical Association’s Scottish general practitioners committee, who has expressed concern about the ability of GPs to deliver vaccination programmes without significant support from other health staff, including school nurses, health visitors and district nurses? What specific action is being taken to release nurses to participate in the shingles vaccination programme and in other extremely important vaccination programmes?

I always welcome the opportunity to debate the national health service in the chamber. It is an institution that we all hold in the highest regard, and we admire what is achieved daily by our hardworking NHS staff. However, there are some difficult issues on which we need an open and honest debate. Everyone is aware of the scale of the demographic challenge that we face. More of us are living to a ripe old age and will potentially be relying on health and social care services. I do not think that we do not need to rehearse the arguments in the chamber. We all agree that we should fund much earlier intervention to prevent people from having to engage with care services. We agree that keeping people out of hospital when they do not need to be there is the right thing to do, as it is not only better for the public purse but much better for the individual concerned. We also agree that we need to shift the balance of care. It is fair to say that we have agreed on much of that for some time, but we have failed to deliver the type of transformational change that is required. We will shortly debate the integration of health and social care: the governance arrangements, financial procedures and accountable officers, and myriad structural issues besides. We must not forget that culture is equally important and is not something for which the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing can propose legislation. We have yet to resolve fundamental questions, such as how we bring together two very different approaches. We have an national health service that is free at the point of need and which assesses people’s needs and then treats them, while our social care system assesses people’s needs, rations what can be provided based on how near a crisis the person is and then charges them for providing a service. We will struggle to succeed if we ignore such questions. I know that the cabinet secretary is grappling with some of those thorny issues, so I was most interested to read his reported comments to the Unison conference in Glasgow on 24 April—just two weeks ago—about demographic change. He said: “We are still going to need the same number of beds, the same number of hospitals, the same number of doctors and nurses just to stand still”. If members were in any doubt, that was confirmed by a number of national newspapers and welcomed in many quarters as a firm commitment and a clear direction of travel. There was nothing equivocal about that statement, and I think that members would all agree that there is nothing equivocal about the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. Indeed, Jackson Carlaw is fond of saying that cabinet secretary is a pragmatic man, and I have to say that I agree. However, it would appear that, since that statement, someone has got to the cabinet secretary. The cabinet secretary’s amendment is the parliamentary equivalent of shouting, “There’s a squirrel!” to distract attention. Instead of talking about what we need to do to tackle demographic change, and helping us genuinely to understand his comments about no changes to beds, hospitals, and doctors and nurses, he wants instead a discussion on minimum unit pricing. Both of those subjects are substantial in their own right, but minimum unit pricing should not be used as a cover for avoiding a discussion on the level of health services that we can expect in the future. I confess that I am left to wonder whether the cabinet secretary meant what he said. Has he been silenced by his civil servants, or is it just another case of saying one thing in public to a Unison audience and another thing entirely in private? Let us suppose for a minute that the cabinet secretary is genuine, because I believe that he is. It is clear that NHS Lothian did not get that message when it was discussing proposals to close three hospitals—the Astley Ainslie, Corstorphine and Liberton hospitals—all in the week that the cabinet secretary said that there would be no hospital closures. Those closures are likely to lead to a reduction in beds. I applaud the valiant effort of the chief executive of NHS Lothian to convince us otherwise, but there is no disputing the facts. In 2007 there were 2,518 beds in NHS Lothian, and for the last available quarter there are 2,411. That is a reduction by anybody’s standards. That is not the whole picture, as the argument is made that beds in the care sector will make up for any reduction in hospital beds. However, there will be a need for further capacity just to stand still, never mind to make up for the loss of beds. For example, the City of Edinburgh Council will have to cope with the closure of five private care homes that provide very sheltered accommodation, which was recently announced by Cairn Housing Association, on top of coping with the changing demographics. Local authorities throughout Scotland are struggling to cope now, never mind as the numbers of older people increase. The capacity is just not there, and there is no promise from NHS Lothian to re-provide each and every one of those beds in the care sector, so consequently we lose beds. If we delve a bit deeper, we see that, on page 166 of its paper, the health board notes that, in its clinical strategic framework, “The shape of our workforce is changing. There will be fewer doctors overall and where doctors skills are needed in specialist areas of care, these may need to be provided on fewer sites to ensure that services are safe.” Let me repeat that: “There will be fewer doctors overall”. The number of doctors will decrease. Does that not all fly in the face of the cabinet secretary’s promise to the Unison conference in Glasgow? The situation is not confined to NHS Lothian. NHS Western Isles proposes to cut the number of its beds from 89 to 53, and other health boards including NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde are reviewing their acute services. I do not think that the cabinet secretary is saying at the outset that the review will mean no changes to hospital numbers, bed numbers or staff numbers, but perhaps he is. When we consider the SNP’s record, it makes interesting reading. Bed numbers have been reduced by more than 1,400 since 2007 despite an SNP promise made by Nicola Sturgeon in 2006 to increase the number of beds. Nurse numbers have been reduced by around 2,000. Perhaps more seriously, the intake of student nurses was slashed by 12 per cent in 2011-12 and there was a further cut of 10 per cent in 2012-13. I think that we would all agree that that is a potentially damaging decision that will have serious consequences in the years to come. We are storing up trouble for the future. If the Government will not listen to me, it should listen to the Royal College of Nursing, which tells us that “cuts to the workforce are not only bad news for patient care but mean that the remaining staff in the NHS are increasingly over-stretched”. Furthermore, Unison reports that there are serious concerns about patient safety with the reduction in nurse-to-patient ratios, and the British Medical Association calls for an open and honest debate about what the NHS can and cannot afford. The BMA also points to the need to increase the resourcing of social care and primary care if we are properly to meet the changing demographic profile of our population. None of this is easy. I recognise that there are real financial constraints both in the NHS and in local government. In that context, the cabinet secretary’s comments were interesting—some would say that they were positively extraordinary. They were a complete departure from his department’s thinking, certainly a departure from the thinking of his predecessor, and a departure from the general direction in which health boards are travelling. I believe that the comments merit serious debate. Can we have the best of both worlds? Can we maintain bed numbers and hospital numbers even if that flies in the face of what health boards are planning to do? Should we maintain staff numbers to maintain the best possible quality of care and is there a trade-off in there? Those are serious issues that merit serious debate. In addition, how do we ensure that we invest in the social care sector and truly shift the balance of care? I fear that, having promised one thing in public, the cabinet secretary is saying another thing in private. Perhaps he simply told the Unison audience what it wanted to hear and has since been pulled back into line by his civil servants. If he is serious, however, we urgently need a national strategy and national planning. Announcing that there will be no bed number reductions, the same number of hospitals and the same number of nurses and doctors requires thought if it is to be more than simply a glib soundbite. Someone said to me that the cabinet secretary was simply playing to the gallery and making it up as he went along. I thought that that remark was uncharitable. However, some evidence of thinking on the part of the Government that underpins the cabinet secretary’s comments would be very helpful; or, if his comments were made in error, he should please tell us, not least because the people of Scotland deserve an honest debate about their NHS. I move, That the Parliament notes reported comments from the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing at the Unison conference in Glasgow on 24 April 2013 that an ageing population means that “we are still going to need the same number of beds, the same number of hospitals, the same number of doctors and nurses just to stand still”; voices concern at reports that the future of three hospitals in NHS Lothian is under threat; further notes that the Scottish Government has already cut over 1,400 beds and almost 2,000 nursing and midwifery staff, and calls on the cabinet secretary to guarantee that his comments mean no further cuts in beds, hospitals, doctors and nurses.

I hope that the cabinet secretary and everyone else in the chamber is proud of that reduction, because those figures relate to the closure of long-stay institutions—including Lennox Castle hospital—which enabled people with learning difficulties to live in communities.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will Mark McDonald take an intervention?

Will Bob Doris take an intervention?

The number of nurses has been reduced by 2,000.

The cabinet secretary did.

Will the member take an intervention?

On the basis that the member named me, will she take an intervention?

I agree absolutely with much of what the minister says. Therefore, I am at a loss to understand whether he agrees with his cabinet secretary, who said that we would need the same number of hospitals.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate about funding for the third sector. Like others in the chamber, I used to work in the third sector, so I bring a little bit of experience to the debate. However, I will not rehearse all of my past history. I hope that Dennis Robertson will forgive me if I get just a little bit political. If I do, that will be born out of frustration, because we have often talked about how we can best fund the voluntary sector. This is not a new debate, and we still have not achieved something quite basic, which is to provide three-year funding. Under the previous, Labour-led, Scottish Government, we witnessed the advent of the compact with the voluntary sector. That included three-year funding. We agreed it at a national level, and we agreed it at a local level. Then, as Gavin Brown rightly pointed out, we had the joint statement on the relationship at a local level between Government and the third sector, which was signed by no less than the SCVO, SOLACE, COSLA and the Scottish Government in September 2009. All that is welcome. We all agree that three-year funding is the right approach. However, we simply have not delivered it on the ground, and we have a patchwork of differing experiences across the country. Consistency is most definitely an issue. The other issue is resource. Although the third sector would be quick to point out that the majority of its income is self-generated, 21 per cent comes from local government and a further 21 per cent comes from a combination of central Government and the rest of the public sector, such as national health service boards. I saw the cabinet secretary’s face in response to Margaret McDougall’s point about the volume of funding, so I know that I am risking his wrath when I say that third sector funding from the Scottish Government was cut by 11.5 per cent in 2012-13, and is projected to fall in total by something like 15 per cent over the spending review period. Ken Macintosh was equally right to point out that the third sector early intervention fund of £20 million is four times oversubscribed with more than 400 groups applying. I welcome the previous announcement by the Minister for Children and Young People that that fund will be topped up with an extra £10 million, but it feels a bit like sticking a finger in a dam that is about to burst. The fund is now less than the schemes that it replaced and, because of the delay in sorting everything out, many voluntary sector organisations have a hand-to-mouth existence while they wait to hear. By anybody’s book, that is not good practice. We should collectively try to set the highest standards in Government as well as in the rest of our public bodies. However, the point of the debate is three-year funding and, on that issue, we are as one. The most striking difference is in how we treat the third sector compared with the private sector. Private sector bodies regularly receive three, five and—for goodness’ sake—in some cases, 10-year contracts but, in some places, the third sector feels strangled by annual funding arrangements, as we heard earlier from Gavin Brown. I recall without any fondness spending nine months delivering a service and three months chasing money for the next year and worrying about whether I would retain committed and specialist staff. We rightly talk about how much we value the work of the third sector, whether it is tackling homelessness, providing social care or building capacity in our communities. However, we cannot expect the sector to keep doing more while looking over its shoulder to see whether the money will follow. Cuts to local government funding are having a detrimental impact on three-year funding, because local authorities are uncertain about what lies ahead. I genuinely believe that the cabinet secretary wants to do something about three-year funding. If that is the case, he will have the support of Labour members, too.

That is sad.

I listen to absolutely everything that John Swinney says. Will he also listen to what I say? Eighty-three per cent of all the Scottish Government’s cuts last year were passed on to local government.

I did not.

I join with others in congratulating George Adam on securing this debate during multiple sclerosis week. I also congratulate Stacey Adam on educating George and on going further than that and ensuring that he did not share some of the personal stories that I have witnessed him sharing in previous debates. It is clear that his passion and conviction have been born out of Stacey’s experience. We are right to recognise that 100,000 people across the UK live with MS, with twice as many women as men. Almost 10,500 people in Scotland live with the condition, which means that we have one of the highest rates of MS in the world, if not the highest. The condition appears to be random, and Clare Adamson was right to describe some of the complexity that underpins it. As one of the few original members of the Parliament—I said “original”, not “older”—I can recall that, in 2000, campaigners descended on the Parliament to protest about the lack of treatment and care services. They rightly challenged us to do more, particularly given that the prevalence of the condition in Scotland is so much higher than it is elsewhere. We listened, and we agreed that action needed to be taken. Malcolm Chisholm has described some of the action that he took personally, and the issue has been a priority for successive Governments. Circulars have been issued, standards have been set and resources have been made available, but it must depress us all that a postcode lottery remains and that the experience that people have on the ground is not what we would want for them. I remember that, at that time, we were told that people in Turkey had a better chance of receiving the drugs that they needed to deal with MS than people in Scotland had. Now, only about one third of people who would benefit from taking MS drugs actually receive them, which is about half the figure in Northern Ireland, never mind the rest of the UK. Only MS sufferers in Poland and Romania get worse treatment than we provide in Scotland. The MS Society survey is extremely helpful. It tells us that about a quarter of MS sufferers say that they cannot see a neurologist when they need help with their symptoms. In 2009, the Scottish Government published clinical standards for neurological services, which I recall being welcomed by members from across the chamber. However, although the standards might have improved for those who get a service, it is clear that not enough of a difference has been made for those who require services at particular points in time. I am reminded of the debate that we had earlier on funding for the third sector. We have a policy framework that is largely right and members from across the Parliament agree about what needs to be done but, 13 years on, the frustration is that there is no consistent delivery on the ground. We must not allow that to continue. I hope that the minister will drive real change so that people’s experience of treatment and care improves. The survey also considered the emotional, social and employment impact of MS. We need much wider consideration of the actions that we can take to mitigate some of those wider impacts. Of people who are diagnosed with MS, 44 per cent are depressed because of uncertainty about the future. Therefore, Nanette Milne was right to talk about the emotional support that can be provided. Some people reported experiencing social stigma because of a lack of knowledge and understanding in wider society, while others expressed huge fears about having to give up work prematurely. Ultimately, people with MS want to live as full and active a life as possible before their condition progresses. As George Adam rightly said, they are real people and families and we need to provide them with treatment and support so that they can do just that.

3. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on reports that nurses spend around 279,000 hours a week on non-essential paperwork. (S4F-01316)

In the week that nurses warned that the dramatic increase in paperwork was taking them away from direct patient care, the RCN and Unison warn the Scottish Government about unsafe staffing levels, with 27 per cent of nurses saying that staffing levels are rarely or never safe. Does the First Minister agree that cutting 2,000 nurses from the NHS, thereby reducing their number to the lowest level since the Scottish National Party came to power, is having a negative impact on patient care? Will he therefore agree to look again at workforce planning to reverse the cuts in nurse numbers so that we can provide the best possible patient care?

I, too, very much welcome the opportunity to debate welfare reform and its impact in Scotland. I commend the Welfare Reform Committee for its work, particularly in highlighting the research from Sheffield Hallam University so that we begin to understand the scale of the challenge facing us. The report estimates that £1.6 billion will be taken from the pockets of some of our poorest people and from the Scottish economy—equivalent to £480 a year for every working-age adult. The worst affected, however, are the disabled, with reforms to incapacity benefit resulting in cuts of something like £500 million per year, never mind the impact of the other benefit reforms that will affect the disabled, such as the bedroom tax. For the working poor, changes will result in cuts of £300 million a year from tax credits. The list goes on. I have no problem with reforming the welfare system. It is overly complicated and bureaucratic. Many of us will recall the forms the size of telephone books that people are required to complete. However, what the Tories and the Lib Dems are doing is not deserving of the name “reform”. It is nothing more than a smokescreen for cuts—a 10 per cent cut in council tax benefit and a 20 per cent cut in incapacity benefit, to give just two examples. For the Tories to suggest that the greatest burden for the country’s recovery will be borne by those with the broadest shoulders is clearly arrant nonsense. Let us not forget that this is the month in which the Tories awarded their 13,000 millionaire pals a tax break of £100,000 more each year, as 250,000 children across the country are pushed into poverty. The changes have a disproportionate impact on women and children, as women make up the majority of those claiming benefits. I was surprised to note that 70 per cent of tax credits and 60 per cent of housing benefit are claimed by women. Some members will view the challenge only in the context of the constitution, but Sheffield Hallam’s research has some interesting things to say on the matter. First, it concludes that Scotland has not been singled out in any way. The impact of the reforms here is broadly in line with the UK average. Indeed, the problem is worse in the north-east of England, the north-west of England, the midlands, Yorkshire, London and Wales. Nevertheless, the scale of the impact is still substantial. Perhaps the lesson for us in this Parliament is that we should make common cause with people in Newcastle, Manchester, Birmingham and Liverpool, rather than this being an issue about the constitution. Secondly, the most deprived areas of Scotland are hit the hardest. Glasgow, Inverclyde, Dundee and West Dunbartonshire will face some of the biggest challenges in trying to protect their most vulnerable communities. I am interested to explore how we can assist local authorities in doing that.

Not the reforms that attack the poorest and most vulnerable in our society by being a smokescreen for cuts. This must not be an abstract debate. Willie Rennie is well aware that the consequences are already being felt. On 1 April, responsibility for council tax benefit was devolved, together with responsibility for community care grants and crisis grants. On council tax benefit, although there is an arrangement in place for this year to share the cost with local government, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is already saying that councils will not be able to fund that next year. Will the Scottish Government plug the gap fully? Anecdotal evidence suggests that local authorities are worried about meeting the demand for community care and crisis grants. In areas such as West Dunbartonshire, councils are expecting 2,000 additional claims to be made, and their funds will be insufficient to meet all the demand. What happens when the money runs out before the end of the year? Does the Scottish Government have a plan B? While we are on the subject, why has the Scottish Government not put in place a social fund commissioner to deal with appeals? Surely that is against the principles of the European convention on human rights. The much-reviled bedroom tax has been introduced. Despite the size of the discretionary housing pot increasing by the maximum amount allowed, it looks as though it will be insufficient, not just in West Dunbartonshire but in many local authority areas, to protect the most vulnerable people who are affected. When the Tories say that people should just move house, they display a total misunderstanding of the housing market. West Dunbartonshire alone is short by 1,000 one-bedroom houses. Where should people move to? We recognise that blame lies with the Tories and Liberal Democrats, but people will look to the Scottish Government to mitigate the worst impact of welfare reform. The action on passported benefits and council tax benefit is welcome, but it is a drop in the ocean. Even now, at this late stage, legislation to protect tenants from eviction and funding to help housing associations and councils would provide a lifeline to those who are impacted by the bedroom tax. Even guidance would help local authorities. The cabinet secretary must listen to the academics writing today in The Herald about the importance of intervention for stopping families and communities being broken up. They recognise that money is tight, and they point out that the council tax freeze is regressive. It helps the richest in our society the most. Their suggestion is to end the freeze, which would help to pay for the cuts to welfare. That would help some of the most vulnerable people in our society. It might be a radical suggestion, but it merits consideration, because the consequences of doing nothing will be devastating.

It is times like these for which devolution was created. It is the very worst kind of politics to tell people simply to wait for some indeterminate time in the future when the power exists to help them now. The Scottish National Party must use the powers that it has—

The SNP must use those powers, because the poorest people cannot afford to wait.

Will the member give way?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on reports that junior doctors are regularly working up to 100 hours per week. (S4F-01286)

Does the First Minister agree with the words of Tom Berry, the chair of the British Medical Association’s junior doctors committee in Scotland? He said that, despite the working time directive, “There are junior doctors who are still working rotas which include 7 consecutive 13 hour nightshifts. It is clear that making junior doctors work 90 hour weeks is not in the spirit of the legislation and can have serious implications for the health and wellbeing of doctors and as a result, affect patient care”. Does the First Minister agree that the practices uncovered by the Channel 4 programme “Dispatches” are truly concerning and that transparency is needed from boards on the extent of the issue and the impact on patient care? Would he therefore agree that the matter should be independently investigated by Audit Scotland?

I very much welcome the opportunity to contribute at stage 3 of the bill. Like many in the Parliament, I have been supportive of the bill’s intentions for much longer than I care to remember. I acknowledge the effort that goes into taking a member’s bill through the Parliament. I have done it before, so I know the enormity of the task. It is not like being a minister, surrounded by an army of civil servants drafting and redrafting the bill, answering every question about whether the word should be “and”, “if” or “but” and providing copious explanatory notes and financial memoranda, with briefing notes coming out of your ears—and indeed the general hand holding that ministers sometimes need. I know that Mark McDonald had assistance from the Scottish Government, which would have made life significantly easier, but that does not diminish the amount of work that he will have had to put in as the member in charge. For that, I congratulate him. The essence of any successful member’s bill is to hit on the right idea, which invites consensus across the chamber. Mark McDonald has done that, and he deserves our thanks for it. I confess that it gave me unallayed delight to listen to Christine Grahame’s gardening tips. I shall rush to the Official Report of the stage 2 discussions so that I can understand the level of interest and expertise that we have on this Parliament’s benches. I invite Christine Grahame to come and visit my garden and help me at some point in the future.

Oh, and I was getting excited for a moment. Clearly, I am to be disappointed. This journey started a number of years ago with our former colleague Scott Barrie MSP, who has been mentioned by other members. Fergus Ewing, too, put in considerable work. I am sure that they will both be delighted when the bill is passed, as it hopefully will be this evening. I also acknowledge the work of Colin Watson, Derek Park, Pamala McDougall and all the members of Scothedge who have encouraged and cajoled us—frankly, they have told us to get on with it—and they will be equally delighted, not least because of the acceptance of an amendment today that will undoubtedly improve the bill, with the inclusion of deciduous trees and hedges. I must confess that I never thought that I would get excited by trees, but constituent after constituent came to seek my assistance, and I began to understand just what difficulties trees and high hedges can cause. In fairness, it is not the trees and high hedges that are the difficulty; of course, it is to do with their owners and the neighbour disputes that arise when we do not think about the impact of our actions, or lack of action, on other people. Let me share some stories. Mrs A from Shandon was concerned that her neighbour’s trees were overgrown and encroaching not just into her garden but into another neighbouring garden. Her neighbour refused even to discuss the matter with her. He even refused to discuss it with the local authority when it tried to help. That was back in 2007, and they have still not had a remedy. Mrs B from Helensburgh had a similar problem in 2008. She is surrounded on three sides by huge conifers and has been living virtually without daylight, with a neighbour who would not address the problem. Another lady from Kilcreggan had a similar problem in 2008. She was told that she could prune back the branches and the roots that cross the boundary, but her neighbour threatened litigation if she even dared to enter his property. In the case of Mrs D from Arrochar, a 60ft pine tree was a potential hazard, swaying dangerously in any high wind—and we can acknowledge that there are lots of high winds in Scotland. The owner refused to do anything about it, and the local authority was unable to help.

I am grateful for that intervention, and I could not agree with the member more. Some of those constituents approached me as early as 2003 or 2004, and somebody contacted me about a case just two weeks ago. The matters remain unresolved. I have probably had about 30 cases over the intervening period, which is a significant number. The majority of people either resolve their disputes or suffer in silence. In all cases, the people concerned have come to my surgery because of inconsiderate neighbours. No remedy was available to any of them until now. I know that they will be delighted when the bill is passed tonight, because it will make a practical difference to their lives. A dispute resolution process will be in place, which will drive the majority to co-operate without involving the local authority, while providing an important safety net to deal with neighbours who are determined to be intransigent. Stuart McMillan is right to say that passing the bill is only the start. Implementation is key and I look forward to the Government taking that forward.

On a related point of order, at the end of February COSLA considered a motion seeking changes to the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001. I suggest to Jamie Hepburn that instead of using parliamentary time in this way, he might want to use it to introduce measures to protect the 100,000 vulnerable Scots who will face the bedroom tax on Monday.

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will bring forward emergency legislation to protect tenants from eviction as a result of arrears arising from the so-called bedroom tax, and financial support to help local authorities and housing associations to mitigate its impact.

Nicola Sturgeon really needs to stop politicking. [Laughter.]

The SNP clearly thinks it is a joke, but the bedroom tax will come into effect on Monday. Although the majority of members will agree that the bedroom tax is an abhorrent policy, it is not sufficient for the Scottish Government simply to shift responsibility to individual councils. The Scottish Government has the power to do something about it now. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it essential to have across Scotland, rather than a postcode lottery, a common legislative approach that protects all tenants, whether they are council or housing association tenants, and which is backed by resources to mitigate the impact? Our repeated calls for action have been echoed by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, by many housing organisations and by organisations such as Children 1st. I know that the Minister for Housing and Welfare has already said no, and John Swinney has already said no to amending the Local Government Finance Order 2013. Will the cabinet secretary today act in the interests of all Scotland’s tenants? Will she forgo her holiday and return to the chamber during recess to pass emergency legislation? In so doing, she would protect the 100,000 vulnerable Scots who will be affected by the bedroom tax and who need our help now. [Interruption.]

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Far from correcting the record, I shall say that it is clear that COSLA passed a motion asking the Scottish Government to amend the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 in terms of the bedroom tax. Nothing is more clear than that, and nothing is more clear than the deafening silence from the Scottish National Party Government in terms of protecting people.

Will the member take an intervention?

This week, members might be forgiven for thinking that they have been elected to a different chamber, given that an overwhelming majority of our parliamentary time has been spent on debating issues that are the UK Parliament’s responsibility. Having spent a little time reflecting on the SNP’s motivations, I begin to understand that this is nothing more than the parliamentary equivalent of Christina McKelvie’s shouting, “Look—there’s a squirrel!” Such is the SNP’s cynicism that it is using our parliamentary time to build up a head of steam prior to its conference at the weekend in the vain hope that delegates will not notice just how incompetent it has been at running the yes Scotland campaign. After all, even the cybernats have monstered elements of the campaign and have been openly critical on Twitter of a number of key figures. I sympathise with and understand the SNP’s need to create a diversion, but it is all very disappointing. In that respect, at least, it is being consistent in its operation. It is all reminiscent of groundhog day—another SNP debate, another reserved issue. How about debating some of the things that the SNP is responsible for? How about debating national health service waiting lists? On that point, I will take Jim Eadie’s intervention.

I have got the point. He is eating into my time. He had nothing to say about NHS waiting lists. [Interruption.] I hear Joe FitzPatrick’s voice warning that we cannot discuss NHS waiting lists. Perhaps that is a little bit too tricky just now. How about the bedroom tax? Cue Joe FitzPatrick. [Interruption.] No, no: steer clear of that one. The SNP does not want to expose the fact that it is doing nothing to mitigate the worst impact on the people of Scotland. How about child poverty? Oh, but it has made no progress on that. Let us stick to blaming Westminster. Let us not debate the things that the SNP has responsibility for because it would be found out. I turn to the substance of the debate.

I have heard enough from Mr FitzPatrick. I have always acknowledged that there are many different views in this chamber, across parties and within them. However, wherever we stand—as a unilateralist or a multilateralist—we have a clear responsibility to think through the consequences of our actions. People have heard me speak before about the economic impact of Faslane and I make no apology for doing so again. There are 11,000 jobs dependent on the base, 6,500 employed directly at Faslane and Coulport—[Interruption.]

No, I will not. Mr Brodie should listen. There are a further 4,500 jobs in the supply chain, using standard income multipliers. On top of that, a further 1,500 to 2,000 jobs are coming to the area due to the decision to relocate all the UK’s submarines there. Those figures were supplied by the MOD and by Scottish Enterprise, which commissioned a survey from EKOS into the economic impact. While I know that members are all very keen on debating the numbers and that it excites many of them, let me be frank. The SNP looks ridiculous when it claims that a lesser number are affected. At one stage, it was only 500 and then it doubled to 1,000. However, the reality is that there would not be a strategic need for Faslane and Coulport and all the jobs would go.

No. There is a suggestion that the Scottish navy would be based at Faslane, but no one in the SNP could tell me how many submarines or frigates that would mean, or even how many fishery protection vessels. The truth is that the SNP does not know and certainly will not say. What is the reason why the SNP will not say? Maybe it is because Angus Robertson has consistently refused to guarantee that the number of jobs already at Faslane would be retained after separation. Maybe it is because John Swinney talked in his leaked paper about slashing the amount spent on defence. Maybe it is because the SNP just does not have a clue. It is interesting that Stuart Crawford, a defence consultant to whom the SNP pays attention, has said that Faslane would sustain only around 1,000 jobs as the future base of a separate Scottish navy. What does the SNP intend to do with the other 10,000 people? Are they simply to be thrown on the scrap heap? Do they not matter in an independent Scotland?

The SNP does not even begin to consider the impact that that would have on the shipbuilding industry on the Clyde. Ninety per cent of the orders received by Scotland’s shipbuilding industry are awarded by the MOD. Separation would threaten those jobs, too. I say as gently as I can to the SNP and, in particular, to Christina McKelvie, who I am pleased to see is back in the chamber, that the SNP’s policy is to use the money saved from Trident to fund conventional defences. It is not for welfare or for funding hospitals and schools. It is not for tackling child poverty. Please stop pretending like this because it is disingenuous and it diminishes members’ contributions. Finally, there is nothing moral or principled about the SNP’s approach. Simply moving Trident south of the border does not reduce nuclear weapons. The SNP may promise a constitutional ban, but by joining NATO it is explicitly allowing NATO partners to use Scottish waters for nuclear subs, something that its own First Minister confirmed on the BBC “Politics Show” straight after the SNP conference. I ask the SNP to please stop posturing and get on with the responsibilities that it has.

Does the member accept that what we are arguing about are the 11,000 jobs, and that irrespective of the adoption of a unilateralist or a multilateralist position, the Helensburgh branch of the Labour Party would agree that we need to take care of the jobs too?

I am sure that the member did not mean to make any personal insults and that he will reflect on that. When the member visited Helensburgh to debate this very issue, the people made him aware that 11,000 jobs were dependent on the base. Does he not believe anyone else then?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The member might have no respect for me, but I would have thought that he should respect your position as Presiding Officer.

I think that members will agree that there should be a welcome change of tone in this debate. I consider myself extremely privileged to lead this debate on dementia carers. Let me start by acknowledging and welcoming the support for this issue that exists across all parties in the Parliament, as is evidenced by the members who have remained in the chamber this evening. I also very much want to welcome to the public gallery Tommy Whitelaw, whose work—and his journey with his mother Joan—led to the Scottish Government providing funding for the dementia carers’ voices project. The dementia carers’ voices project recognises the central importance of the carer’s voice in informing the future shape of services and in ensuring that the needs of carers are recognised in that process. Members will recall that, almost two years ago, Tommy Whitelaw started his tour of towns and cities across Scotland—walking much of the way, I suspect—to raise awareness both of the impact of dementia on families and of the difficult but vital role that is played by carers. I never met Tommy’s mum, but I know that she was not defined by her dementia. She was a daughter, a sister, a wife, a friend, a workmate, a neighbour and a valued member of her community. I know that she was a much loved mother and, clearly, a very special lady. Tommy was at his mum’s side when she received her diagnosis of dementia, but they went home without support. At a later stage of her condition, they were told that there was not much more that could be done and it was time to consider residential care. For much of their journey in dealing with dementia, they did not have access to a wide range of support. Certainly, there was little support for Tommy himself to help with the isolation and loneliness that he felt as a carer, which I know is felt by many carers in my constituency and throughout Scotland. Despite the much-lauded carer and dementia strategies that successive Governments have put in place, the experience of Tommy and Joan is repeated by other people. We know that from the stories that Tommy has collected and continues to collect, which are at the heart and foundation of the dementia carers’ voices project. Something is not working well at a local level. There is a postcode lottery of care, some of which involves gaps in health provision and some of which is about differences in services between local authority areas. However, irrespective of where the problem lies, the challenge for us in this chamber is to ensure that the best possible standard of care is provided wherever someone lives in the country. In that regard, the dementia carers’ voices project will be not only helpful but extremely useful to the Government because it will use the stories that Tommy has collected on his journey to shape thinking about services, which I hope the Government will take and use; highlight the role and importance of carers, which I know the Parliament recognises; and consider how we empower carers by using the charter of rights for people with dementia. I think that virtually every member in the chamber signed up to the charter, but it is not yet real. We need to ensure that the isolation and loneliness that Tommy experienced is not felt by others and that there is a much better understanding of dementia and the carer’s journey among health and social care professionals. Important and helpful messages are already emerging, and I think that we should learn from them now rather than simply wait until the end of the project. One of the messages is that we do not currently ask about the person inside the dementia, but if we are to provide the best possible person-centred care we need to know about their lives, about what they do and do not like, and about them as individuals so that we can put the individual very much at the centre of their care. We know, because carers tell us, that there is no consistency of care staff, and yet we know that familiarity and a routine is so important to somebody with dementia. We heard a story from a carer in the Highlands—I think—about someone having 104 different care staff in a short space of time. That is not the way in which we want to treat people with dementia. We also find experiences in the project that suggest that people need a friend and somebody to talk to who has been there before as a carer—that is something quite simple. Above all, there is the whole question of awareness. I will give members just a couple of quotes from carers who described to Tommy the issue for their becoming aware of services and being able to access them. One said that it is “like trying to crack a secret code.” Another one said that it is “like trying to break MI5.” That should not be the case; we should be much more engaged in providing information to people. Another carer said: “I now know that help is there but you have to know where to look, no one comes to you with information or instructions.” Some of that is easy to resolve. I very much welcome the Scottish Government’s guarantee of at least a year’s worth of post-diagnostic support, which I think will be helpful in changing the landscape. It has huge potential to assist people and to prevent carers from falling into crisis situations. It would be significant if the minister could signal that the support will be implemented in all care settings, including care homes and continuing care. There are 86,000 people who have already been diagnosed who might not have access to that kind of support. I strongly urge the minister to ensure that they are included. All members in the chamber recognise the importance of carers and the amount that they save the state. There are good strategies in place, but it is evident from the experience of Tommy on his tour that we need to do so much more. I commend Tommy’s journey to members because what he has done is critically important for informing us what is truly happening out there. Let us use his journey as a driver for change.

Never.

I spent part of my career in local government, so I have seen at first hand its power to drive change, improve communities and provide opportunities for residents. Local authorities are at the forefront of tackling poverty and regenerating many of our neighbourhoods, and they deserve our support, but increasingly we are asking them to do more with less. I welcome any additional funding that the cabinet secretary announced today, but Sarah Boyack was right to remind members that last year the Scottish Government passed on 83 per cent of all cuts to local government. Of course, the proportion this year before the adjustment is 50 per cent. At the same time, there are new burdens on the shoulders of local government, particularly as a result of welfare reform. What the UK Government is doing does not deserve to be called reform. It is making savage cuts, which impact on some of the most vulnerable people in our society. It is doing so at a time when it is rewarding its millionaire friends with tax cuts. The majority of members in this Parliament think that that is simply obscene. Much of the responsibility for picking up the pieces falls to local government and the voluntary sector. As the cabinet secretary said, local government will be responsible for community care grants and crisis loans, at a time when claims are likely to increase. Local government is contributing to the council tax reduction scheme alongside the Scottish Government, but no agreement is in place on how the funding will be provided in future years. The overwhelming burden of the bedroom tax—some £50 million—will fall to councils along with housing associations. They have expressed serious concerns about the impact on housing revenue budgets and repairs, and some housing associations fear that they might even go to the wall.

I say to Jamie Hepburn that the SNP missed an opportunity. We should be uniting to get the Tories to bin the bedroom tax, but instead the SNP sees everything through the prism of the constitution. Everything is about the contrast with Westminster—frankly, that is depressing. The Scottish Government has the power to mitigate the impact of the bedroom tax, but the louder the SNP members shout, the greater they intend the diversion to be. The people whom they ignore are the most vulnerable in our society. Shame on them for that. It is the impact on people that should concern us all. In many cases, people will not be able to contribute additional funding for their rent. They will inevitably struggle to manage and will fall into arrears. Simply to suggest that somehow they can just move house demonstrates a complete and utter misunderstanding of the housing market in Scotland. I say to the Tories that there is a shortage of social rented housing—one-bedroom properties are just not around. Already our surgeries are full of people who are concerned. Simply saying that it is all Westminster’s fault and “We share your pain” is just not good enough. It is exactly for times such as these that devolution was created. We can and should do something. The Scottish Government has the power to help local authorities mitigate the impact of the bedroom tax and we will support it if it is brave enough to do so. A number of creative solutions have been suggested. The Scottish Government should look at them and consider how it can help people. My local authority, West Dunbartonshire Council, is not going to evict tenants provided that they engage with the council’s debt counselling and repayment services. It has also added the maximum allowed to the discretionary housing payment pot, but it simply is not enough to cope with demand. Local authorities need help. Communities across Scotland need help. It is truly the worst kind of politics to have the power to protect people now but to suggest that they simply wait until 2016 before anything is done. This is about people’s lives. The SNP needs to raise its game.

Will the member give way?

In what has been a busy time for the respective health teams, I am pleased to bring the parliamentary week to a close debating the integration of health and social care. I do not think that there is a more pressing social policy concern than the care of our older people. Nobody in this chamber doubts the scale of the demographic challenge that we face, whether it is the 40 per cent increase in those who are aged 65 to 74 in the next 20 years—which includes many of the people in this room—or the staggering 83 per cent increase in those who are aged over 75. Scotland’s population is getting older and people are living longer. Earlier, the cabinet secretary said that a girl who is born today is likely to live to be 100. It strikes me that, on the basis of that statistic, the cabinet secretary is going to see an awful lot of me for an awful long time. Although the statistics are a cause for celebration, they also raise challenges. Experts suggest that we would need 6,000 more beds in the NHS and that the health budget would need to double to simply stand still if we are to meet the likely demand. Doing nothing is clearly not an option. Our aim must be to provide the very best quality health and social care to enable people to live their lives in their local community, enriched by family and friends. Scottish Labour set out our policy intentions almost three years ago and we followed that up with an expert group chaired by Sir John Arbuthnott that drew in members with expertise in health and social care. Their work has helped to shape the agenda, and I thank them for that. We recognised at the time that older people were falling through the gaps in services. They were ending up in emergency care because of a lack of integration on the ground. Although we all talk the language of prevention, the assessment frameworks that are used by local government have to prioritise those who are in most need and ration services. Also, there remains a postcode lottery in care. Costs are shunted between different public organisations and there are differential charging regimes. Our vision of the future is to have integrated, locally delivered, locally accountable services that are based on radically reformed community health partnerships and involve GPs much more in the design and commissioning of services, and to have a national framework that ends the postcode lottery of care, drives up standards and delivers better quality care with much better outcomes for older people. We need a single budget to stop health and local government playing pass the parcel with people’s care, and a charter that sets out what is expected in terms of outcomes, equity and quality.

I have to say that, when funding for local government is squeezed such that the SNP Government passes on 83 per cent of all the cuts that it receives, it is no wonder that local authorities have to be creative in order to continue providing lifeline services to their communities. At the time of our previous debate on the subject, we had a different cabinet secretary. Her approach was remarkably similar to ours, and at the time I made reference to imitation being the sincerest form of flattery. I confess that I was slightly disappointed by the consultation document and the Government’s response. The document was light on vision and ambition and it was all about structures and governance. The focus on older people and adults appeared to be a secondary consideration in the tussle for control. In short, although it is, regrettably, a pale imitation of the Government’s earlier ambition, we will work with it to try to get this right. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments today about the principles and the vision that will underlie the bill. They were worth hearing. The stakes could not be higher. We need a radical vision of how to achieve integration, and not backroom deals that balance competing interests. If we start from what we need to achieve for service users and their carers and design the service around that, we are much more likely to get it right. Before I turn to governance, there is a key issue that I hope the cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government will consider. The NHS and local government have very different cultures. The NHS assesses people based on need and then provides treatment free of charge. In local government, need is also assessed, but then priorities are determined, services are rationed, and in many cases people are required to contribute financially. How will we bring those two competing cultures together? Equally, a number of services are outsourced to the private sector, such as home care. Will that use of the private sector continue as it is? Will it in some way spread? How and from which sectors will the Government commission services? Those are key and fundamental questions that the Government needs to consider and discuss with the Parliament. The model of governance that the Government suggests concedes the fact that there should be more elected representatives on the board—that is welcome—but that that should be balanced by health board members. I invite the cabinet secretary to be even more radical. Virtually every submission that we have received asks for representation and voting rights on the board. I am sympathetic to many of those calls, as I am sure the cabinet secretary is. If we take allied health professionals, occupational therapists and physiotherapists as examples, many of those people are the bridge between health and social care services. They help in practical ways to sustain people in their own homes, and of course they should have a voice and a seat at the table. For that matter, we should consider the myriad voluntary sector organisations that operate at a community level, building capacity as well as providing services. They, too, should have a voice and a seat at the table. However, it will become an incredibly crowded table.

Not at this point. All too often, the voluntary sector acts as the glue between health and social care. Many voluntary organisations operate at a neighbourhood level in a way that other services find difficult. I am a fan, but not because I have some kind of romantic notion of what voluntary organisations do. I know that we get added value when the voluntary sector delivers services—we get a bigger bang for our buck—and I know that, in many cases, the quality of the services delivered is second to none. Therefore, let us ensure that the voluntary sector has a key role in integration. However, I want to draw a distinction between local authorities and health boards that might chime with the experiences of many members in the chamber. In my 13 years as an MSP, I have found health boards to be wholly unaccountable to everyone other than the cabinet secretary—and he would surely concede that, even then, there are challenges. I have watched executive directors, as employees of the health board, engaged in payroll votes where, no matter the issue under discussion, all the hands go up simply to follow the chief executive. On the subject of officers, we really do not need another set of accountable officers. We already have accountable officers in local government and health. Is there genuinely a need for more institutional clutter and confusion?

I have more faith in local authorities than Bob Doris has. I will come on to develop how I think that that accountability is best deployed. I want the new health and social care body to be accountable and to be answerable to the people of the area. We live in a democracy, thankfully, where we elect councillors to deal with matters in our local communities. Our councillors have a wealth of knowledge and experience and they are tenacious in representing their communities, and I believe that they should be in charge. The model that is operated by local government allows for officers and expert advisers to influence and shape the agenda, to have their seat at the table and to provide the professional input that is essential to good decision making. That is a model that works. I invite Bob Doris to think about that. What is wrong with that? On the day that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities president, Councillor David O’Neill, has set out his vision for further devolution of powers to local government, let me encourage the cabinet secretary to be radical. The debate should be about not who holds the balance of power, but who provides the best vehicle for delivery. Democratic accountability may be an alien creature in the NHS, but it is alive and well in local government where it is such a driver for change. I trust councillors—does the cabinet secretary?

I am very clear that this should be a partnership, and I want to bring democratic accountability to that partnership. Increasingly, what we are talking about is ensuring that services are effectively knitted together and delivered on the ground. I see councillors very much as providing the democratic accountability, but the local government model also involves professionals from across the sector and provides a way of including the voluntary sector, allied health professionals and the whole working partnership. I think that there is merit in that, and I hope that the cabinet secretary will consider it. On finance, I see that the cabinet secretary will retain an annual focus of tension: agreeing the budget. However, if the two sides do not agree, do not worry—he will have the powers to force them to do so. Frankly, that sounds like a recipe for more bean counters rather than a focus on older people or adults. A more radical alternative would be to allocate the money centrally using an Arbuthnott-type formula that recognises need in much the same way as the Scottish Government already does for health boards. Unfortunately, that does not filter beyond health boards. However, if the formula works for health boards, why cannot it work for integrated health and social care bodies? On the subject of money, local government is woefully underfunded for social care. As I said earlier, the SNP passed on to local government 83 per cent of all the cuts made. Is it any wonder, then, that costs of care are rising and people in neighbouring areas are being charged different rates under different eligibility criteria? The SNP must ensure that there are adequate resources for local government to meet its responsibilities or it will destine the integration of health and social care to the worst possible start. The Government must consider the impact of welfare reform. Many people who are in receipt of the disability living allowance use it to pay for services. If they fail to qualify for a personal independence payment, there will be a black hole. I have asked the Government many times to address that. Matters are pressing. Members on the Labour benches will help to deliver a fair and robust system of health and social care, but the Scottish Government must do more. It must be more ambitious and visionary. The cabinet secretary spoke about a revolution; I look forward to seeing it. I move amendment S4M-05838.1, to leave out from “joint” to end and insert: “strengthened accountability for local service delivery, with a strong role for local authorities; notes the importance of truly integrated budgets that avoid conflict between local authorities and NHS boards as well as a strong role for clinicians and care professionals along with the third and independent sectors in the planning and delivery of person-centred services; notes with concern both the increases in care charges and the postcode lottery in charging experienced across Scotland as local authorities are forced to react to Scottish Government cuts to their budgets, and calls on the Scottish Government to use the integration of health and social care to create a truly integrated health and social care service that improves care across Scotland.”

Will the member take an intervention?

I am clearly missing something with regard to Mr Dornan’s interpretation of our amendment. I suggest to him that the issue is not just for Labour councils, but is for SNP councils and every other council across Scotland. Would Mr Dornan care to comment on the suggestion that executive directors of health boards should somehow be on the new integrated partnerships? Does he support a payroll vote?

Will the member take an intervention?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. This is the first time that the cabinet secretary has kept a promise to me. [Laughter.] Will the cabinet secretary specifically exclude executive directors from the new bodies?

I welcome the opportunity to debate waiting times, which is a subject of considerable importance to patients and staff in the NHS. People value the NHS, which is a much-loved institution. People do not need their confidence in the NHS to be undermined by the Scottish National Party’s approach to healthcare. People want the best possible care, as quickly as possible. The time from general practitioner referral to diagnosis and treatment can be anxious for patients and their families. Anything that prolongs that wait clearly adds to the worry and uncertainty. We know that, for many conditions, early diagnosis and early treatment can lead to much better health outcomes, so all of us across the chamber know the importance of reducing waiting times. However, the achievement and meeting of waiting time targets must be real. Targets must not be the only thing that matters to the Government, because if that is the signal, we will see distortion of behaviour. If targets are all that matters, that ends up having a negative impact on patient care. The Scottish Government’s self-congratulatory amendment is totally out of place in light of Audit Scotland’s report and the reality on the ground. Audit Scotland’s report demonstrated that the focus was on targets rather than patient care. It set out a picture of sharp rises in social unavailability at the same time as target times were reducing. A staggering one in three people were recorded as socially unavailable in June 2011. Then the NHS Lothian scandal broke. Boards were told to stop misusing codes and—miracle of miracles—the number of socially unavailable patients dropped dramatically. Of course, at the same time waiting times started to rise and targets were breached. Warning bells were absolutely ringing. Audit Scotland also pointed out that one in four patients had an actual wait that was well in excess of what was reported—the figures are only 3 per cent reported, against 23 per cent of cases with much longer waits, which remained unreported. The evidence clearly shows that social unavailability was growing and that the reported number of breaches was far less than the actual number. I was disappointed to have confirmed that the former cabinet secretary, Nicola Sturgeon, knew about that but chose to ignore the warning signs. In March 2010, Audit Scotland published its report into the management of waiting times. It made a number of observations, such as: “NHS boards vary in how they deal with patients who do not or cannot attend appointments and this may not always be appropriate”, and: “The report also finds that the NHS is not accurately recording all relevant information about patient waits which makes it difficult to demonstrate that it is managing all patients correctly in line with the new guidance.” It also noted: “There is wide variation in levels of social unavailability across” twelve “boards. This implies that boards are applying the code differently, which has implications for patients.” Audit Scotland told the Scottish Government in March 2010 but nothing was done. In evidence to the Public Audit Committee, members were told that, in March 2011, Audit Scotland contacted the Scottish Government about the report’s recommendations on monitoring progress. Audit Scotland was told by the Scottish Government that new guidance was imminent. In my understanding, “imminent” meant that the guidance was just around the corner or looming, not that it would take some 18 months before the guidance was issued—long after NHS Lothian’s deliberate and retrospective manipulation of waiting times came to light. By that time, the horse had well and truly bolted. What was going on? Is it legitimate to expect the health department to know what its own statistics division knew? Should we have expected the cabinet secretary to have seen the data? The NHS statistics division says in The Sunday Times that it reported the figures for social unavailability on a quarterly basis to the health department. Was that to the director of health workforce and performance, whose responsibility includes waiting times? Did he report it to the director general for health or the cabinet secretary? Surely a policy area of such importance deserves closer scrutiny than it appears to have received. It beggars belief that nobody was monitoring that. Audit Scotland is clear. It says that during 2011, the focus “was on meeting waiting time targets” and that “There was not enough scrutiny of the increasing number of patients recorded as unavailable.” Audit Scotland’s contention is that better use of the available information could have helped to identify concerns about the use of unavailability codes. Audit Scotland told the Scottish Government in March 2010 and reminded it in March 2011. Despite the evidence before its very eyes, the Scottish Government did absolutely nothing. Not one single iota of action was taken—not by the officials, not by the senior management team at St Andrew’s house and not by the cabinet secretary herself. The consequence? Thousands of patients have been let down by the SNP and parked on hidden waiting lists, in some cases with no end date, as a way of managing the waiting time targets. The whole system was focused on avoiding a breach instead of on the patient. Contrary to what the cabinet secretary said, I do not blame the hard-working nurses and doctors who are trying their best with fewer and fewer resources—2,000 nurses cannot be removed from the NHS without consequences. Nor do I blame the waiting list managers, who are under enormous pressure to deliver—some of them are off sick with stress. It is the SNP that has put an obsession with targets ahead of patient care. Jamie Hepburn (Cumbernauld and Kilsyth) (SNP) rose. Mark McDonald (North East Scotland) (SNP) rose. I think that it was James Callaghan who once said: “The sky has darkened with the wings of chickens coming home to roost.” The sky is very dark indeed, when we consider Nicola Sturgeon’s handling of waiting times. But we should not worry—Alex Neil is there to clean up her mess. However, even he is encountering some difficulty. When the situation at NHS Lothian first came to light, Nicola Sturgeon said that it was an isolated case. After all, she had received assurances from all chief executives of all health boards that they were acting in line with the waiting time guidance. Well, they would say that, wouldn’t they? The British Medical Association tells us that “feedback from our members would suggest that this aggressive management style is not isolated to Lothian.” Let me allow that statement to sink in. Our doctors are telling us that pressure on and bullying of waiting list staff are more widespread. With growing allegations about a bullying culture in the NHS, what action has the cabinet secretary taken? Indeed, what action did his predecessor take? Then we had Alex Neil telling the chamber in December that waiting time data was “reliable and accurate”. Just a few weeks ago, we were treated to the cabinet secretary’s “Little Britain” defence of “Computer says no”: it was all just an information technology problem. The cabinet secretary cannot have it both ways. He cannot say that the data is reliable and accurate and at the same time tell us that there was a problem with the IT system and that it did not record the information properly. He might wish to pause and reflect on developing a consistent line. Let us look a bit closer at the SNP’s claim that it is all just one big IT problem and that that is why the social unavailability figures dropped. I asked Audit Scotland whether that was a reasonable assumption to make. The Auditor General’s response was: “There has not been a significant change in IT systems over that period.”—[Official Report, Public Audit Committee, 23 February 2013; c 1243.] The drop is therefore not due to any change in IT. The cabinet secretary has said that everything has been sorted and that the unavailability codes have been abolished. There is also a new waiting time guarantee of 12 weeks from decision to treatment. Plans have been approved by health boards, based on the new guidance and, in turn, agreed by the health department. Can the cabinet secretary explain why we are already seeing a postcode lottery and considerable variation in treatment? Some patients receive seven days’ notice of appointments, but others receive 21 days’ notice. Some patients get two chances for appointments, but others get only one before they are consigned to the back of the queue. Some patients are offered treatment in just their health board area, but others are offered treatment in different areas and sectors. In a letter to The Herald yesterday, the cabinet secretary said that the new waiting time guarantee has already been achieved and that 99.9 per cent of all cases are meeting the new target. I have to say that the 0.1 per cent of people for whom it is not being achieved must all live in my constituency. We can have little confidence in the accuracy of waiting time information. The systems that are used to capture the information have been discredited and they could not be properly interrogated by Audit Scotland. If it could not extract the data, how on earth can we be sure about what the cabinet secretary is saying? He should tell my constituents about his 99.9 per cent achievement. He should tell Miss M, who is 21 years old and an athlete. She has a hip injury and has waited 12 months for a magnetic resonance imaging scan. She has been told that she will need to wait five months for an operation. That young woman’s life is on hold. Was her case reported as a breach or is she being parked on a hidden waiting list somewhere? What about Mrs D? She has a problem with her gall bladder and was referred by her GP on 21 August. On 3 October, her consultant took the decision to treat, but—guess what?—she is still waiting. Has that been reported as a breach or is she, too, parked on a hidden waiting list somewhere? What about Margaret Gray, who came to my surgery two weeks ago? She attended her general practitioner in July 2012 with severe pain in her right knee. As it was not improving, she was sent for an x-ray and was then referred to a consultant on 12 October. She had a scan on 11 January and she was told that she would need to wait two weeks for the results. Guess what? She is still waiting for the results and for treatment. Her waiting time guarantee has been breached. Margaret is off work on sick leave and may lose her job due to the delays in treatment. That is the reality for Scots. Are SNP members seriously saying that constituents have not brought to them similar examples of concerns about how long they have to wait? This is about people’s lives. What does the cabinet secretary say to my constituents? What does he say to all our constituents whose treatment is not meeting his target? I turn to accident and emergency waiting times. There is no doubt that we have the worst set of waiting times for accident and emergency since the SNP came to power. The target has not been met across Scotland as a whole since 2009. The number of patients who are seen within the four-hour waiting time target has fallen to the lowest level recorded since it was introduced, and the number of patients who spend more than 12 hours waiting rose to 323, which is the highest number on record. In NHS Lothian, 75 people spent more than 12 hours in A and E in January alone. The cabinet secretary said at the time that the experience of John McGarrity, an 84-year-old man who was left to wait on a trolley for eight hours in a freezing cold corridor, was “not a true reflection of the National Health Service”. He should tell that to the family of Mary Scott. Mary, who was a feisty and sprightly 93-year-old, had a stroke and, aside from waiting six hours for an ambulance to arrive, had to wait on a trolley for six hours for a bed. We can imagine the stress of that wait on her and her family. The cabinet secretary should tell the 323 patients who waited even longer than Mr McGarrity and Mrs Scott that that is not a reflection of the NHS under the SNP. Nurses, too, tell us a different story. One nurse said: “It is ... a common occurrence to have old and very ill people lined up in corridors on trolleys because there are not enough beds. In some cases, they are the lucky ones. Others don’t make it out of the waiting room because there are no trolleys or staff to put people on them.” The Royal College of Nursing tells us that the current reality is that, while nurses and other healthcare staff are trying to do their best, there are not enough staff, beds or resources in the system. The SNP can ignore me if it wants to, and it can even ignore the journalists with whom it disagrees, but it ill behoves the cabinet secretary to ignore what doctors and nurses are telling him. He should not ignore what he has been told. The system is on the point of breaking. The cabinet secretary announced £50 million. That will make it all right. Although I welcomed that initially, as more detail emerged, the announcement appeared to be an exercise in smoke and mirrors. It does not deal with providing extra beds, and nurses tell us that that is the problem. When we look closer, it is not new money. It is funding that will be taken from health boards, repackaged, tied with a fancy ribbon and handed right back to them. That is nothing less than the cabinet secretary reacting to events and headlines. It is not strategic, it is not planned, and it is not sensible. The cabinet secretary did not want people to know that hidden away in that announcement was a cut in the waiting time target. Now, instead of 98 per cent, he has cut the target to 95 per cent. Was that announced to Parliament or to doctors and nurses, or even to the people of Scotland? No. That admission of failure was sneaked out. Some might accuse the cabinet secretary of moving the goalposts; others would call it cheating. The SNP is responsible for this mess. It is responsible for thousands of people being parked on hidden waiting lists. What is worse is that the warning signs were there and the SNP did nothing. Now, instead of coming clean about the challenges that the NHS faces because of the choices that the SNP has made to cut the number of nurses and beds, the SNP has moved the goalposts—it has changed waiting times for A and E—with spectacular sleight of hand. It is a sneaky and dishonest approach that is more about spin than it is about patient care. Frankly, the people of Scotland deserve much better. I move, That the Parliament believes that the recent hidden waiting times scandal raises significant questions regarding the integrity of the Scottish Government’s claims on waiting times; believes that clear warning signs were overlooked; recognises that both the hidden waiting times scandal and the Scottish Government’s failure to meet its four-hour A&amp;E waiting time target for Scotland as a whole since 2009 are signs of an NHS under significant strain, and asks the Scottish Government to put patients and hard-working NHS staff first and to ensure that the health service properly meets its waiting times obligations while providing the best possible patient care.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I take all my constituents’ cases up with the health board and with the minister. My constituents, however, are so disappointed and upset at what is going on in the NHS that they, along with NHS staff, have come to me and agreed that their cases should be used in the chamber to try to bring about change and get the Government to wake up to the reality of what is going on in the NHS.

I think that I am on record as saying, on numerous occasions, that we would reorganise the 22 health boards that are currently part of the institutional clutter in Scotland, which would release tens of millions of pounds and could lead to more nurses being employed.

Would Gil Paterson care to comment on the fact that, on the SNP’s watch, maternity services at the Vale of Leven hospital have been slashed from a 24/7 service to a 8-to-8 service, lab services have been taken away and centralised at the Royal Alexandra hospital and, despite a commitment to keep services local, the SNP closed the Christie ward at the Vale of Leven?

Members can see that I do not paint my nails.

I congratulate Liam McArthur on securing the debate. Scotland has the highest incidence of MS in the world, with about 10,500 people estimated to be living with the condition. That makes the issue of keen interest to us all. The impact of the disease extends to families, friends and colleagues. I associate myself with your remarks, Presiding Officer, on George Adam—I hope that he survives seeing his wife this evening. We know that MS is an unpredictable disease and that it is, unfortunately, currently incurable. Too often, people who are affected by MS are confronted by a postcode lottery in accessing healthcare, which can mean long delays in diagnosis, poor access to rehabilitation and, in some areas, lack of access to even the most basic care. As colleagues have pointed out, in 2009, the Government published the clinical standards for neurological health services, in order to address the issue. It then carried out a review, ending in 2012. It charted progress, which was patchy. For example, one finding of the interim review was a “concern that the momentum to drive improvements will decline at the end of the programme”. The review also found “a requirement to increase opportunities to spread and share good practice” and “concern that improvements would be hindered without additional investment.” There was also a need for “a common core data set to drive improvements in neurological services.” We could do more. A postcode lottery remains despite progress, as does variation in people’s experience of services throughout the country. Although we need to improve access to health services and, indeed, to social care services, I will spend a little bit of time celebrating some of the services that are provided by the voluntary sector. Those services provide the glue in most of our communities; they provide practical support not only to MS patients but to their families. I know from experience of Leuchie House Short Break Care how important good access to care is for people who are affected by MS and for their families. Leuchie house provides residential short breaks and day respite care. It also provides preventative services, rehabilitative services, reablement and intermediary respite and care services, physiotherapy, emotional support and complementary therapies. The list is long. Since July 2011, when Leuchie became an independent charity, it has dealt with something like 200 patients and their families. It has provided much-needed care for those who are cared for, as well as for carers. An impressive range of services is available there. I will be privileged to spend an evening in Leuchie house in a couple of weeks. I invite members who have not visited it to take the opportunity to do so. Leuchie house is summed up by testimony from one of its guests: “Leuchie is the only place where I don’t feel disabled.” That is the kind of provision that we should value. The Dumbarton and district branch of the MS Society is active in my area and provides a number of excellent support services. It recently organised a new drop-in centre for sufferers of MS and carers in Helensburgh, which enables them to meet others with the disabling neurological condition. Progress has undoubtedly been made. Initiatives such as those that I have described at Leuchie house and in Helensburgh are available locally to assist sufferers in coming to terms with the disease. We need more such examples, because they are positive examples of what can be done practically to help MS patients. However, too many people do not have access to such facilities. More needs to be done to ensure that patients get the treatment to which they are entitled, regardless of where they live.

Does the First Minister recognise the substantial concerns that have been expressed by the legal and the medical professions about the proposals for no-fault compensation, which are about not just the additional cost but the lack of detail on how such a scheme would operate effectively? Will he therefore review the proposals to take on board those concerns and consult again before proceeding further? I am sure that he would agree that it is important that we get this right.

That does not make a waiting time guarantee.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. It is really surprising that, as a nationalist, Alex Neil is relying on the “Little Britain” defence of “Computer says no.” Audit Scotland’s report on the management of waiting times is “a wake-up call to the Scottish Government”. Those are not my words—they are the words of the Royal College of Nursing. In the words of the British Medical Association—again, they are not my words—the systems are “inadequate and have been open to manipulation.” In short, the Scottish National Party has been accused of putting targets before patient care. What Audit Scotland has exposed is that one in three patients was parked on hidden waiting lists. Their waiting time guarantees were suspended, and some were without an end date for that suspension. Social unavailability reached a high point in July 2011, then NHS Lothian was rumbled and suddenly the numbers fell across Scotland. It was not that patients were being treated faster; at the same time, waiting times were going up. One in four patients had their waiting time guarantee breached but, miraculously, only 3 per cent were reported to the Scottish Government. As the cabinet secretary himself conceded on radio this morning, we can have no confidence in the reporting and monitoring systems. The Scottish National Party crowed about having the lowest waiting times, but is it not true that none of those figures was real or based on fact? In its 2010 report, Audit Scotland warned the SNP about a problem with social unavailability. Nicola Sturgeon and the SNP knew about this in 2010 but they chose to turn a blind eye and do nothing about it. I ask the cabinet secretary to please stop using the staff has a human shield; this is about him putting spin ahead of patient care. Is it not the case that we cannot trust the SNP with waiting times and certainly cannot trust it with the NHS?

I welcome the opportunity to debate access to new medicines in the NHS and the tone of the speeches made by Jackson Carlaw and the cabinet secretary. I also welcome the new medicines review that the cabinet secretary has initiated. It is right that we consider how the SMC operates. Although its work is highly regarded, it is nevertheless operating under certain constraints as a result of the criteria that the Scottish Government has set. Equally, it is right that we review IPTRs. Clinicians and patients have made it clear to us that those are an obstacle to patients getting the medicines that they need and that the approach varies across Scotland, and we must consider those comments. Like the SNP, Labour did not support the cancer drugs fund, not because it was proposed by the Tories but partly because we genuinely believed that other equally serious conditions also needed improved access to medicine and that an emphasis on early treatment and a preventative approach led to better outcomes. The operation of the cancer drugs fund in England has also led to a bit of a postcode lottery in places, which is not, I believe, desirable. That said, the current IPTR system is no longer acceptable. Clinician after clinician came before the Parliament’s Health and Sport Committee to criticise it—and they were very brave to do so. They were being placed in the invidious position of recommending patients who they knew would benefit from the drug required in the knowledge that their chances of securing agreement from the health board were very slim. Let me point members to the words of Dr Stephen Harrow, who is a consultant oncologist at the Beatson. He told the committee that he works in a deprived area in the west of Scotland and that he has to tell patients that there are more drugs that are not available than drugs that they can access. It took the shocking case of Iain Morrison, which was highlighted in the chamber, to prompt action. He is a man with bowel cancer who had to pay £1,700 a fortnight for the drugs that help to prolong his life. The NHS charged him VAT and an administration fee for the privilege. Thankfully, he now has access to the drugs, but I understand that that took more than one request and the assistance of his constituency MSP. We heard the case of Anne Fisher, who is a mother of three from Greenock who has cancer. She cannot get access here to drugs that would be available if she lived in England. That simply cannot be right by any measure. There is also the case of a constituent of mine, whom I shall call Mrs Smith, although that is not her real name. In 2007, Mrs Smith was diagnosed with bowel cancer. Her daughter and her husband contacted my office in 2012 after she had had two IPTRs and appeals rejected. As a result of tests that experts carried out, we know that she would benefit from a 12-week course of cetuximab. Her third IPTR last October was also unsuccessful. In another health board area, she would have been given the treatment. I say to the cabinet secretary that that simply cannot go on. Whatever the outcome of the review, the cabinet secretary must ensure that, at the very least, there is not that appalling postcode lottery in Scotland. Access to medicines must improve, and there must be consistency of application across all the 14 health boards in Scotland.

Fourteen different ways of doing things is no longer acceptable. Let me turn to the orphan drugs fund. That is very welcome, but it must not just be a sticking plaster. Clarity is needed on how it will be accessed, what conditions will apply and how it will be funded beyond April next year. Indeed, concerns have been raised by many, including the Daily Record, which reported that, if every eligible cystic fibrosis sufferer in Scotland were to be prescribed Kalydeco, that would cost £14.5 million. Kalydeco is just one of a number of orphan medicines. We need to be clear about how access will be decided. I was reflecting on the previous, rather robust and sometimes humorous debate about capital budgets. That made me think that the cabinet secretary has no obstacle to doing something. The issue is not Westminster’s fault; it is the responsibility of all of us. I know that the cabinet secretary, unlike his predecessor, has moved quickly to set up the review. As people across Scotland are waiting for life-saving treatments, can he move equally quickly to set up new arrangements that will work in their interests? I move amendment S4M-05654.1, to insert at end: “; welcomes the New Medicine Review, which will consider the processes that facilitate access to new medicines, and the fund for orphan drugs that was announced in January 2013; notes serious concerns regarding the system of individual patient treatment requests, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that the views of clinicians are central to determining issues of access to medicines.”

The cabinet secretary will be aware that far too few GPs operate in deprived areas and that as a consequence access for some of the most needy patients is constrained. Given that the last data set is apparently 10 years old, would it be useful for the Government to collect current data on GP numbers and their distribution? What action will the cabinet secretary take to ensure that extra GPs and additional capacity are available in deprived areas?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention on that?

Why did the cabinet secretary delay that package, which she recognises as so important, for about 18 months, when the consequentials had already been given to the Scottish Government?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the member and I will indeed be brief. Can he take the principle that he has just outlined and apply it to this week’s debate on legal aid, where the SNP abandoned any question of universality in favour of means testing and targeting?

Will the member give way?

The debate has been fractious at times, but that only underlines the seriousness of the issue before us. I can agree with much that is in the Government’s motion on child benefit. It is worth reminding ourselves of the scale of the impact: 90,000 families in Scotland will have their benefit income reduced or removed; and 200,000 children across the UK will be plunged into poverty, of whom as many as 15,000 are likely to be in Scotland. As others have rightly pointed out, those are the UK Government’s own figures. Malcolm Chisholm was right, though, that the SNP is simply wrong to assert that we in the Labour Party do not believe in universal benefits; we do. We are proud to have introduced the family allowance and child benefit, but the difference is that we want to ensure that, where benefits are universal, they are also sustainable and affordable. Child benefit’s importance as a universal benefit is widely recognised because the benefit is for children and is paid predominantly to women. We also chose to target those struggling on low incomes by providing tax credits, but even those are being eroded by the Tory-Lib Dem coalition. I am fond of quoting the Prime Minister. He previously said that the cuts that would occur as a result of the global recession would fall “on the broadest shoulders”. At first, those cuts fell on the sick and disabled. Now, it appears that they are to fall on women and children as well. The attack on women and children is not confined to child benefit, as the Welfare Benefits Up-rating Bill goes even further. The Chancellor of the Exchequer said that only the “shirkers”, the people with their curtains drawn, will be affected by his cuts to tax credits and benefits. The language that he uses is, frankly, disgusting, but he is also fundamentally wrong. Not uprating benefits is a direct attack on working people and those striving to support their families. Contrary to what Willie Rennie said, the UK Government has also made a real-terms cut to statutory maternity pay. According to the House of Commons library, when all the benefit changes are taken together, pregnant women will lose £1,300 during the course of their pregnancy. Taken together, two thirds of the overall hit will be on women, and various members have pointed out the disadvantage that will occur as a result. The impact is clear: poverty will increase. Jim Eadie was right, because all this is happening at the same time as 8,000 of the UK’s millionaires will enjoy a tax cut of £107,000 per year. That is not just unfair but immoral. Therefore, I join with the many members across the chamber, on the Government benches and on the Labour benches, in condemning the coalition for its approach to welfare reform. Having said that, I am genuinely disappointed with the SNP position. Back bencher after back bencher glibly fell back on the usual constitutional argument that, with independence, everything will be okay, there will be no deficit or other problems and the sun will always shine each and every day. However, the issue of child poverty is serious. It is a complete abdication of responsibility for the SNP not to strain every sinew to alleviate the problem not at some point in the distant future but to take action now. Poverty is not simply about a lack of income.

No, thank you. Before coming to the Parliament, I worked in many of the most disadvantaged communities in Glasgow and the west of Scotland. There I saw that poverty is shaped by poor health, poor educational attainment, the lack of a job and low self-esteem—people in communities locked into a cycle of despair. There I saw that the way out of poverty is through having access to opportunity and support to access employment. The SNP Government has the power to deal with that. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation report to which Drew Smith, Neil Bibby and Jayne Baxter all rightly drew attention was clear on that point.

Tom MacInnes, the author of the report, said: “with political debate dominated by the referendum on independence, it’s important to point out that issues that are central to tackling poverty, such as health, childcare, schools and housing fall within the current legislative powers of the Scottish Government. The problems highlighted in this report cannot wait; action can and should be taken now.”

I believe fundamentally that the SNP knows that it can do something. I remind the SNP that, under Labour, the percentage of children in absolute poverty in Scotland fell from 28 per cent in 1998-99 to 12 per cent in 2005-06. I am very proud that that was the highest fall across the United Kingdom, where a Labour Government lifted half a million children out of poverty. The SNP should please not tell me that it lacks the power. We more than halved child poverty. Where is the SNP’s ambition? Of course, we can judge the SNP Government on its actions not its rhetoric. Under this SNP Government, the housing budget has been cut by £40 million and the college budget has been cut by £35 million.

Absolutely not. The member should listen. Under this SNP Government, the health budget has been cut in real terms, 2,500 nurses have been cut from the health service and we are now seeing trolley waits at accident and emergency departments. Under this SNP Government, no progress has been made on reducing child poverty, as the figures have flatlined, and the average Scottish household has been around £1,200 a year worse off than in the previous year—that is from the Government’s own figures. The SNP promises much but delivers little. Nowhere was that better illustrated than in Neil Bibby’s speech. The SNP promised 600 hours of nursery provision for each child in 2007. That was welcome, but it was not delivered by 2011. In fact, if I recall, it was promised three times. Now it has been put on pause until 2014 or beyond. Will we ever see it? The SNP might talk the talk—in fact, there is a lot of talk in the chamber at the moment—but the evidence suggests that it does not walk the walk. Everything that the SNP does is viewed through a constitutional prism. As the motion demonstrates, even tackling child poverty is put on pause. In effect, the SNP is telling the poor people of Scotland, “Wait four years and then we will get round to you.” What happens if the SNP loses the independence vote? There will be no answer for the children and families currently in poverty. [Interruption.]

Despite the noise, I regret the fact that, regardless of what SNP members say, their agenda is based on the politics of identity. That is not socially progressive. We on the Labour benches believe in fairness and social justice. The fundamental difference between us and the SNP is that we do something about it. While the SNP continues to care only about independence, the children of Scotland are left waiting.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I congratulate Helen Eadie on securing the debate. She is very committed to the issue and has worked extremely hard over the years, as convener of the cross-party group on heart disease and stroke, to influence the thinking of Parliament and the Government. Today, she brings the Scottish campaign for cardiac rehabilitation to Parliament. As we heard, the campaign is a collaboration between a number of significant voluntary organisations, including the British Heart Foundation and others that have been mentioned. The aim is to ensure that every suitable heart patient is given access to a rehabilitation programme. That makes sense, because people who undergo rehabilitation get better quicker. Rehabilitation can save and transform lives. The campaign argues that patients should be offered alternative methods of rehabilitation, which might be based at home, in the community or in hospital, depending on where people are able to take part in programmes, and it argues that it is important to overcome barriers to participation. There might be barriers for people who live in deprived or remote and rural communities, because they might struggle to access services. I was struck by Dave Thompson’s description of inequity in services in his area. The campaign also calls for minimum standards and monitoring, as members have said. We know that adopting such an approach to cardiac rehabilitation can transform lives and, at the same time, save money, which is no bad thing in a time of austerity. I understand from the campaign briefing that rehabilitation has reduced death from heart disease by more than a third in just over 10 years. That is a considerable achievement. The campaign points out that rehabilitation can help to prevent the need for much more costly treatment. A heart bypass costs in excess of £5,000 whereas rehab costs less than £2,000. Cardiac rehabilitation has also cut readmissions to hospital by as much as 30 per cent. The figures make for interesting reading. Cardiac rehabilitation is clearly worth doing, whatever measure we use to consider its effects. I visited a cardiac rehabilitation group in Dumbarton. The participants had nothing but praise for the physiotherapists and nurses who worked with them. There were a couple of grumbles about what the physios made patients do, but by and large everyone realised that they are fortunate to have good access to an excellent rehab service, which is not the case for everyone in Scotland. When I met that bunch of people, I could not get over how full of life they were. They might all have had heart attacks, but that was not going to stop them. They were very much looking forward, and having great fun as they did so—the group was filled with laughter. I want that quality of cardiac rehabilitation not just for people in Dumbarton but for everyone in Scotland. The Government needs to spread good practice to every health board and every corner of the country. I congratulate the NHS on what has already been achieved. The action plan is a positive step forward and staff in many areas have embraced it and are working to implement it. That is evident from the 60 per cent fall in the mortality rate for heart disease. We know that we can do more and that we can accelerate the pace of change. Members of this Parliament do not often all sing from the same hymn sheet, but we are doing so today as we ask the Government to consider a HEAT target, accelerate the pace of change and ensure that monitoring arrangements are in place, so that the aims of the campaign can be met and cardiac rehabilitation services can improve not just in one or two areas but throughout the country. I hope that the minister will be able to tell us that that will happen.

If Michael Forsyth is Voldemort, is the minister Harry Potter?

I agree with Jackson Carlaw that the debate has been absolutely interesting and largely constructive. With all due respect to my front-bench colleagues, I have to say that the debate has been owned by the back benches. I do not want to pick people out, but there have been incredibly impressive and informative speeches from Mary Scanlon, Mary Fee, Linda Fabiani and Dennis Robertson. Kevin Stewart and Mark McDonald will both be quite surprised that I mention them, too, because we do not often agree, but on this issue I thought that their speeches were very impressive. We acknowledge the achievements of, and the progress that has been made by, the Government, the NHS and all the partners, but it is always the case that we can and should do more, although my comments are set in the context of that broad support. I echo the minister’s praise for all those who work in mental health—the health service staff and people in the voluntary sector who provide care and support daily for people who have mental health problems. I will start where Richard Simpson started. Irrespective of political colour, we are good at producing strategies. Our shelves are littered with them. The mental health strategy rightly commands support from across the chamber, but we need to make sure that it is implemented so that it makes a difference on the ground. That is a challenge not just for the Government, but for all of us. The minister told us about a new dementia strategy and a refreshed suicide and self-harm strategy, which are both welcome, but we need to be sure of their implementation. I ask the minister seriously to consider setting up an implementation group that has a clear action plan, a monitoring framework and a timetable for key milestones so that we can measure progress. Let us make sure that the strategy is not destined for the shelf but leads to change. Nanette Milne rightly reminded us that one in four of us is likely to suffer from mental health problems at some point. Mental health services used to be regarded as a Cinderella service, but I think that the collective efforts of Parliament and successive Governments have changed that. However, I am concerned that, in a time of austerity, the clock will be turned back. In many communities across Scotland there have been cuts to social care services and in others charges have been introduced for the first time. I know of constituents who face losing a service or paying £50 a week for the first time in order to retain provision that is essential for their mental health and wellbeing. At local level, parts of my constituency in Helensburgh do not have access crisis services after 8 pm, due to lack of resources. Malcolm Chisholm rightly drew our attention to the value and importance of crisis services in his constituency. We need to be vigilant. We recognise the value of community-based services, which are often much to be preferred to inpatient care because they support people to continue with their everyday lives. Let us ensure that they are adequately resourced. Jim Hume raised the question of statistics when he discussed child and mental health services. I welcome the Government’s HEAT target of referral to treatment within 18 weeks and the progress that the minister outlined. However, children are being admitted to adult mental health wards; I am sure that across the chamber we agree that that is inappropriate. We need action to tackle that. I press the minister to ensure that sufficient CAMHS beds are available. I know that he is committed to making progress on that. Jim Hume also made a point about the lack of statistics, although I note that the minister was able to give us some and said that 89 per cent are being seen within the CAMHS target. However, when we asked SPICe for the statistics, it told us that there are none. We were therefore unable to measure progress. This is a critical area of policy, so will the minister advise when the data will be available? Does he agree with SAMH’s call for an audit? If we establish our baseline position, we can effectively measure progress. That would be a useful tool for us all, including the Government. I turn to Mary Fee’s authoritative contribution on the justice system and the impacts on families of offenders, which was very much complemented by Christine Grahame’s contribution. Mary Fee was right to point out the serious omission in the mental health strategy, which is that there is no mention of the very real challenge for and impact on children of having a parent who is an offender. In the past—in a previous life in Government—we used supplementary reports to pick up on areas that needed further development. I invite the minister to do just that and to ensure that mental health support for the children of offenders is part and parcel of the mental health strategy in the future. Many members spoke about early intervention for children. Mark McDonald raised the issue of support for parents, and post-natal depression, which has an impact predominantly on women, but also impacts on men and children. We support the many positive things that are being done by the Government, such as the triple P programme, the incredible years programme and, as children move on to primary school, the Place2Be programme. We welcome continuing investment in those initiatives. Linda Fabiani, Roderick Campbell and many other members talked about the importance of tackling stigma and the extremely positive work of the see me campaign and SAMH in challenging stigma. Again, we commend their work to Parliament. I turn to NHS 24 and its CBT service, which was mentioned by Mary Scanlon. When I visited the project at the Golden Jubilee hospital, I was struck not just by how flexible the project is, but by how it is making a huge difference to people predominantly in rural areas, where individual telephone support is essential to their improved mental health and wellbeing. The statistics that we are starting to see are extremely positive. I wonder whether we could roll that out beyond rural areas, where there is a need to do so. David Stewart rightly reminded us of something that had thus far been missing from the debate: the importance of occupational health services and the importance of challenging employers’ attitudes. The majority of people who experience episodic mental ill health still need to hold down employment, and may struggle to cope with that. I close by talking about the wider challenges of mental wellbeing. Kevin Stewart spoke very well about welfare reform; there was much in his speech with which I agreed. Although I hope that mental health organisations have contributed to the Harrington review, there is a real need to provide support and advice to people who are faced with having to reapply for their benefits. I am concerned about the preparedness of the NHS to cope with the impact. Mark McDonald rightly referred to the deep-end group of GPs and its report about the challenges that those GPs face in providing adequate support for their patients. In my view, that will get worse with austerity. The strategy needs to be set in the context of the likelihood of increasing levels of child poverty in Scotland; the challenge of youth unemployment and unemployment more generally, which is increasing; and the challenge of a reduced standard of living, with rising levels of in-work poverty, which leads people to have to use food banks and payday loans. People in our communities are increasingly struggling to cope with everyday life. The need for the strategy is self-evident: the pressure on our mental health is increasing. The minister will have our support if he puts in place a robust implementation plan and monitoring framework so that this strategy really makes a difference on the ground.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the inappropriate use of social unavailability codes by national health service boards to meet waiting time targets. (S4O-01702)

This week it was NHS Grampian in the waiting times scandal; last week it was NHS Forth Valley. In a report compiled by a former NHS manager, NHS Forth Valley was revealed as making the most extensive use of social unavailability codes in Scotland to avoid breaching the waiting time guarantee. Was the cabinet secretary aware of that when he stood up in this chamber and gave NHS Forth Valley a clean bill of health regarding waiting times? If not, does he believe that the practice in NHS Forth Valley was acceptable?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My question was entirely about NHS Forth Valley, aside from one reference to NHS Grampian. The cabinet secretary did not at any point address the question about NHS Forth Valley.

I, too, congratulate Bob Doris on securing the debate. As the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on learning disability, I very much welcome the opportunity to debate the nature and provision of services for people with learning disability not just in Glasgow but more widely. I recall well the massive change in the late 1990s to how we supported people with learning disabilities and the move away from long-stay institutions such as Lennox Castle and Woodilee hospitals. That change was transformational for the quality of life of people with learning disabilities and for their families’ experience, and it was the right thing to do.

Give me a minute. We should not keep things the way they are just because it was ever thus. The challenge for us as policymakers is to ensure that we do better and that we increasingly do what is right for the individual. We have not stood still since the late 1990s, because the trend in policy is towards independent living. As members have said, just a matter of weeks ago this Parliament passed a bill to give legislative underpinning to self-directed support, which at its heart is about ensuring that people who require care and support can be in control of how and when that care and support are delivered. Whether or not we like it, that has implications for services. If, in effect, we take money from a service to use it differently, as self-directed support would have us do, that has consequences for what is left behind. Nowhere is that more evident than in the case of day centres. It is not about cuts but about changes to how services are provided. My understanding is that not one penny of a cut will be made as a result of the day centre proposals, because the money will be spent instead on individual care packages.

I will come on to the issue of the process in a minute. As convener of the cross-party group, I note that of the people who use learning disability services in Glasgow and elsewhere, only around one in 10 use day centres. That does not mean that the centres are not important, but experience suggests that the majority of people prefer to be involved in a variety of activities in their local area rather than go to a day centre. However, for others, the day centre will be their first choice. Any proposal for service change should ensure that service users are listened to, that assessments are carried out and that alternative services, which are sometimes better, are put in place before there is any decision about change. That is good practice. Change is difficult, unless there is a tangible alternative. I make it clear that I would always want any service, whether council or voluntary sector, to take the time to get things right. However, the reality is that the proposal in Glasgow is where self-directed support takes us. Personalised services often mean a reduction in centrally provided group services, because people make different choices. People cannot support SDS but then misunderstand some of the consequences that may arise from its implementation. Further, I gently point out that Glasgow’s share of the local government settlement has declined each year for the past four years. Had that not happened, Glasgow would have an extra £75 million to spend this year. I come back to the point that this is not about cuts. The discussion should be about the nature of support for people with learning disabilities. It is not about cuts, because the issue is not confined to Glasgow. I know that it has been an issue of some difficulty for the SNP-controlled Dundee City Council, which recognises that it, too, needs to close a day centre. The difficulty with service changes is how to unlock the money to run alternative services at the same time. The issue is how we deal with transition and maintain day centres for those who still need them. I invite Bob Doris and his colleagues to join me in asking the minister to look again at the issue of transition and to smooth the implementation of self-directed support. Glasgow is to be awarded £0.5 million for that, in comparison with the £5 million that Birmingham, which has similar needs and similar levels of self-directed support, will get to manage the same transition. If we provided that kind of support, we would make a real difference for people with learning disabilities and not only improve their ability to choose but continue to improve their quality of life.

Speaking as a regular visitor to George Square, my understanding is that the money is actually coming direct from the Scottish Government by way of tax increment financing.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement about the new fund. Can he advise when the fund will be established and open to applications? Does the cabinet secretary agree with me that the fund’s effectiveness will be curtailed if the IPTR system is not currently working for the benefit of patients? Is the current system sufficient to guarantee access to Kalydeco for patients who need it?

You have done nothing.

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of his statement but regret that its contents demonstrate beyond any doubt that the Scottish National Party waiting times scandal has just deepened. His statement is a whitewash full of assertions that are patently not true—he would have had evidence of that if he had bothered to read the internal audit reports. For an area in which there are apparently no problems, an awful lot of action is now being taken. First, NHS Lothian was caught fiddling the waiting times figures. At the time, Nicola Sturgeon assured the chamber that she had spoken to all health boards and that there was a problem only in NHS Lothian. Then came NHS Tayside, with evidence revealed today of blatant waiting times manipulation and serious allegations of bullying and pressure being applied to staff. The problem is wider. Other health boards have retrospectively adjusted their figures: social unavailability was at an all-time high of almost 21,000 in June 2011 but dropped to 9,500 as of September 2012, which is nothing short of a miracle. The one thing that is clear is that the manipulation of waiting times is rife. In NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, auditors have been unable to interrogate data, there was no audit trail and, where they sampled, they found that 60 per cent of patients had their waiting time guarantee suspended.

Can the cabinet secretary tell me why the internal audits cover the period from January to June 2012, when Audit Scotland is looking at April to December 2011? Were health boards being given time to cover up after NHS Lothian was exposed? Will the cabinet secretary now confirm that Nicola Sturgeon misled Parliament when she said that there was a problem only in NHS Lothian? Is it not the case that, today, the SNP has shown that, instead of leading the NHS, it is misleading Scotland and the thousands of patients who have been affected by this scandal?

It is there in the report.

I very much welcome the cabinet secretary’s action in that regard. However, in addition to the problems with retrieving data from Glasgow—which makes one wonder how figures are supplied to the Scottish Government—the sampling of 100 patients by PricewaterhouseCoopers suggested that 56 in south Glasgow had periods of social unavailability applied while in north Glasgow the figure rose to a staggering 62 patients, one of whom waited as long as 168 days. Does the cabinet secretary consider such periods of unavailability in Greater Glasgow and Clyde to be in any way acceptable?

It may be Christmas but, to be frank, I found that response astonishing because health inequality is not affected by borders. Let me suggest to the minister something that he can do to give an early Christmas present to people living in disadvantaged areas. The deep-end group of general practitioners who serve our most disadvantaged communities are asking for more time with their patients to address their complex and underlying problems. Why does he not do something about that?

Fantasy, fantasy.

I am grateful to the minister for early sight of his statement. There is much in it with which we on the Labour benches can certainly agree. I also pay tribute to the workers and their trade unions for the vigorous campaign mounted in defence of Remploy. I will not rehearse the flaws in the UK coalition Government’s approach to the closure of Remploy factories across Scotland; suffice it to say that we supported the Government’s call to delay phase 2 until we could evaluate and learn lessons from the closure or takeover of factories at phase 1. I share the minister’s disappointment that the UK coalition pressed on regardless and announced the closure of another four factories, in Dundee, Cowdenbeath, Leven and, of course, Clydebank—an area that neighbours my constituency—over and above the earlier announcements about Springburn, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Netherton. It is helpful that the minister has accepted Labour’s proposal for an employer support grant. Although I acknowledge warmly his announcement of £5,000 to employers for each employee as a recruitment incentive, I am sure that he would agree that it falls well short of the position adopted by my Labour colleagues in the Welsh Assembly. They provide an employer support grant over four years—not 18 months—with grants of up to 100 per cent for jobs in the public sector and up to 75 per cent for jobs in the private sector, with a total budget of £2.4 million a year. What is the total budget for the employer recruitment incentive in Scotland for each year of operation? I am equally grateful that the minister has accepted Labour’s proposal for a permanent supported workplaces task force. Who will be invited to join the task force? Will it involve representation from the First Minister’s Council of Economic Advisers? When will the task force meet?

I understand that the Scottish Government has received or will shortly receive reports from each of the 14 territorial health boards’ internal investigations into the hidden waiting times scandal. I believe that the Scottish Government’s intention is to publish those reports on 19 December, which is immediately before the Parliament’s Christmas recess. I am sure that there is no attempt by the Government to avoid scrutiny. Given the seriousness of the situation and reports of the scandal spreading beyond NHS Lothian to a number of other health boards, including NHS Tayside and NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, it is essential that members have the opportunity to question ministers on the findings before the parliamentary recess. Presiding Officer, will you advise whether it would be possible for the Parliamentary Bureau to consider allowing for a ministerial statement on Thursday next week to enable members to properly scrutinise the matter?

I am delighted to speak in the debate, and I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on bringing the matter to the Parliament. I commend her for highlighting the personal experience of a family’s journey while they live with cerebral palsy. As we know, Bobath Scotland provides support and assistance to children with cerebral palsy. The centre in Port Dundas is the only one of its kind in Scotland. I have had the pleasure of visiting the centre, and members can believe me when I say that it is very impressive. I recommend a visit to members who have not been there. Bobath’s purpose is to help children and families to gain skills, through a holistic, hands-on approach that involves work with the whole family and the child’s external support network. Members have spoken far more eloquently than I can about the importance of the services that Bobath offers and the transformation in families that have received support, so I do not intend to repeat what they said. There is no question in my mind about the value of what Bobath Scotland does. The staff, parents and children are passionate about the service; indeed, we are all, rightly, passionate about the service and the organisation. We are constantly amazed at what the children can be helped to achieve. Support for Bobath extends to my local area. Several of my constituents volunteer to organise and participate in the dragon boat race in Loch Lomond, which I think raised £40,000 this year. I applaud all their fundraising efforts. That takes me neatly on to money. Patricia Ferguson was right to point out the scale of the task that Bobath undertakes and the scale of the funding challenge that it faces. Without a shadow of doubt, health boards’ resources are declining year on year. Referrals are still being made, but they are often not backed by a transfer of resource. There are health boards that do not refer at all, because they do not want to spend money and cannot afford to do so. It would be surprising if any organisation, let alone Bobath Scotland, could budget or plan effectively in such circumstances. It is fundamentally wrong that a country the size of Scotland should have such a postcode lottery. We need to ask ourselves whether a child with cerebral palsy in Greater Glasgow and Clyde is somehow more deserving than a child with cerebral palsy in Highland, Grampian, Tayside or anywhere else. The answer, of course, is no. I offer the minister a positive suggestion, which I hope that he will consider. Rather than just moan about the problem, let us try to do something a bit differently. Funding arrangements are in place for the Children’s Hospice Association Scotland. I know CHAS because Robin House in Balloch is in my constituency. CHAS takes children from across Scotland in very much the same way as Bobath Scotland does. A lead health board negotiates with all the other health boards, which means that CHAS is not chasing round 14 health boards with 14 different sets of funding criteria. It is a sensible and effective model, which I commend to the minister. It works for the NHS and it works beautifully for CHAS. Will the minister consider whether the model could apply to Bobath Scotland? If he finds that it can do, I will thank him, as will lots of people, because he will be giving their kids access to Bobath’s services and the opportunity to have a better life.

I welcome the opportunity to debate Scotland’s health service. We are all—rightly—proud of the national health service and we are all grateful to the dedicated staff who work in it to make our experience of the NHS the best it can possibly be. However, let us be clear: they do not want just our thanks; they want and need our support and, above all, they want us to be honest about what is going on in hospitals and health centres across the country. We in this chamber trade figures about staffing numbers and budgets. I know that there are 2,500 fewer nurses in the NHS, which has brought the nursing workforce to a level that is lower than it was when the Scottish National Party took power. I also know that the health budget has declined by £189 million in real terms and that the cost pressures on health boards are enormous. A cursory glance at any set of health board papers will tell anyone the truth of that. However, the SNP simply denies the truth. The level of complacency that it has displayed—and that its amendment shows that it continues to display—is frankly breathtaking. However, it will not be able to deny the reality as health service workers themselves report how they struggle to cope with increasing demands and even less resource. Audit Scotland has put the NHS on an amber warning. Nine health boards had underlying deficits, and three health boards had to borrow money to break even. Health budgets have decreased in real terms from 2009-10 and are set to continue decreasing over the next three years. Savings have been deemed to be at significant risk of not being delivered, and there is a £1 billion backlog of repairs, more than half of which has a direct impact on patient care. The SNP’s amendment might as well have come from a parallel universe. Is it really questioning what the Auditor General had to say? It was a damning report card by anybody’s definition, but what we got from the SNP at the time was a blizzard of statistics and assertion from the cabinet secretary about how everything is wonderful. I have to say that I feel a degree of sympathy for Alex Neil. Most of the mess is not of his making. He has inherited this situation from the former Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy, Nicola Sturgeon, and he has been left holding her poisoned chalice. Let us consider some of the challenges that Alex Neil has inherited, starting with waiting times. Others will talk more about NHS Lothian, but what is now becoming clear is that the manipulation of waiting time figures was going on well beyond NHS Lothian. It was going on in NHS Tayside and NHS Grampian, and allegations have been made about none other than NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. Labour members said months ago that the practice was widespread. We even gave examples, but the former cabinet secretary was in denial and said that it was just a local problem. I even recall Mark McDonald—who is in the chamber—and Joe FitzPatrick accusing me of innuendo and of casting aspersions about NHS Tayside. That would, of course, be the same NHS Tayside that last week suspended two members of staff due to suspected manipulation of waiting times. I look forward to receiving Mark McDonald’s apology, but I will not hold my breath. In NHS Grampian, patients get a letter saying that they should call to set up an appointment, but there are time restrictions on when they can call and the line is constantly engaged. Also in NHS Grampian, a pensioner who was approaching the 12-week time limit was offered, at short notice, treatment in Glasgow or Tayside, when there was no space available at either of those two locations. His wife kept on the case and, when she threatened publicity, she got a cancellation the next day. She tells me that she reported this matter to the former cabinet secretary’s constituency office and to her civil servants, but that she was, essentially, ignored. Did the former cabinet secretary know that the problem was widespread? Did she know about that experience in NHS Grampian? The real scandal will be if she knew and simply did nothing. When we last debated waiting lists, we pointed out the warning signs to the then cabinet secretary. Social unavailability underwent a dramatic and unexplained rise from 4,967 in 2008 to 20,662 in June 2011, which is a fivefold increase in a few years, as people had their waiting time suspended so that the figures would look good. That was the SNP’s hidden waiting list. In 2010, Audit Scotland produced a report that highlighted concerns about how waiting times were recorded. It said: “The report also finds that the NHS is not accurately recording all relevant information on patient waits which makes it difficult to demonstrate that it is managing all patients correctly in line with the new guidance.” The Government’s Information Services Division says: “several health boards have been warned about the high levels of social unavailability”. What did the cabinet secretary do to address those concerns? Did she even monitor what was going on? Did anything change as the result of Audit Scotland’s report in 2010 and its clear warning? I suspect not, which is why we are in the mess that we are in today. Let us not forget that behind each and every one of those statistics of a waiting time breached is a patient—a patient with a need for treatment who might be suffering unnecessarily as health boards fiddle their figures to satisfy the SNP. Waiting time targets are challenging—there is no doubt about that—but they are not delivered by creating a culture of fear and intimidation so that staff are forced into the position of hiding the truth. In one of the largest health boards in the country, staff are off work as long-term sick as a result of stress because of what they have been asked to do to manipulate waiting times. A woman in my own constituency with suspected breast cancer was told that she would not be seen until the new year, breaching the waiting time target, because clinics were being cancelled for the whole of the holiday period. What happens when those targets on waiting times are missed? As we understand the system, the breach needs to be reported to the Scottish Government, but is there any monitoring of what then happens to patients who have breached the target? Are they left to languish, waiting for treatment, as the attention turns to those who are not yet in breach? I will explain that point to the cabinet secretary. In Forth Valley, a patient waited 337 days over the 62-day target to be treated for upper gastrointestinal cancer. The overall wait was therefore more than a year. In Grampian, a patient with colorectal cancer waited 133 days over the 62-day target. In Lothian, a patient has been waiting for lung cancer treatment for 67 days over and above the 62-day target. It just seems that those who have breached the target are not treated quite so urgently. I hope that the cabinet secretary can reassure me that that is not the case and that he will investigate and monitor the situation. Reports in The Herald identify hundreds of Scottish patients who wait too long for cancer treatment, with more than 1,000 breaches in the past two and a half years. To be clear, that was due to a shortage of staff and equipment, not because of the complexity of the cancer or the need for more diagnostic tests. The Government response is that that number of breaches is within the 5 per cent tolerance level. Can we really tolerate delays to cancer treatment of such extraordinary length when we know that early diagnosis and early treatment can save lives? Only yesterday, damning evidence was given at the Health and Sport Committee by Scotland’s leading cancer specialists, who described the lack of access to up-to-date cancer treatment and training and the current difficulty in recruiting to specialist cancer centres. That is because Scotland’s NHS is now looked on as being “quite inferior”. The specialists’ frustration is over their inability to prescribe courses of treatment that they know will prolong life and that are routinely available in England. Their clear view that the individual patient treatment request is inadequate and simply leads to a postcode lottery must be acted on. I welcome the review that the cabinet secretary has announced, but we must ensure that any replacement system is fair and not dependent on where someone lives. Members may also recall similar comments that one of our leading cardiologists made recently in respect of cardiac treatment about Scotland falling behind in the use of new technology and innovative treatments such as transcatheter aortic valve implantation. I confess that I find the SNP amendment a little embarrassing. We only need to look at NHS Lothian to know that financial targets are indeed at risk. The most recent set of NHS Lothian board papers report a projected deficit of £12 million. Of course, the SNP amendment removes the line in our motion that calls on the Scottish Government “to provide guarantees that waiting times manipulation has not spread beyond NHS Lothian”. Now we know the truth—that manipulation has indeed been wider than NHS Lothian. The NHS in Scotland is in danger of becoming second rate on the SNP’s watch. I implore it, genuinely, to stop and listen, to set aside the spin, and to pay heed to the chorus of voices, not from within this chamber but from health professionals and patients who are telling it that all is not well with our NHS. The more the SNP hides the truth, the more it buries its head in the sand, and the more it comes up with delusional amendments, then the more people will decide that they cannot trust the SNP with the NHS. I move, That the Parliament recognises that the NHS has been put on an amber warning by the Auditor General and calls on the Scottish Government to urgently act on the concerns raised; believes that reductions in staffing levels as well as financial pressures are having a negative impact on patient care and that further inaction is not an option; is concerned at reports that raise further questions about the integrity of waiting times data, and calls on the Scottish Government to provide guarantees that waiting times manipulation has not spread beyond NHS Lothian.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

We need an apology from you.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

It would appear that the waiting times scandal is indeed not simply confined to NHS Lothian, with reports of figures being fiddled not just in Tayside but also in Grampian. I welcome the fact that the reports will be published in December, although I hope that it will not be just before Christmas. The Presiding Officer will recall that Nicola Sturgeon said to her party conference that all patients are now covered by the waiting time guarantee. Was she wrong?

I, too, congratulate Jamie Hepburn on securing the debate. Almost half of women in the United Kingdom experience domestic violence, sexual assault or stalking. Violence against women causes more deaths and disability among women who are aged 15 to 44 than cancer, malaria, traffic accidents and war. Two women are killed per week as a result of domestic abuse. Those are just some of the chilling statistics that are cited by White Ribbon Scotland and which demonstrate the white ribbon campaign’s importance. Despite the previous Scottish Executive’s efforts to use groundbreaking and hard-hitting advertising campaigns that contained clear messages about there being no excuse for domestic abuse, and despite the current Government’s efforts, the numbers who are reporting abuse continue to rise. As other members have said, we need to recognise that the abuse of women is rooted in gender inequalities. It is fundamentally about differences in power between men and women. We need to do more to prevent abuse from happening and to change society’s attitudes and values. The debate recognises all of that. Jamie Hepburn outlined the importance of the white ribbon campaign, so I will not go on about the significance of the 16 days. I will just repeat what he said—that women’s rights are fundamentally about human rights and concern us all. We need to support and work with White Ribbon Scotland and other organisations such as Zero Tolerance, Rape Crisis Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid to challenge all violence against women. I commend the campaign entitled “Together we can stop it”, which Women’s Aid has launched. It makes real the stories that lie behind the statistics. It is challenging behaviour and giving women confidence to report incidents. I acknowledge that the responses from the police and the courts are constantly improving. I highlight the significant contribution that has been made to women’s experience of the justice system by the success of the domestic abuse court in Glasgow, which has been rolled out to Edinburgh and which I believe is being piloted in Livingston. I commend the police for launching a nationwide festive campaign to tackle domestic abuse. I must be honest and say that I wish that we did not have to have all these campaigns, but we must look at how they contribute to the whole process, which is about changing attitudes. Something that is not often mentioned is the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Act 2011, which was passed by the Parliament and is approaching its first anniversary. Two orders have been served under the act, and two more are pending. That is a small but important step for women, but we must be relentless in our pursuit of the issue. We must focus on two fronts. First, we must focus on services, for which there is a continuing need. From the most recent census, Scottish Women’s Aid identified that 22 per cent of women who requested accommodation had their needs met, which means that 78 per cent of women did not. There is a continuing problem in that regard. Secondly, we must change attitudes in society. We must challenge gender inequality, as it is only when we start to do so that we will make a sustained difference.

5. To ask the First Minister what lessons the Scottish Government has learned from the serious incidents in the NHS reported in the BBC Scotland “How Safe is Your Hospital?” investigation. (S4F-01021)

The First Minister has touched on one of the issues that the programme raised, which is the appalling treatment of staff who report serious incidents. That was the experience of Robert Wilson, a staff nurse at NHS Ayrshire and Arran. He called for a whistleblowing helpline, as did we in December, February and May. I am delighted that the First Minister has now come to the chamber to announce that there will be a helpline. Why was there a delay? Will he ensure that the whistleblowing helpline is independent of the NHS? How will we monitor the follow-up from the helpline?

The cabinet secretary rightly said that, at a time of wage restraint, it is wrong to ask public employees to pay increased contributions to their pensions. Does the UK Government require additional contributions particularly from staff, or does it require an increase in pension contributions overall? The cabinet secretary said that, where the Scottish Government can act differently, it will take the opportunity to do so. I invite him to consider NHS pension employer contributions. The Scottish Government contributes 13.5 per cent, but NHS employers in England and Wales contribute 14 per cent. Does the cabinet secretary agree that taking action on that would help to offset some of the impact on our hard-working NHS staff?

My amendment 3 seeks to remove section 16, which gives local authorities the power to charge carers for services received when seeking self-directed support. Like other elements of the bill that relate to carers, it repeats provisions in the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968. At the heart of the amendment is a debate about the principle of charging carers for services in the first place. In effect, section 16 highlights local authorities’ ability to charge carers for services. Members should make no mistake: although the power is discretionary, local government is shouldering 83 per cent of the Scottish Government cuts and might have no choice but to use it. Probably without exception, we have all paid tribute to carers and acknowledged their value to society. In economic terms, they provide £10.8 billion of worth simply by caring and save the public purse a substantial amount of money; in social terms, they sustain older people in their families, homes and communities. The question today is whether our rhetoric will be matched by action. The Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 established the principle that carers should be given the same status as care providers and acknowledged that carers required resources and support to enable them to fulfil their caring role. As Simon Hodgson, director of Carers Scotland, has said, “the idea that health board staff have to pay to attend a course on how to lift someone safely, or local authority staff would be invoiced for taking time off in lieu because they had earnings or savings above a certain level, would be rightly considered absurd, yet that is precisely what might happen if the legislation is not amended.” Either carers are to be treated as care providers or they are not. Let us be clear: the amounts that we are talking about for training, respite and so on for carers are tiny in comparison with the £10.8 billion that they give back. The evidence backs that up. Charging is also considered to undermine the principles of self-directed support, as it could deter carers from accessing support in the first place. Concerns have also been raised about adding to the postcode lottery of care that already exists with regard to charging, with 32 local authorities doing things in 32 different ways. Where, as a result of the 1968 act, charging exists, guidance on legislation has been interpreted in different ways. In some cases, local authorities already charge for care; in others, the carer’s income is taken into account when assessing the needs of the person being cared for. There is little consistency of approach. The key point is that section 16 is not required. As the provision already exists and as charges are already made under it, the section is effectively redundant. As the power in the 1968 act has existed for some time, I am genuinely disappointed that the minister has waited until now to announce that he will introduce regulations—although I am delighted that he intends to do so. Surely those regulations should have accompanied the bill to make the intentions with regard to charging absolutely clear. At the moment, we are facing both ways, and delay simply invites local authorities to charge. Carers are very much an integral part of Scotland’s health and social care system. They are an essential but finite resource, and they need our support to continue to care.

I welcome the minister’s intentions—I have never doubted them—but the issue for me is that section 16 is not required. The power that he will exercise is in the 1968 act.

It is not that we spend our time delving into the intricacies of legislation, but I refer the minister to section 87(5) of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, which says that he “may … make regulations for modifying or adjusting the rates at which payments under this section are made, where such a course appears to him to be justified, and any such regulations may provide for the waiving of any such payment in whole or in part in such circumstances as may be specified in the regulations.” He already has the power without section 16.

Amendment 2 is about regulation of personal assistants. The issue has, rightly, been the subject of much interest and debate in the committee and beyond. The intention behind amendment 2 is that we achieve a balance between the disabled people who will be empowered and able to choose their own personal assistants and the people who might have complex conditions and who would be considered to be more vulnerable. I celebrate the fact that the bill is about empowering people who are cared for to have more choice, more flexibility and more control over their lives. The fact that a person is in a wheelchair does not mean that he or she cannot exercise control and decide whom to employ as a personal assistant, just as any employer would do. I do not think that any member has a problem with that. I accept that disability organisations and disabled people themselves do not want regulation. Rather than rely on legislation, they want training and support to become good employers and to recruit safely. Indeed, some disabled people do not need any of that support. My concern is about people who have very complex needs, who might be deemed to be very vulnerable. Such people want the flexibility that self-directed support gives them and they want to exercise choice about how and when their care is provided. That is absolutely right. However, there might be a need for additional safeguards, which afford a degree of protection when it comes to employing staff. There is no doubt that the relationship with personal assistants is critical and is based on trust. It is unfortunate that history is littered with examples of that trust being breached. I am thankful that such cases are in the minority, but they happen. The question is, therefore, whether sufficient safeguards are in place to enable us to feel confident that a balance has been struck between preserving the empowerment that the bill will give to the majority, and protecting the small group of people who might be considered to be vulnerable. It is for Parliament to weigh up potential risks. We have received correspondence from concerned parents who are worried about the safeguards that are in place and who want the reassurance of registration to give them piece of mind about their son’s or daughter’s wellbeing. We need to acknowledge that there have been incidences of abuse that have shocked us all. Such cases have not been confined to residential care homes. I am struck that the Government agency that is responsible for regulation and registration, the Scottish Social Services Council, thinks that we need a system of regulation. In its submission to the Health and Sport Committee, the SSSC argued for registration and “minimum induction training”, and for distinguishing “complex care and care for particularly vulnerable service users”, to enable that area to be regulated without limiting personal choice for everyone else. In effect, there would be regulation for a small proportion of personal assistants. The minister does not want to overprofessionalise personal assistants—I agree with that view. However, the Health and Sport Committee and I think that more could be done to reduce risk. Amendment 2 would not set out a scheme of regulation in the bill. That would be entirely inappropriate, because there are complex considerations, which are best left to professionals and disabled people to work through. Rather, amendment 2 attempts to offer a proportionate approach, by giving the minister the power to make regulations, should they be required. Amendments 4 and 5 relate to amendment 2 and are technical; they would ensure that regulations would be subject to affirmative procedure, in order to ensure greater scrutiny. I hope that the Government and Parliament will accept the need for a balanced approach and support the amendments. I move amendment 2.

I listened carefully to the minister’s comments. Social workers might have a responsibility to advise people about the protecting vulnerable groups scheme, but the duty does not extend to ensuring that disabled people employ only personal assistants who are part of that scheme. If we are being frank, social workers already have huge case loads. Given all their other responsibilities, it is not realistic or reasonable to lay such a burden on them. The bill is—rightly—about ensuring choice and flexibility for the majority, but we in Parliament have a responsibility to balance the undoubted opportunity that the bill presents with the risk. We need to strike a balance and recognise disabled people’s legitimate view that they should be able to make their own choices about personal assistants. However, we have an equal responsibility to safeguard people who might be vulnerable. I draw members’ attention again to the clear view of the Scottish Social Services Council—the Government’s agency for regulation. It has not said that we already have sufficient powers; it has said that regulation is needed in limited circumstances. We do not have a monopoly on wisdom. We should listen carefully to what the regulators tell us. I intend to press amendment 2.

I associate myself with the minister’s remarks and thank the Health and Sport Committee, which is so ably led by Duncan McNeil, the committee clerks, the bill team and, indeed, the minister himself. Having been on that side of the fence myself, I know the effort that will have gone into the bill. Last but by no means least, I thank the organisations and individuals who helped to shape the bill. We are grateful to organisations for disabled people, carers, children and many more besides for taking a direct and considerable interest in the bill, because it has strengthened the end product. The bill itself has been a long time coming but, in fairness, the minister has created a degree of momentum in the past year. At its heart, the bill is about choice, flexibility and empowerment and rightly enshrines principles of independent living for adults and children who receive social care services. As we know, those who exercise choice and control over the services that they receive and how they are delivered get better outcomes—nowhere more so than in terms of provision of social care. At stage 1, I cited the example of a tuck-in service that was provided to an older constituent, who was to be tucked up in bed by care workers between 7 pm and 8 pm. With the exception of Jackson Carlaw, who at stage 1 told us that he went to bed that early, I know of no other adult who goes to bed at that time. That was perhaps more an illustration of the needs of the service being the determining factor, rather than the needs of the individual and how they want to live their lives. Self-directed support turns that experience on its head—and rightly so. Of course, as the minister made clear, the local authority will offer four choices: receiving direct payments, where people will be given the money from which they can meet their needs directly; directing how the local authority arranges services on a person’s behalf; continuing with current local authority support; and a mixture of all three. Although direct payments have been available for a while, take-up remains low. In 2001, only 207 people accessed them; by 2011, the figure was 4,392. There is clearly scope for many more direct payments to be made. I also want to look wider than social care. After all, self-directed support sits in the wider context of the personalisation of services—a concept that was first advanced by the previous United Kingdom Labour Government very much in consultation and partnership with disabled people. Essentially, personalisation recognises that different things shape people’s lives. We are not simply defined by our condition or by the care that we receive; education, housing, employment and transport all contribute to how we live our lives. The Scottish Government itself recognised as much when it set up the direct payment pilots in the national health service for that small group of people with health and social care needs. Although I understand that the Government is reluctant to go down that road at this stage, the issue will undoubtedly return with the advent of the integration of health and social care. If we honestly believe that outcomes benefit as a result of direct support in social care services, we must surely believe that similar benefits can be gained in the limited circumstances in which people’s health and social care needs merge. I hope that the minister will discuss the issue further with all of us in the chamber to ensure that we can truly create transformational change for people. A number of amendments were moved this afternoon with varying degrees of success. Some were supported by the Government; others were not. Nevertheless, I recognise that the Government has moved the bill on since its introduction, and I am grateful to the minister for that. Touching briefly on certain amendments, I think that, with regard to the debate about whether to charge carers for services, Parliament needs to decide whether we believe that carers should be treated in the same way as care providers. Of course, the second test is whether there is evidence to suggest that spending our money in such a way has a clear benefit. All of us, including the Government, regularly state that carers save the state £10.8 billion each year simply by caring. By comparison, the amount that we would spend on them for respite and training would be absolutely tiny. We should invest in order to save, and to enable carers to do the job of caring that they do so well. I welcome the minister’s commitment to introduce regulations that will waive charges for carers. He has come to the process slightly late, if I may say so, but I am delighted that he has. Although I believe that the power to charge and the power to introduce regulations lies in the 1968 act, and that there is no need for section 16, the bottom line is that the minister will create those regulations and create change. However, I urge the minister to be quick. As matters stand, local authorities currently charge; section 16 tells them that they can charge if they want to and, as local government is genuinely shouldering a burden of cuts, authorities may be forced into the position of having to apply charges. Speed is therefore essential. I ask the minister to bring some clarity to the issue in his closing speech. Is he simply limiting the waiving of charges to those who are in receipt of self-directed support for carers, or will it apply more widely? I welcome the wider debate about the role of carers and charging, and I am clear that the power that the 1968 act gives the minister allows him to direct local authorities in all charging that is associated with social care—not just direct payments. Can he therefore advise members on the scope of his intentions with regard to future regulations? He will be aware that there are still concerns about the postcode lottery in care charging, which must be addressed. I will touch briefly on advocacy. Although the bill extends choice and control so that there is greater direction over how support is provided, there remains a need for independent advocacy. I recognise that that will not be required for all, but it is nevertheless essential for some if we want the bill’s provisions to be realised. On regulation of personal assistants, it is incumbent on Parliament to recognise the needs of all and to balance the opportunities that the bill presents with the risks. Those risks may be small, but if the Government’s own agency believes that in limited circumstances personal assistants require to be regulated, we must consider that. There is much to welcome in the bill, and overall it is a good piece of legislation. If it has the transformational effect that we believe it can have, we will have positively changed the landscape of social care in Scotland. For that reason, I am happy to support the bill.

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister invites me to be bad, but I shall resist. Does the minister not agree that bringing forward his proposal at this late stage indicates that previously he was not thinking in those terms at all and that the issue was not raised? I welcome the outcome today, but does he recognise that he was encouraged to get there?

The minister will be aware that Greater Glasgow and Clyde Health Board is about to embark on a review of all its services. Will he ensure that included in the consultation is an option for services to be delivered north of the River Clyde at the Vale of Leven hospital in collaboration with the Golden Jubilee hospital?

I will be the first to congratulate Jim Eadie on securing the debate. I acknowledge the work of Action Duchenne in supporting boys and men with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. I am proud to be the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on muscular dystrophy. We benefit from the experience of people such as John Miller, who as we know is the Scottish advocacy officer for Action Duchenne and who never stops talking about Lee. I associate myself with Jim Eadie’s remarks about John’s work and the work of his family. Working with the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign, the cross-party group has spent much of its time focused on what we can do to improve the experience of people with muscular dystrophy. Inevitably, a lot of that has been about services. We have focused on the development of specialist multidisciplinary care, better transition services, better access to physiotherapy, the need for specialist muscle care advisers and the need for health and social care to be better joined up. We produced “The Mackie Report: Access to specialist neuromuscular care and social care in Scotland”, which clearly set out what could be achieved, based on evidence from health and social care professionals and, more important, from those with muscular dystrophy and their families. The Scottish Government’s response was helpful, although there is a continuing problem with the employment of specialist muscle care advisers. The minister will recall that he gave a hugely welcome commitment to provide three full-time care adviser posts in this financial year. My understanding is that, currently, two advisers are in place, but that someone has yet to be employed for the north of Scotland. There might have been recruitment difficulties, but the minister will know just how important the advisers are to those with muscular dystrophy, as they provide essential care and support. If the minister has time, it would be helpful if he could tell us what action is being taken to ensure that the appointment is made as quickly as possible and that the long-term future of the posts is secure. I return to Duchenne specifically. The thought that the groundbreaking research that Jim Eadie has highlighted might lead to the production of genetic medicine that will improve the treatment and condition of those with Duchenne’s is truly fantastic. I do not pretend to understand what exon skipping is all about or what AAV-based medicine actually does, but what matters is that it will make a huge difference. The lesson for us all is to ensure that we continue to invest in research and to consider the impact of services and how to improve services for those with muscular dystrophy. Like Jim Eadie, I know that Action Duchenne will do just that, as will the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign, which also has an extensive research programme. I join Jim Eadie in paying tribute to the campaigners, fundraisers and researchers because, without their efforts over the years, many things would have been so much more difficult to achieve. He is absolutely right that we should contribute to international research and participate in global clinical trials. Co-funding of such initiatives working in partnership with others will, undoubtedly, lead to quicker and more significant progress. I, too, recommend that to the Scottish Government. Jim Eadie and I appear to be mentioning the same people tonight—we are at one on the matter. I recommend that those who have not yet seen Mark Chapman’s film watch it. It is called “A Life Worth Living: Pushing the Limits of Duchenne”. I was not able to make the screening in the Parliament in June—indeed, that might even have been its premiere—but I have seen the film since then, and I recommend it to colleagues. Mark Chapman is not defined by his disability or his condition. Rather, he is a shining example of what it is possible to do and of the richness of life. Therefore, I am very pleased to participate in the debate and, once again, congratulate Jim Eadie on bringing it to the chamber.

8. To ask the Scottish Government how many transcatheter aortic valve implantation procedures have been performed in Scotland since the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing announced that these would be made routinely available. (S4O-01466)

I whole-heartedly agree with the cabinet secretary. I welcomed his announcement that TAVI would be routinely available in Scotland. At that point, almost 100 patients were, as I understand it, waiting for treatment. Can he tell me whether direct referral from the patient’s cardiac consultant to Edinburgh royal infirmary is how the system works? Can he also tell me whether there is any delay or any barrier to patients receiving treatment, given that only four patients have received treatment so far?

I would like to tease that out. Is it common or good practice for the terms of the contract for an agency directly contracted by the NHS not to be known before it is signed?

I have never had such a long and insincere welcome, but I thank the cabinet secretary for giving way. I accept what he says about eye tests. Does he agree, therefore, that means testing entitlement to optical vouchers is a barrier to people receiving the kind of treatment that he has just described?

Will Aileen McLeod give way?

The economic forecast remains bleak. Unemployment is rising and remains persistently above the level in the rest of the UK. There are 30,000 fewer public sector workers and our public services are under enormous strain. I say that, not to talk Scotland down but in recognition of the reality of the situation that communities face throughout Scotland. I say with all due respect to Fiona McLeod that we cannot consider the issue in the abstract when people are struggling. Experts tell us that over the next few years our budget will fall by £5.5 billion. The SNP knows that and we know that, but the SNP has managed to identify only about 25 per cent of the savings that are required. It does not take a genius to work out that three-quarters of the cuts are still to come. The truth is that the SNP does not want to tell us before its referendum how bad the situation is. The truth is that the SNP’s sole concern is to secure independence—it gives that away in the motion. Does the SNP really care about pensioners who are struggling to heat their homes this winter as energy prices rocket? Does it really care about the hard-working families who are having to rely on food banks to feed their children? Does it really care about the increasing number of young people who are out of work and on the dole? Patrick Harvie was right to say that it is not about who cares the most. He was equally right to say that the SNP cannot hang around for two years waiting for independence, which it says will be wonderful, while doing nothing now to help the pensioners, hard-working families and young people who are struggling.

That is exactly the debate that we want to have across parties in the Parliament—[Interruption.] Dearie me! We can tell that it is nearly Christmas. SNP members are getting noisy. The SNP has sent out the Government’s very own pantomime dame, Alex Neil, who is, as ever, rising to the occasion. Alex Neil is famous for not letting the facts stand in the way of a good story. His Orwellian doublespeak in the debate has been the stuff of legend. Murdo Fraser was right to say that we have learned something interesting, which is that Alex Neil is in favour of higher taxes. The First Minister is in favour of lower taxes. Who is right? Presiding Officer, I know that you will find this hard to believe, but I have in the past accused the Government of being most interested in division and denial. The Government keeps presenting me with new evidence to support that contention. Let me tell members a story about the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. In the Airdrie & Coatbridge Advertiser, which I have taken to reading quite avidly, our very own Alex Neil appeared in a serious story on 17 October about a pensioner whose leg has had to be amputated because of a failure to diagnose a problem early enough. That is clearly very distressing for her and for her family, so how helpful is it that her MSP is none other than the health secretary? Does the health secretary take responsibility and help to sort out the problem? No. We understand from the article that he “has written to the Prime Minister”, even though health has been devolved for the past 13 years and the responsibility lies with none other than Alex Neil.

I am delighted to hear it. Out in the real world, families are squaring up to the economic challenge and are considering what they need, rather than what they want. It is time that the Government did the same. We need an honest debate. We need to be explicit about the choices that we make and we should not let things happen by default. Cuts are being made by the SNP. The SNP denies it, but the doctors know it, the nurses know it, the homecare staff know it and the man and woman in the street know it. At the heart of the debate is an issue of fairness. The SNP cannot simply say that it is a question of universal services versus some kind of targeted provision. The issue is far more complex than that and the SNP does people a disservice by pretending otherwise. Most mature countries have a mix of universal and targeted social policies. I do not disagree with much of the analysis about some of the benefits that are gained, but we need to ensure that the policies are properly costed and that they do not have unintended consequences. The NHS functions largely as a universal service that is free at the point of need. Everyone can receive the service and we absolutely support that. However, there are parts of it that are not universal. NHS dental treatment is means tested, optical vouchers for people to get their glasses are means tested, and travel to hospitals is means tested. The systems for dental treatment and optical vouchers are exactly the same as the old system for prescriptions. The SNP says that to reintroduce any element of prescription charges would be an attack on ill health, so does the cabinet secretary believe that the current means testing for NHS dental treatment and optical vouchers are attacks on bad teeth and poor vision? The cabinet secretary is not standing up. My goodness! I take it from his silence that we are not seeing policy being made on the hoof—those are attacks on bad teeth and poor vision. To be more serious, a wide range of homecare services and residential care services are means tested.

No, thank you. To turn to social care, I say genuinely to Maureen Watt that the SNP is not protecting public services, which was the contention that she made in her speech. Just look at what is going on in local government, which is shouldering the burden of the SNP cuts: 83 per cent of the Scottish Government’s budget cuts have been passed on to local government—the very people whom we expect to deliver on the increasing demand for social care. For the first time, people are paying for essential services such as home helps, community alarms and aids and equipment for the disabled. Costs have risen by as much as 50 per cent in the past few years and there is a postcode lottery of care with different charges, different eligibility criteria and a system of rationing that sees 15-minute care visits as somehow ticking the box. That is not about fairness. It is about the consequences of choices that have been made by the SNP. The cost of making prescriptions free was £57 million last year and is projected to rise to £61 million next year—enough to pay the salaries of 2,000 nurses. That is the choice. Bob Doris said that we can have free prescriptions and that that helps people in poorer communities as well, but tell me something, Bob; what does the SNP tell people when they are refused life-saving cancer drugs because of the SNP cuts? The truth is that the choice that the SNP makes is to not fund cancer drugs, but instead to remove 2,500 nurses and midwives from the NHS, thereby taking their numbers to a seven-year low. The truth is that the choice that the SNP makes is to provide an advantage for people such as Fred Goodwin—bankers, the lot of them—when food banks are appearing in our towns and cities. The truth is that the choice that SNP makes is that older people are cut off from essential services because they cannot afford to pay, and the SNP cuts to local government are making things worse. Add to that the backlog of maintenance in the NHS, which amounts to £1 billion. The SNP needs to realise that the time for soundbite policies and retail politics is over. It is time for the SNP to be honest and truthful. This is not just a debate that Labour is calling for—why not listen to the BMA, the Royal College of Nursing and Audit Scotland when they express their concerns about the health service or, for that matter, to Campbell Christie, Crawford Beveridge and Professor David Bell about the sustainability of services?

This is a debate about the SNP’s myth versus everybody else’s reality. In closing, I will continue with my Christmas theme and leave members with the words of three wise men. Mike Russell—in writing and probably recorded—

Mike Russell wrote: “Put bluntly, universality now drags down both the quality of service to those most in need”. Kenny MacAskill said to the Justice Committee: “it is right that those who can afford to pay towards the cost of their defence should do so”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 18 September 2012; c 1717.] And none other than Alex Neil, in this chamber on 14 May 2009, when speaking about the changes to the central heating programme, said: “It would be inappropriate to use scarce resources to provide free central heating systems for some of our retired bankers”.—[Official Report, 14 May 2009; c 17481.]

The SNP must stop pretending.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments that screening will continue. After all, women need certainty about the breast screening programme. However, does he agree that more needs to be done to improve uptake for women in disadvantaged areas where levels of access are consistently lower?

5. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to improve treatment for people with dementia. (S4F-00956)

I very much welcome the progress that has been made. I am sure that the First Minister agrees that the 14 additional specialist nurses need to be set against the cut of 2,500 in the overall number of nurses in Scotland. I bring to the First Minister’s attention a response from NHS Fife to a freedom of information request, which says: “During 2011, the highest number of bed or ward moves for a dementia patient in a single hospital stay was 13.” Does he share my view that that number of moves is unacceptable for dementia patients? What measures will he take to eradicate from our national health service the practice of boarding out?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the Audit Scotland report “NHS financial performance 2011/12”, which suggests real-terms budget reductions and growing financial pressures on the NHS. (S4F-00935)

The First Minister’s response reminds me of NHS Lothian’s approach to waiting times, which involved a culture of strongly discouraging the reporting of bad news. I hope that the First Minister will not continue to be in denial about the problems that face the NHS. Does the First Minister agree, therefore, that the cut of more than 2,500 in the number of nurses is having a direct impact not just on patient care, but on nurses? In today’s Edinburgh Evening News, we find out that in NHS Lothian 17,500 working days are lost among nurses alone because of stress, which is a record high. Is that not a wake-up call for the SNP and the First Minister?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the Audit Scotland report “NHS financial performance 2011/12”, which suggests real-terms budget reductions and growing financial pressures on the NHS. (S4F-00935)

The First Minister’s response reminds me of NHS Lothian’s approach to waiting times, which involved a culture of strongly discouraging the reporting of bad news. I hope that the First Minister will not continue to be in denial about the problems that face the NHS. Does the First Minister agree, therefore, that the cut of more than 2,500 in the number of nurses is having a direct impact not just on patient care, but on nurses? In today’s Edinburgh Evening News, we find out that in NHS Lothian 17,500 working days are lost among nurses alone because of stress, which is a record high. Is that not a wake-up call for the SNP and the First Minister?

I am not sure whether anything is clearer after that speech other than the fact that I have lost almost seven minutes of my life on it. Harold Wilson said that a week was a long time in politics, but had he considered events in the chamber last week, I am sure that he would have judged that a day was a long time in politics for the SNP. Last week’s events are scarcely believable. We had revelations, reversals and, today, utter rubbish. The situation has all the elements of a cracking farce, with the First Minister in the starring role. It is quite something for his actions to be so jaw-dropping as to eclipse the loss of two of his MSPs, who were relegated to the inside pages, and all because of legal advice on whether Scotland would have automatic entry to the EU and whether it would be required to join the euro. I will tell members a story. It is the story of a First Minister who went to court to conceal whether he had sought legal advice and the content of that legal advice. I ask members to imagine our surprise at discovering that the First Minister was hiding the fact that he had no legal advice at all and was wasting our money to protect something that did not exist. The Deputy First Minister, who doubles on occasion as the First Minister’s human shield, was sent out to explain why that was all perfectly reasonable and to tell us that she was now seeking specific legal advice from the law officers. She, of course, denied that she had sought specific legal advice from them before. It was a shame that she had not checked with her boss about what he had previously said because, in the now infamous interview with Andrew Neil, when asked whether he had sought specific legal advice from his law officers, the First Minister replied, “We have, yes”. There is no mistaking the meaning of that but, in the First Minister’s fantasy world, what did we know? We were to be treated to the 27-word defence. I confess that it was such an amazing defence that it stopped me right in my tracks. The law officers have considered a plethora of documents from the SNP, but it appears from the Independent on Sunday that they consistently told the First Minister that Scotland’s future as part of the EU would not be automatic and would require detailed negotiations. That must have slipped his mind, or perhaps he could not reveal it for fear of breaching the ministerial code. I turn to the ministerial code. The First Minister rightly defends it. I invite the Deputy First Minister in his place to look a little more closely at paragraph 2.35. We must bear it in mind that there are several types of legal advice: advice from the law officers is one, advice from the solicitors in the Scottish Government is the second and external legal advice is the third. The code makes it clear that ministers cannot reveal whether advice has been sought from the law officers. It goes on to say that ministers cannot reveal the content of advice from law officers or other legal advice. Now, those are four interesting words. Can the Deputy First Minister reveal whether she sought any other legal advice but cannot tell us what is in it? Perhaps the real story here is that the SNP has sought other legal advice that does not tell the SNP what it wants to hear, so it is in complete denial. Here is the Deputy First Minister’s opportunity to clear this up. Has the Scottish Government taken any other legal advice on entry to the European Union? The Deputy First Minister should feel free to intervene. Let the record show that the Deputy First Minister did not move a muscle. Let me ask again, because this is important. The ministerial code is no bar to revealing whether legal advice was sought from sources other than the law officers. That is absolutely clear. Will the Deputy First Minister now confirm whether any legal advice has been sought and does indeed exist? Okay, let the record also show that the Deputy First Minister did not bother to stand up and intervene. After hiding from the media the morning after her challenging “Newsnight Scotland” interview, she admitted that an unfortunate impression had been created. Well, who created that impression? If it wasnae their fault, whose fault was it? Does she not understand that the reason for the anger that has raged in the Scottish media on the issue is precisely because much more than a nod and a wink had been given on this issue to so many of the commentators and journalists. The reason for the betrayal that they have felt is precisely because they were told that this existed, and it simply did not exist. Is it not the case that the First Minister is playing fast and loose with the truth? The legal advice that does not exist according to the Deputy First Minister seems to exist in the First Minister’s mind and appears to be confirmed in the Independent on Sunday, but no, no—the official SNP position remains one of denial. It reminds me of the story of the emperor’s new clothes, but the First Minister has no cover on this one. The serious underlying issue is one of trust. Trust and honesty, in my view, are important traits for a politician. What I have learned this week is that the First Minister has demonstrated neither, and this at a time when the stakes could not be higher. We are facing the most important constitutional question in more than 300 years, but we now know that we cannot trust or believe what the First Minister says. Is it not the truth that the First Minister will say and do anything to get his way, even if it means that he has to bend the facts? He has damaged his credibility and, on today’s performance, he is damaging the Deputy First Minister’s credibility. In closing, let me turn—

I will say quickly that, in a week when the First Minister has denied his own words, I do not believe that the hand-picked advisers can simply consider the ministerial code, nor do I believe that the SNP-majority Parliament will be anything other than partisan, because that is what SNP members have demonstrated. This is a matter for an independent judicial inquiry. If the SNP had any respect for the people of Scotland, it would not run away from proper scrutiny.

Jamie Hepburn is absolutely right—we should not be name calling. Does he therefore regret his comments on television that perhaps I—now what was it—boiled cats and ate them for breakfast? [Interruption.]

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary give way on that point?

How much taxpayers’ money has the Scottish Government spent on a court case to hide information on legal advice about the European Union—legal advice that was not even commissioned and that does not exist? Could President Barroso, Jim Sillars, Romano Prodi and a number of others be correct in saying that Scotland would not have automatic entry to the European Union? Perhaps the cabinet secretary should seek legal advice on whether joining the eurozone is a requirement for new countries when they join the EU.

The First Minister may be happy to talk about free prescriptions. Does he recognise that there are consequences to his policy choices? Does he recognise that nursing levels are at their lowest since 2005, and that—as told by the Edinburgh Evening News—nurses are working seven days a week for months at a time to fix NHS Lothian’s waiting-list scandal? Is not that the reality of the SNP’s choices in Government?

We have faced many challenges in this Parliament, but we did so secure in the knowledge of year-on-year budget uplifts and the trend of increasing resources. We all know that times have changed. The economic forecast remains bleak; unemployment is rising and it remains persistently above the level in the rest of the UK in percentage terms; there are 30,000 fewer public sector workers and our public services are under enormous strain. This is not about talking Scotland down; it is about recognising the reality of the situation that we face in our communities across Scotland. Over the next few years, our budget is likely to fall by £5.5 billion. We have so far managed to save about 25 per cent of what is required, so it does not take a genius to work out that three quarters of the cuts are still to come. Meanwhile, out in the real world families are squaring up to that challenge to their household budgets. They are looking at what they need rather than what they want and are considering what is essential rather than what is desirable. It is time that this Government did the same. We need an honest debate that is explicit about the choices that we make. We should not let things happen by default. At the heart of the debate is social justice, which is the issue that brought many of us into politics and motivates many of us across the chamber to this day. That does not diminish because we have a debate about universal versus targeted provision. It is false for the SNP to propose that one is somehow against the other, because the issue is much more complex than that. Most mature countries have a mix of universal and targeted social policies. The truth is that many will have systems of targeting within a universal framework, with extra benefits afforded to low income groups.

I will give way to Margo MacDonald.

The problem that I have with that premise is that this Government argues that somehow things will be better if people vote for independence. However, people are suffering now and the Government is not dealing with that. When members consider that the NHS largely functions as a universal benefit—it is free at the point of need and everyone receives a service—they must also consider that parts of it are not universal. To name but a few such examples: NHS dental treatment is means tested, optical vouchers for people to get their glasses are means tested and travel to hospitals is means tested. I will touch on free prescriptions. The cost of making prescriptions free was £57 million last year and the cost is projected to rise to £61 million next year. That is enough to pay the salaries of 2,000 nurses. That is the choice. As a nation we spend £1.18 billion on prescriptions—that is a lot of money.

No. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is projecting a £30 million increase in its prescribing budget this year. It also plans to cut the number of clinical staff by an extra £15 million—that is 500 nurses. What is the choice? Hands up those on the SNP benches who want 2,500 fewer nurses and midwives—taking their numbers to a seven-year low. No one has raised a hand. Is that the exchange for free prescriptions? We have a choice to make. Hands up those on the SNP benches who believe that providing an advantage for people such as bankers is right when food banks are appearing in our towns and cities. That is the choice that we face. For the final time, hands up those on the SNP benches who are content to ignore the anecdotal evidence from general practitioners that people are presenting for cold remedies or indigestion tablets that they would previously have bought over the counter, and to continue to provide free prescriptions rather than investing in patient care. That is the choice, and I see no hands going up. Last week, Nicola Sturgeon talked about a “dividing line”. Today’s performance shows that she clearly does not realise that the time for soundbite policies and retail politics is over. We need to reflect on the reality of our financial circumstances and to decide what is important now, not at some point in the distant future. In coming to a close, I will talk about social care. Local government is shouldering the burden. It has been passed 83 per cent of the Scottish Government’s budget cuts, yet those in local government are the very people whom we expect to deliver on the increasing demand for social care. For the first time, people are paying for essential services such as home helps, community alarms and aids and equipment for the disabled. Some costs have risen by 50 per cent in the past three years. There is a postcode lottery of care. We have different charges, different eligibility criteria and a system of rationing that sees 15-minute care visits as ticking the box. That is not social justice; that is the consequence of the choices that the SNP Government has made. We all say that we believe in social justice, but we need the courage to deliver it. In times of scarcity, it is essential to target our resources at people who face the biggest challenge. Presiding Officer, I will leave you with a quick quote.

The quote is: “The current and future challenges we face could, if not properly responded to, threaten the fabric of social cohesion in Scotland.” Those are the words of Campbell Christie.

The Government cares about division, derision and denial. That is its motto and the people of Scotland deserve better.

Will the member give way?

Normally, the choice is posited as Trident or schools and hospitals. Is it not the case that the SNP’s policy is that if Trident is cancelled, all the money goes into defence spending?

I congratulate Linda Fabiani on securing the debate. I note that she and I are both in purple today. We should have perhaps have co-ordinated and been in pink instead. I also congratulate the many organisations, volunteers and supporters who have attended the Parliament this week and last on the issue. We have been privileged to celebrate the work of Breakthrough Breast Cancer and Walk the Walk, which organises Edinburgh’s moonwalk, when pink bras invade the city. Linda Fabiani and perhaps even the minister and the cabinet secretary might want to join Sarah Boyack, Drew Smith and me, who went on this year’s moonwalk, on the walk next year.

Forgive me, I almost forgot Malcolm Chisholm. It would be a great signal for MSPs to walk the walk. Many of us, both male and female, have donned our pink feathered bras, hats and other more interesting items, some of which are, frankly, indescribable but all pink, in support of breast cancer awareness month. The stories that we heard were moving and dignified—from the initial shock of diagnosis, to the challenges of treatment and the positive stories of survival. We constantly need to remind ourselves of why this matters. Yes, Scotland’s cancer record is continuing to improve and the fact that the survival rates of many cancers are increasing is to be celebrated. However, we should attribute part of that success to the increase in early diagnosis, to health education programmes aimed at encouraging earlier presentation and referral and to the raised awareness that is due to initiatives such as breast cancer awareness month. We know that the earlier a cancer is recognised, the greater the chance of its being cured. That is why organisations such as Breakthrough Breast Cancer play such a key role. By sending out the simple message of TLC—touch, look and check—it is helping women themselves to identify problems earlier and ultimately helping to save lives across the country. Cancer, though, is still a major issue that affects many of us in Scotland and breast cancer is a particular problem. It is the most common cancer among Scottish women: nearly 4,500 women are diagnosed every year, and around 1,000 die annually from the disease. I hope that we can do even more to ensure that more survive in the future. It is vital that we make every effort to reduce that number, and early detection programmes are simply the best way to do that. Education is key. I found the statistics from Breakthrough Breast Cancer particularly appalling because they showed that only 3 per cent of women know that there are five or more different signs and symptoms of breast cancer. What is even more appalling is that 62 per cent of women do not check regularly, which is an easy thing to do. Scotland’s one-year survival rates are lower than those of other European countries, particularly Nordic countries. That is largely due to late presentation, because we do not check and we do not respond early enough. In my view, breast-screening programmes are essential. Linda Fabiani referred to the debate about overdiagnosis and overtreatment, but that debate should be set clearly in the context of the impressive number of women who are diagnosed and treated successfully. Breast-screening programmes need to stay. We had a debate earlier today, which was quite angry at points, about universal programmes versus targeting. However, we need to do both. We have a fine example of a universal screening programme, but we need to target disadvantaged areas more, because the risk of breast cancer is greater there. Women from deprived areas are less likely to be diagnosed early and have a lower survival rate than those in the most affluent areas. Therefore, we must do more to ensure that we reach those who live in disadvantaged communities. I commend the Scottish Government for its current advertising campaign, which I think is fantastic. There is controversy about showing breasts on television and, dare I say it, even in newspapers. However, as Audrey Birt of Breakthrough Breast Cancer has said, “Get over it.” If it helps to save lives, people should indeed get over it and support the campaign.

The action by the European Commission on minimum unit pricing and the challenge in the Court of Session notwithstanding, does the cabinet secretary recognise that there is much more that we can do to tackle alcohol abuse? On that basis, can I commend to him the member’s bill of my colleague, Richard Simpson, which contains a range of measures to tackle alcohol abuse, and ask him for an early meeting so that we can take that work forward together?

I welcome the progress on the four-hour waiting times targets in accident and emergency and join in congratulating the staff on their achievements. However, does the cabinet secretary share my concern that the number of patients waiting more than eight and more than 12 hours for admission and treatment has doubled? Will he advise members what he intends to do to address that?

I associate myself with Chic Brodie’s comments, which were absolutely valid. In 2011-12, the Scottish Government assumed a 5 per cent increase in the volume of prescriptions and allocated an additional £57 million to health boards for that purpose. What increase did the cabinet secretary allow for this year? Does he share my concern that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has identified a substantial overspend in its prescribing budget for this year? What will he do to ensure that that has no negative impact on patient care?

I congratulate Kevin Stewart on securing this debate and on shining a light on the practice of work capability assessments. He is absolutely right to say that they are having a deeply disturbing impact on people in our constituencies. I join him in thanking the organisations that have provided briefings for this debate. When discussing welfare reform, I always remember that David Cameron promised that the cuts would fall on those with the broadest shoulders, which I assumed would mean people such as his Cabinet of millionaires. However, the hardest hit are not those with the broadest shoulders; they are those who are among some of the most vulnerable people in our society. I recall that, when work capability assessments and employment and support allowance were first introduced, there was broad support for the principles underlying the policy. We would all agree that the principle of helping someone to secure employment is reasonable. I am in no doubt about the benefits of work for the individual, for families and for society, and therefore I believe that, if someone is able to work, we should help them to do so. However, those who genuinely cannot work should not have to endure a chaotic shambles of a system that denies them dignity and makes them out to be scroungers, because nothing could be further from the truth. However, on that issue, we have a battle of hearts and minds to win in Scotland. The system is so incompetent that, I understand, half of the decisions that are made are overturned on appeal. That alone tells me that the system is not fit for purpose. Like Kevin Stewart, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the Daily Record on its campaign to highlight the problems that have been experienced by people across the country such as Crawford Leask, Tom Meikle, Janice Mills and Margaret Monaghan, whose stories demonstrate the indignity of the process and the incompetence of Atos, which is charged with carrying out the assessments. That is campaigning journalism at its best. There are many people in my area who want to work, but they are not given the opportunity to do so or the support that they need in order to do so. I know of one young man with a learning disability whose dearest wish is to work but who is unlikely to be able to do so without a huge amount of support, given the nature of his condition. The work capability assessment would probably say that he is fit for work, because it is not very good at identifying those with disabilities that are not obvious. It focuses on physical disability and mobility but fails to recognise the real problems that are associated with things such as mental health, learning disabilities or autism. The systems are more about information technology than people. They do not recognise that someone who is disabled might have a progressive condition that means that they will have good days and bad days. All of that is putting a huge strain on the voluntary sector and the advice services in particular. We know that Citizens Advice Scotland has reported a huge increase in case load and that it is struggling to meet the demand. I ask the Scottish Government to ensure, if it is at all possible, that the formula consequentials that it has for this area are released to the voluntary sector as quickly as possible, because it is struggling to cope with the demand that is out there. A postcode lottery is emerging, poverty is leading to destitution, some people are giving up because they are depressed and others are contemplating suicide, which I find quite distressing. I know that the pilots that were run identified that there were problems and that a cross-party select committee highlighted those problems. Unfortunately, the coalition Government rolled out the contract in 2010 without taking on board those issues. It has also failed to apply financial penalties against Atos in 90 per cent of the cases in which it could have done so, for which it has been criticised by the National Audit Office. I understand what Kevin Stewart says, and I know that he is not a cheerleader for Atos, but there is a problem with the contract and with the methods that are used. The Scottish Government needs to review whether it is appropriate for it always to co-operate with Atos. I know that lots of disabled people were genuinely concerned when Nicola Sturgeon welcomed its sponsorship of the Commonwealth games, because they could not understand why she had done that. This issue is not about independence. People are suffering now and I think that it is incumbent on this Parliament to alleviate that suffering if we can.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

We are all aware that advice services are critical at times of substantial change. I know that the Government could provide budget consequentials to advice services. Could it do that quickly?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that in almost half of Scotland’s health boards, IVF waiting times are increasing. In NHS Fife, couples are waiting three years before treatment, which is the longest waiting period in the country. Although the cabinet secretary’s announcement of additional funding is, of course, welcome—if long overdue—will he confirm that that funding will tackle the postcode lottery in treatment cycles and the cut-off age for treatment, as well as reducing waiting times?

The Royal College of Nursing says that nursing levels are at their lowest point since 2005, with almost 2,500 nurses having been cut and patient care suffering. Today, the First Minister pledged his support for nurses. Will the cabinet secretary tell me how the real-terms reduction in the health budget that is set out in table 3.02 is consistent with the First Minister’s view? How many more nurses and other NHS staff will lose their jobs as a result?

There are undoubtedly real and pressing challenges in our national health service, which are starting to have a significant impact on patient care and patient safety. I make it clear at the outset that the work that our NHS staff do is exceptional. Whether they are doctors, nurses, our Scottish Ambulance Service staff, our technicians who work behind the scenes or our porters and cleaners, we are grateful to the entire NHS family. It is our responsibility to ensure that they are adequately resourced to do their job. We are joined in the public gallery by paramedics, by Ambulance Service staff and by Mick Conroy and Harry Donaldson from the GMB, all of whom I welcome. Last week, the Scottish National Party rearranged the deckchairs with its ministerial reshuffle, which moved the Deputy First Minister away from health at a time of crisis for the NHS. I say with all due respect to Alex Neil that she is probably the SNP’s most talented minister. Her move to run the referendum campaign shows the SNP Government’s real priorities. Separation is its first, last and only priority. The faces can be changed, but the feel and substance remain the same. The SNP is out of touch with people’s concerns and is putting the NHS in Scotland on pause as it obsesses about the constitution. What is required is not new faces but a new focus, new ideas and a new direction. However, I welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing’s announcement about the sick kids hospital in Edinburgh, although it is of course five years later than promised and it does nothing to tackle the £130 million repairs backlog or the £1 billion backlog across Scotland. The hospital estate is crumbling on the SNP’s watch. One thing is clear. The cabinet secretary needs to get a grip on his brief quickly, because while we are on pause, patient care continues to suffer, waiting times at accident and emergency departments continue to lengthen, nurses are losing their jobs and ambulance staff are expressing concern about patient safety. If I was to construct a charge list for Alex Neil to tackle, here is what it would say: the NHS has fewer staff than at any time since 2007; the SNP is presiding over cuts of more than 5,500 staff, almost 2,500 of whom are nurses and midwives; and nursing and midwifery numbers are at a seven-year low. We cannot strip so many people out of the NHS without there being an impact on patient care. Despite promises to protect the health budget, the SNP is cutting it by £319 million in real terms. That is a fact. Add to that the fact that inflation in the health service runs higher and the fact that prescribing budgets are already overspent at this point in the year, and it is clear that there is real downward pressure on the budget. Patients are going without basic provisions, such as blankets—shame on the SNP and the First Minister that it took two of my constituents coming to the Parliament for them to recognise the problem and take action. Hospital inspections have thrown up some examples recently. In one case, at Glasgow royal infirmary, there was only one working shower—with no shower curtain—shared between 15 patients; in another, an elderly man was found sitting naked on his bed, in his own urine and with no screens around him, during visiting hours. Where is the patient care and dignity in that, cabinet secretary? Patients themselves say that wards are understaffed and that patients are being moved around the hospital. Senior NHS managers—for goodness sake—have been fiddling the waiting list figures to meet targets, and as a consequence, patients have gone without the treatment that they needed and deserved. In the cabinet secretary’s own backyard, NHS Lanarkshire has experienced huge and substantial difficulty in recruiting junior doctors, which has created problems at Monklands hospital, at Wishaw general hospital, in neonatal care and in general medicine. The problem has led to delays in assessing patients and reduced outpatient activity and has affected cover for patients who were booked in for elective procedures. The cabinet secretary cannot tell me that there is no impact on patient safety and patient care. Local health services are increasingly under threat and closing, despite the SNP’s promises. The mental health ward at the Vale of Leven hospital has closed. The children’s ward at St John’s hospital shut for the summer. The maternity unit at Inverclyde royal hospital is threatened with closure. There are plans to close the children’s ward at the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley. The winds of change are coming. Health boards are having to reorganise services because they cannot run them on the current level of resources. Where in there is the concern for patient care? Complaints about NHS Scotland are at a record high, but what do we expect, when the SNP cuts staffing, cuts nurses and cuts support to our hospitals? We cannot keep expecting the NHS to do more and more on less and less.

I am afraid that that is nonsense. The Royal College of Nursing says that the number of nurses and midwives has reduced by 2,500. It is at a seven-year low. Is the member saying that the RCN is not telling the truth? I am shocked, frankly. Four years ago, Nicola Sturgeon promised that ambulances would be crewed by two staff, including a paramedic, in all but exceptional circumstances. However, single crewing is back, and in many cases it is almost routine. One paramedic told me that on Sunday and Monday mornings the relief shift is routinely single manned, because the staff who are coming off duty cannot safely go out again. That is not an isolated incident; there is evidence of single manning in Helensburgh, in Wick, in Dumfries, and in Glasgow—right across Scotland. Ambulance shifts are being dropped entirely in St Andrews, Kirkcaldy, Glasgow, Paisley, Greenock, the Vale of Leven—virtually every part of Scotland. So that there is no doubt about that and so that members can appreciate the scale of the problem, let me give the numbers for the Vale of Leven. In the space of roughly a month from June, 29 shifts were dropped, six of which were urgent tier shifts, and a further 22 shifts were dropped last month. A whole paramedic response unit has been dropped for this entire week. The patient care of my constituents is not the priority. On a number of occasions, there have been two vehicles instead of three on the night shift. In Kirkintilloch, there was only one ambulance on over an entire weekend in August to cover an enormous geographical area. In addition, the use of private ambulances seems to be on the increase under the SNP. The skills mix is being changed so that drivers—who do a valuable job—are replacing technicians. Drivers are even replacing paramedics in emergency vehicles. Patient care will suffer if skills are confused in that way. One paramedic said: “The management are playing Russian roulette with people’s lives. Over the past few months there have been numerous instances where ambulances have been single crewed. Core shifts have been dropped to save money.”

In a second. Another paramedic described being alone with a child with a head injury and being unable to transport him to hospital because they were waiting for a back-up vehicle. What about the additional staff that the Government promised? I understand that a number of people who failed their exams are out in ambulances in an attempt to teach them the necessary skills. There is nothing wrong with that, as people learn in real-life situations, but the Ambulance Service counting those unqualified staff in the numbers is wrong. In one case, a student who was not yet qualified was the only person manning the entire station at Girvan. There were no paramedics or technicians—there was not even a driver. It is clear that patient care in the Ambulance Service is being sacrificed on the altar of cost cutting. Margo MacDonald rose— I am terribly sorry, but I cannot give way to Margo MacDonald, as I have very little time. The picture is extremely worrying. The NHS is struggling—there is no doubt in my mind about that—and, despite the valiant efforts of dedicated staff, that is having a negative impact on patient care. The SNP simply pretends that that is not happening, and that is not good enough Tomorrow, when the budget for the coming year is revealed, the cabinet secretary will have an opportunity to put his money where his mouth is. Concern for patient care and safety must be at the top of the agenda, or the people of Scotland will judge him and the SNP and find them to be wanting. I move, That the Parliament believes that the Scottish Government’s budget decisions are impacting negatively on patient care; notes with concern that the number of nurses and midwives is at its lowest since 2005, an assessment that is shared by the Royal College of Nursing; further notes with concern warnings from unions that cutbacks in the Scottish Ambulance Service are leading to ambulance staff attending emergency calls on their own and shifts not being covered; notes reports of patients going without basic provisions, such as blankets, and inspections that reveal significant failures in patient care; praises the hard work of NHS staff across Scotland, and calls on the newly-appointed Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to support the efforts of NHS staff by making a clear commitment to prioritise patient care ahead of the campaign to separate Scotland from the rest of the UK.

I have made clear on a number of occasions our absolute view that the NHS budget should be protected. I am disappointed that the minister still fails to understand that. I find it incredibly hypocritical that a Government that is stripping 2,500 nurses and midwives from the NHS says that we are crying crocodile tears. It is dissembling.

Will the member take an intervention?

I have been in the chamber time after time when the SNP has essentially hidden behind the NHS staff. It is NHS staff who are coming to me with stories about the NHS fraying at the edges because the Government is cutting their numbers. We all support NHS staff. There are ambulance staff in the gallery and I invite the member to meet them afterwards and hear the real stories rather than the spin.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this stage 1 debate on the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill and I associate myself with the minister’s thanks to all those who were involved in shaping and scrutinising the bill. I am sure that the minster will forgive me for saying that the bill has been a long time coming. It was promised for the previous parliamentary session, but I understand that it was sacrificed in negotiations with COSLA just before the 2011 election because there were legitimate concerns about funding. As Duncan McNeil explained, there remain legitimate concerns about funding. The bill has returned and some would say that it is a pale imitation of its previous incarnation, but perhaps it is a more practical set of measures and therefore a greater opportunity to create some change at a local level. On the basis that the bill will extend choice and control for people who receive social care, Labour members will be pleased to support the bill’s general principles this evening. Before I consider specific areas of the bill, I want to look at the policy context for self-directed support and, in its widest form, personalisation, which was first advanced by the previous United Kingdom Labour Government, working alongside disabled people. Personalisation is of course much wider than social care, given that it is about all the different things that contribute to the way we live our lives: our education, housing, employment, health, transport and so on. It is not intended to be a narrow focus on social care alone. It is about empowering those with additional needs to shape their lives in a way that suits them. I hope that the Scottish Government will in due course consider the wider possibilities of personalisation. Let me look to social care for an illustration. Many of us have constituents, many of them older people, who benefit from a tuck-in service that helps them to get ready for bed every night. Nine times out of 10 that tuck-in service is delivered between 7pm and 8pm. I do not know about members, but I do not know anybody who goes to bed that early in the evening. [Interruption.] Jackson Carlaw has put up his hand to say that he does—old age is clearly advancing. Visits at such times are perhaps more about the interests of the service and lack the flexibility to respond to individuals’ needs. Self-directed support is about exercising a degree of choice and control that makes life better. Let me outline some specific concerns that have been raised. First, the independent living movement is clear that the bill should be viewed as a mechanism to support disabled people and those who live with long-term conditions to realise independent living. In his evidence to the committee, the minister agreed with that and I was pleased to hear today that he will give further consideration to strengthening the bill with perhaps a clear statement of intent about independent living. That statement should recognise that disabled people have a right to independent living and state that the bill will empower those who use self-directed support to have the same freedom, choice, dignity, and control as other citizens at home, at work and in the community so that they may participate in society and live an ordinary life. That approach is supported by a powerful range of organisations, including Inclusion Scotland, the Health and Social Care Alliance, Self Directed Support Scotland and the independent living in Scotland project. Secondly, there is the question of advocacy. There is no doubt that, while the bill seeks to extend choice and control so that there is greater direction over how support is provided, there remains a need for independent advocacy. We know from experience that it can be difficult for some people to negotiate through choices that are often different and complex and that they require assistance and guidance in doing so. Including in the bill a right to advocacy will ensure that the bill’s provisions, which we all support, will become a reality for all. Thirdly, there is the question of an appeals mechanism. As the bill is written, it seems to me that the local authority will determine need and provide what it believes are appropriate services to meet those needs but that there will be only an internal complaints procedure if things go wrong. There may be access to the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman, but it looks only at the process by which a decision was made rather than at the substance. My experience tells me that people generally need money to access a judicial review. The provision in the bill is not as comprehensive as having an independent and impartial tribunal to ensure that appeals are robust. Indeed, I understand from Capability Scotland that the Scottish committee of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council—never heard of it before—recommended this month “the establishment of a new tribunal jurisdiction to deal with appeals against community care decisions”. The absence of an appeals procedure ultimately has the effect of weakening rights, and I hope that the minister will take time to reflect further on that. Fourthly, there is a concern about the postcode lottery of care and, in particular, care charging. That is not a new issue in the Parliament, as I have been raising it consistently for three, if not four, years. I am genuinely disappointed that the Government and COSLA have taken so long to resolve the issue. There is a working group but, as I have said before, if that group was on performance-related pay, it would not be earning very much. Apparently, the issue is just too difficult. Frankly, in a country of this size, it is not acceptable for a service to have wild variations in charging such as those in my area, where the charge is £30 per week for a service in West Dunbartonshire, but £300 per week for the same service in neighbouring Argyll and Bute. There are different charges and criteria, and a lack of transparency and fairness. Wherever someone lives Scotland, they should pay broadly the same and the criteria for charging should be the same.

No—not on this point. The postcode lottery in charging could have a negative impact on disabled people’s ability to direct their support in a meaningful way. Will the minister ensure that rapid progress is made in developing a national framework for the provision of and charging for care? We need fairness and transparency on the issue once and for all. Fifthly, there is the matter of balance between individual and collective services. For example, day care centres are much valued by their users as a means of providing social interaction, yet their very existence could be threatened because of the withdrawal of funding. Although I absolutely acknowledge that self-directed support would not prevent an individual from continuing to use a day care centre if they chose to do so, that is not the practical experience on the ground. Therefore, more thought perhaps needs to be given to the transition for collective services. Sufficient financial support is needed to underpin the changes so that we do not have the perverse consequence of losing valuable services. I turn briefly to carers. There is a call from carers organisations and carers that the bill should establish a duty to support unpaid carers so that they can receive direct payments in their own right following an assessment. I sympathise with the carers’ view, and with the minister’s approach, not least because the contribution that carers make is invaluable and because, by supporting carers, we spend to save. I suspect that such a duty will require additional funding and some thought. I am interested to hear whether the minister has made an assessment of that, never mind ensuring that carers have their needs assessed in the first place. Carers already have the right to an assessment, but it is difficult for them to access that. Their view is that a discretionary power is perhaps not enough. I would welcome it if the minister considered that issue. Finally, I turn to the integration of health and social care. That developing policy, rather than an obsession with separation, should be dominating the Parliament’s discourse. We need nothing short of a transformation of people’s experiences of health and social care so that no one falls through the gaps. We might disagree about the means, but we do not disagree about the need for integration. The challenging demographics alone underline the need to act and to do so decisively. Labour believes in the creation of a national care service, which would be as radical as the creation of the national health service more than 60 years ago, with local delivery and local accountability. It would be a seamless service that joined up health and social care, with a framework of minimum standards and an end to the postcode lottery. Self-directed support is an important step in that journey, although it is disappointing that it is focused only on social care. The Scottish Government had a pilot on self-directed support in health. I would want to explore the opportunity of taking that further in a limited number of cases in which people’s health needs overlap their social care needs. The bill is an opportunity not to be missed, but it needs further improvement. We will work with the Government to ensure that the bill truly supports choice, control and independent living.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister remind members that the working group was set up by COSLA at the behest of the Scottish Government and that the Scottish Government is represented on it? Three years later, there is still no progress on ensuring that care charging is consistent across Scotland, which is surely an ambition that we share.

You are on it.

I was going to welcome the cabinet secretary to his post, but I have thought better of it in the light of his comments. Does he agree that it is unacceptable for the number of people who are waiting in A and E units for more than eight hours and more than 12 hours to double? I have heard what he is going to do about that, but I would be interested in knowing the reasons for the doubling in the number of people who wait for that length of time. Does he not agree that, as NHS staff are increasingly finding, it is the SNP cuts to both staffing numbers and the overall NHS budget that are causing those long waits?

Not enough.

Given that the presumption to which the minister referred is in practical terms considered a requirement, what more will he do to ensure that the process provides some flexibility where there is a demonstrable clinical and patient benefit in that regard? Further, does he agree that single rooms require more nurses?

I am delighted to contribute to this debate on the 10th anniversary of “River City”, which is filmed at the BBC’s studios in Dumbarton. I congratulate Annabel Goldie on lodging her motion for a members’ business debate and on changing her mind about the value of “River City”. I offer apologies from my leader Johann Lamont—she tells me that she is a great fan, but had to leave to attend to other business. I have discovered that my connection with “River City” extends beyond the fact that filming takes place in my constituency. Those who are regular viewers will know that the current storyline centres on Big Bob having a heart attack. Big Bob is played by Tom Urie, who is the brother of local Hermitage academy headteacher Geoff Urie, although I am not sure that Geoff will appreciate me outing him in that way. There is Liz, played by Eileen McCallum, who is known to many members not simply for her considerable acting ability, but for her passionate support for the campaign to improve services for and treatment of muscular dystrophy. Then, of course, there is my very own Gina, who is played by none other than Libby McArthur, whom I once employed many moons ago to provide drama classes for local communities. She was a punk rocker then, and looks very different now. Apparently, some 500,000 of us, including Annabel Goldie, tune in to follow the life and times of the people of Shieldinch as they grace our screens each week on a Tuesday evening on BBC Scotland, with, as we have heard, a repeat on a Sunday afternoon. However, Annabel did not tell us that the programme is also screened in Australia. It is also available on the BBC iPlayer, where it is watched by people from across the United Kingdom who look forward to a taste of home. It is an award-winning programme. It was nominated for best drama programme at the British Academy of Film and Television Arts awards in 2006 and for the audience award for most popular television programme. That is not bad going at all. My constituents have loved it, because a truly phenomenal number of them have appeared as extras and have earned Equity cards on the back of that. There is a value well beyond entertainment, important though that is, which is the considerable economic value that the programme has brought to my community, which Annabel Goldie touched on. The studios are in a set of former warehouses that were owned by Diageo, which used to employ hundreds of people to bottle J&amp;B whisky before the company closed down and left the area. At the time, the community was devastated. Local politicians, business leaders and the public sector came together to attempt to regenerate the area and formed Strathleven Regeneration CIC, of which I am a director. I am glad that the company supplied Annabel Goldie with a draft copy of its report on the investment that has been made, because the company commissioned the report knowing that the debate was coming up, and we felt that it was important to mark the anniversary—not just in the chamber, but in my local community. During the building phase, £5 million was spent and 41 construction jobs were created. Since 2002, £84 million has been invested and there is an annual programming budget of £8.5 million. There are 221 net additional full-time jobs in the west of Scotland regional economy. Overall—I refer to the figure that Annabel Goldie quoted—the cumulative effect of “River City” and the other productions at BBC Scotland’s Dumbarton studios over the past 10 years is £135 million gross value added to our regional economy. It is a considerable success in economic terms, and I invite the minister to look at how we can build on that, not just on my side of the water, but on Duncan McNeil’s. I am disturbed by the First Minister’s recent suggestion that we should break up the BBC if Scotland votes for independence. What will that mean for programmes such as “River City”? We know that it will mean a massive reduction in the programming budget across BBC Scotland. Potentially, licence fees will go up—we know that, too. The First Minister suggests that perhaps he would accept a model similar to the RTE model, with commercials being part of any future BBC Scotland. That is not the future that I want for “River City”. I join Annabel Goldie in congratulating the BBC and “River City” on the programme’s 10th anniversary, and I look forward to at least another 10 very positive years in Shieldinch, despite all the fuss about referendums.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what funding it has allocated to West Dunbartonshire Council from its youth unemployment fund. (S4O-01230)

I am sure that the minister recognises the scale of the challenge that faces West Dunbartonshire, and I am disappointed to note that nothing was allocated to the local authority from the youth unemployment fund. She knows my view that had funding been based on the percentage of the population that was unemployed, the council would have received support, because of its huge and increased unemployment levels. When she meets the council in the near future, will she consider further what assistance her Government can give to get young unemployed people in West Dunbartonshire into work?

No, you do not.

Let me leave the member in no doubt that I do indeed welcome them, because where Labour follows—[Laughter.] I know, I know. As the member knows, where Labour leads, the SNP will follow.

The programme for Government has always marked the start of a new parliamentary year. At its most basic, it forms the work programme for the Parliament over the coming year. At its best, it represents our ambition and aspiration for our people and for Scotland. I genuinely think that people will, in the challenging year that is to come, reflect that this programme has been a wasted opportunity. The SNP has a parliamentary majority. It can be radical and ambitious, and this was the moment to show Scotland what it could do. Instead, we have timidity and an astonishing paucity of ambition, albeit with one or two notable exceptions. I thank Jamie Hepburn for illustrating so well that Labour has led the debate on issues such as integration of health and social care, and welfare reform, and that the SNP has followed. Yesterday and today, we have heard much assertion in place of fact: talk instead of action and shouting by SNP back benchers and, of course, by Alex Neil, to cover up the lack of intellectual rigour in the SNP’s proposals. As the First Minister said—on this point, even I agree with him—he does not have a monopoly on wisdom, so perhaps it is worth listening to the other voices in the chamber, rather than simply trying to drown them out by shouting. I will highlight a couple of areas in the legislative programme, but first I commend the Government and Nicola Sturgeon on bringing forward proposed legislation on equal marriage. I welcome the intention to ensure that that legislation is accompanied by protection of freedom of speech and religion. To that end, the SNP Government has made clear that it wishes amendments to be made to the Equality Act 2010 and that it will work with the UK Government to do so. I ask, therefore, what progress has been made in the dialogue with the UK Government. I wonder whether Alex Neil—who, disappointingly, is not here—will use the opportunity soon to confirm his support for the legislation, because he has not so far done so. Secondly, on the proposed integration of adult health and social care bill, Labour supports the integration of health and social care. However, my view is that the bill will not go far enough, given the scale of the demographic challenges that we face. Instead of the radical approach, which I had hoped to see, to ending the postcode lottery of care, to ending delayed discharge and to ensuring that older people do not fall through the net, we have a set of proposals that are, on the one hand, prescriptive and, on the other, are so vague that it is clear that the author has little idea of what the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy wants. The bill should specify national standards of care as well as outcomes, so that whether a person lives in Dumbarton or Dunbar, Dingwall or Dumfries, a consistent approach can be expected. We would have introduced a bill without a set of confused governance arrangements—reporting to the cabinet secretary, the council leader and the health board chair—and which would have put local councillors in charge. That would bring democratic accountability to parts of the NHS. Surely the SNP would welcome that.

That is not at all the case. We have been consistent and clear in our plans. My shame is that the SNP has failed to copy the plans adequately or been radical enough in pursuing them. We would also have introduced a single budget, merging social work and health budgets for older people, rather than there being a confused and convoluted set of negotiations between a number of different partners. Our approach is to focus on the needs of older people. My regret is that the Government’s bill is likely to be too timid to produce the cultural change that we need for our older people now. I am happy to work with the Government to get that right. I am sure that Bob Doris will share my disappointment that the approach of SNP councillors in Glasgow was to reject key proposals in the Government’s consultation. On the proposed children and young people bill, although I welcome the increase in nursery hours, I am genuinely disappointed that it has been so long in coming. The SNP promised exactly that in its manifesto way back in 2007. The proposal was then, as it is now, to entitle three and four-year-olds to a minimum of 600 nursery hours each year. It could well be 2014 before that is delivered—seven long years after the SNP first promised it. Families are crying out for help now. They need more than part-time places. Families need access to affordable wraparound care—access to childminders, and to before-school and after-school care. Why is childcare more expensive in Scotland than it is in England? We know that improving access to affordable quality childcare is good for families, but it is also good for the economy. Is it not astonishing that a Scottish Government that spends much of its time telling us how progressive it is, is to be trumped by the Tories on provision for two-year-olds? Only 1 per cent of two-year-olds will get a nursery place with an SNP Government, but in England—under the Tories and Lib Dems—37 per cent of two-year-olds will get a nursery place. Where is the SNP’s vision and where is its ambition for two-year-olds? We do not often hear MSPs talk about secondary legislation and it never merits a mention in the programme for Government. However, this year there will be a swathe of secondary legislation on welfare reform. Members will not be able properly to scrutinise the regulations, which will cover council tax benefit and a range of passported benefits, because the SNP does not favour transparency. Will the regulations be any different from those that will be proposed at Westminster? The SNP is very fond of telling us that things would be so much better if only it had the powers, and that everything is the fault of those terrible people at Westminster. I must confess that when I look at Cameron’s Cabinet of right-wing millionaires—which is increasingly male, pale and stale, and three quarters of its members went to Oxbridge—I concede that the SNP may have a point. However, it is not good enough to blame someone else. The SNP Government has the power to do things differently. Some of the benefits are now devolved, but instead of protecting the interests of the people of Scotland, the SNP Government simply shrugs its shoulders and passes on the Tory cuts. Where is the ambition? Let me remind members of Strathclyde Region, which was a model in terms of its protection of its people from Tory cuts, in that it had the vision to have a social justice strategy. It is a shame that the SNP Government does not have the same level of ambition. At a time when the number of people who are receiving food parcels in Glasgow has doubled, it is shameful that the Government’s legislative programme is largely technical. When every family in Scotland is £1,200 a year worse off under the SNP, the legislative programme does not do anything for jobs or for growth. That, too, is shameful. Johann Lamont was right yesterday, when she said that this is “a country ... on pause”. Forget the real-life problems that people face—unemployment, fuel poverty and child poverty—and let us just talk endlessly about a referendum. This is where I differ from the SNP: the thing that gets me up in the morning is not an obsession with the constitution, but an ambition to tackle poverty, to improve the life chances of our people and to build a strong economy. As someone who is half Portuguese, half Scottish, and was born in Hong Kong, the politics of identity that are espoused by the SNP leave me cold, because I believe in powers for a purpose—not in some half-articulated vague promise of jam tomorrow if people vote for independence, when the SNP Government does not even use the powers that it has now. The First Minister is very fond of telling us that decisions about Scotland are best made by those who live and work in Scotland. Can someone please explain to me why, if that is the case, the SNP is ceding monetary control to the Bank of England, ceding control of financial regulation to the London-based Financial Services Authority and is about to cede control over much of defence policy to NATO? That hardly represents decisions being made in Scotland. I welcome the referendum bill. We need clarity about the question and the franchise, but we need to look beyond that to engage in a debate about the best future for Scotland. Let me touch on John Swinney’s evasive performance on “Newsnight Scotland” last night. On the basis of John Swinney’s discomfort, I am beginning to wonder whether the First Minister has already conceded the second question. We all know that the First Minister wants two questions because he will not get the right answer to the first one, but what John Swinney’s performance tells me is that the First Minister has singularly failed to take his back benchers and his party with him. This is the SNP’s golden moment. This is the SNP’s once-in-a-lifetime chance to tear Scotland out of the United Kingdom, but no amount of calculation or guile from the First Minister—he is capable of much of both—will stand in the way of its ambition. I understand that Nicola Sturgeon believes that there should be only one question, too. Although I will say more about Nicola shortly, I cannot help but think that we are seeing succession planning before our very eyes. I wish her well. The independence debate may, to all intents and purposes, be fascinating to us in Parliament, but the real challenges are being faced in our communities, outside Parliament’s doors. They are the challenges of putting food on the table, of clothing children, of heating a home and of getting a job. None of those will be helped by the SNP’s referendum. In fact, none will really be helped by the legislative programme or by the reshuffle. It is interesting that the Tories reshuffled their Cabinet yesterday and Alex Salmond has done his today. It is clear that the umbilical cord stretches to Bute house; I wonder whether they are “better together”. Regardless of that and of the differences that I have had with the Deputy First Minister, I have always respected her talent and energy and I have always enjoyed working with her. I am not quite sure whether she would say the same of me, but we are missing you already, Nicola. It is a shame that her talent and energy are being diverted. The fact that she has been moved to run the referendum campaign shows the SNP Government’s priorities: separation is the first priority, the last priority and the only priority of the SNP. Nicola Sturgeon’s replacement is none other than the Parliament’s own pantomime dame. He is a master of diversion if the facts do not suit him, but that will not work with the NHS. I hope that he gets to grips with the job quickly. Yesterday, the SNP said that reshuffles without changing economic policy are meaningless. Yesterday, the SNP launched a legislative agenda that fails to address the pressing economic issues. It has nothing to say to the many thousands of Scots who are worried about making ends meet, about their jobs and about their children getting jobs in the future. The obsession with separation has been shown yesterday and today and is evident from the Deputy First Minister’s having been put in charge of the referendum when problems are emerging in the NHS. Alex Neil faces a challenging agenda. He faces the fact that the NHS has fewer staff than it has had at any point in the past seven years and the fact that the SNP has cut the NHS budget by £319 million. Accident and emergency waits are increasing, cancer-treatment waiting time targets are not being met and basic issues of dignity are not being addressed.

I thank Annabelle Ewing for allowing me to intervene. Would she care to confirm to the chamber that all that she is doing in the Welfare Reform Committee is passing on those Tory cuts to the people of Scotland?

I welcome the opportunity to debate the PIP breast implant scandal. I welcome some of the women who have been caught up in the scandal, who are here today campaigning for a public inquiry. The reason for a public inquiry is to ensure that something like this can never happen again. In the words of Trisha Devine, one of the leaders of the campaign: “We’ve taken the battle to the floor of the Parliament and we look forward to giving our MSPs as much information and support as possible so we can make some real political progress in our quest for answers. Our main goal is to ensure this awful situation can never happen again, and today’s public discussion gets the ball rolling. We’ll build on this momentum and won’t stop until we have justice and a healthcare system we can trust in.” Today’s debate in Parliament is the culmination of a tremendous effort on the campaigners’ part to have their voices heard by Parliament and Government. The debate is not about the rights or wrongs of plastic surgery. It is about how we act to improve care and support for patients, particularly when things go so spectacularly wrong. These women have had their lives turned upside down by the scandal, but have rallied together to articulate a convincing case for a public inquiry to take place in Scotland. This is a serious public health issue, and the PIP implant victims deserve answers. Today, Scottish Labour has published a seven-point action plan, which I hope that the Scottish Government will embrace. Covering everything from the need for a Scottish register of implants to the scope for a public inquiry, it forms the basis of ensuring that we avoid a scandal of this nature happening again. Let me deal first with the need for a public inquiry. As the Scottish Government’s amendment suggests, a number of reviews are under way. All of them are internal reviews, conducted by the United Kingdom Government, and none of them is independent. One of those reviews, conducted by Earl Howe into the actions of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, has now reported. There is a strong view from the campaigners that that fails to address some of their fundamental questions and concerns. Although the report concludes that the MHRA acted appropriately, it notes that it was trying to reach evidence-based conclusions without the necessary data to do so. It is the case that, for some years before their use was curtailed, a number of clinicians complained in the strongest possible terms to the MHRA about the efficacy of the implants, and that includes Scottish clinicians. I do not believe, therefore, that the Howe report can serve as a substitute for a full public inquiry; I think that it will helpfully inform any public inquiry that might be taken forward. I look forward to the review that is being undertaken by Sir Bruce Keogh about the need for an implant register and whether better regulation of the cosmetic industry is required. However, given the scope of his review, there will still be questions to be answered at the conclusion of the process. It is undoubtedly the case that the regulation of medical products is reserved to the UK Parliament, and I hope that it will consider much more robust action so that we can have better confidence in the efficacy of medical products and the means by which they are regulated and tested. Like most members, I am conscious that we have stringent levels of testing for drugs—it is right that we do—but the standard of testing for medical products appears to be substantially lower. That has to change. However, in itself, that is not the whole story. There are questions that fall to the Scottish Parliament. I have always believed that the Scottish Government has an overarching responsibility for the nation’s health. The Scottish Government should instruct a public inquiry because we could include consideration of issues such as the extent of the use of PIP implants in Scotland and the rupture rate, because we are not clear that Sir Bruce Keogh’s review will deliver that information in a Scottish context. The inquiry could also consider establishing minimum standards for private clinics that operate in Scotland, which would include issues such as insurance coverage, disclosure to patients of the risks and safety of procedures, regulation of third-party providers—those companies that use hospitals and clinics in Scotland—and regulation of providers that consult in Scotland but perform the surgery elsewhere, usually in England. Early notification is an issue. The issue was first highlighted as a problem by the MHRA in March 2010. However, I was surprised to see that it took until December 2011 before some women became aware of the problem through press reports. That is a 21-month difference. I know that Health Facilities Scotland, an agency of the Scottish Government, should have been told in March 2010. I am not sure whether it was told or, if it was, what action was taken by it or by the Scottish Government to ensure that people knew about the issue. It would be useful for a public inquiry to reflect on communication as one strand of critical work. We could also use NHS National Procurement, which is a very efficient organisation that I had the privilege of visiting just a few weeks ago. It already purchases medical equipment and devices for the NHS, and uses clinicians as part of the team to inform that purchasing. Building on the expertise of an existing organisation would have provided quite an effective safety net. I have suggested that approach to the cabinet secretary, during a meeting with the campaigners. I hope that she will respond positively to the suggestion, as that is something that we can do now. Of the 4,000 women who are thought to have received implants, the cabinet secretary told us that there was only one case of the NHS in Scotland using a PIP breast implant. That is great. For some reason, the NHS in Scotland used other products. Whatever the reason, the cabinet secretary was of the clear view that that was more a matter of chance than anything else. We really should not be leaving that to chance in the future. Our action plan explores a range of other issues and I commend it to the chamber. Immediate issues can be tackled. For example, many victims told us about a postcode lottery of care when they approached the national health service. Some doctors turned women away and other women were not referred on to consultants. I want the Government to ensure that there is a consistent response. Let me tell members about Emma, who lives in Scotland. Her implants were inserted in Birmingham by the Hospital Group. She went to Monklands hospital breast clinic in Lanarkshire and said that she had a problem on 21 September 2011. She was refused a scan. Her general practitioner sent an emergency referral letter on 19 January 2012, but it took until 16 April 2012 for that emergency letter to be acknowledged and for her to receive an appointment. The consultant whom Emma saw relied on incorrect information. He refused to offer a scan and refused to perform an extraction of the implant. Despite the Government’s best efforts, that is the kind of experience that women in Scotland are having. We want a consistent response to happen quickly. Another initiative would be to call a summit of the private providers to ensure that they adopt a consistent approach to the aftercare of the women affected. Some providers have been very good, but others have been awful. Some providers asked women to pay £2,500 to have the implant removed and replaced, some initially charged for scans and the Hospital Group asked women to sign away their legal rights in return for treatment. That must stop and the Government must bring pressure to bear. We need to regulate private healthcare better. Healthcare Improvement Scotland’s remit includes the regulation of private hospitals, private psychiatric hospitals, private clinics, private medical agencies and private ambulance services, but its regulations cover only private hospitals, psychiatric facilities and voluntary hospitals. The rest are not covered. We must close that loophole urgently and regulate private healthcare clinics and third-party providers in Scotland. In fairness to the Government, it has been consulting on the matter since July 2010, but I say to the minister, as gently as I can, that we cannot afford to wait much longer. In the spirit of consensus, let me offer to work with the minister to introduce regulations much more urgently. The current regulatory regime does not include a minimum standard for what patients can expect if things go wrong. I urge the Government to consider setting out some of those standards in the national care standards. Our action plan calls on the Government to develop a better framework relationship with the MHRA to ensure that there is, on the one hand, proper retention and testing of implants and, on the other hand, a formal structure of regular communication. If such arrangements had been in place, the numerous and substantive concerns that clinicians expressed might have been picked up sooner and acted on more quickly. I have two final points. Let us re-establish a Scottish implant register. I know that there were problems with the last one, but it is not beyond us to sort those out. On a practical level, let us allow the NHS to carry out both removal and replacement of PIP implants in the same operation, as it is safer for the women to go through one procedure rather than two. That should be done on the basis that the woman assigns her right to recovery of the cost to the NHS. In other words, the NHS reclaims the money from the private provider. That would be cost neutral to the NHS and clinically better for the women concerned. What happened is a scandal. We must do our utmost to ensure that no one is placed in this position again. There needs to be confidence in the system of testing medical devices and implants. We need improved regulation, we need to improve care and support for patients when things go wrong and we need a public inquiry, which will help us to understand how we can prevent such a situation from happening again. I commend to the chamber Labour’s action plan and my motion. I move, That the Parliament notes that an estimated 4,000 women in Scotland are believed to have received breast implants manufactured by Poly Implant Prothèse (PiP); supports the ongoing criminal investigation in France into the former owner of PiP, Jean Claude Mas, for his role in the manufacture and distribution of the substandard implants containing industrial grade silicone; further notes with concern that PiP’s activities remained undetected by regulators for a considerable period of time and the lack of information provided to the victims of the scandal, a number of whom only became aware of the potential dangers through news reports in December 2011, over a year after the medical device alert was issued by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency in March 2010; regrets the lottery of aftercare offered by the private clinics that carried out breast augmentation operations with PiP implants for women in Scotland, particularly the charging for replacement operations and attaching conditions to treatment such as the waiving of legal rights; further notes the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy’s assertion that it is only by chance that the NHS in Scotland did not use the potentially dangerous implants and that the true scale of the scandal in Scotland may never be known, and calls on the Scottish Government to do everything possible to address the suffering of the Scottish victims of the PiP implants scandal and ensure that lessons are learned for the future, including holding a public inquiry under the Inquiries Act 2005.

In recognising the scale of the problem, does the member support a public inquiry being held at UK level?

I was quoting the cabinet secretary, who has consistently said that we would perhaps be safer using the upper limit, which is 4,000 women.

I did not invent the 4,000 figure; it actually came from the member’s own Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy. Nevertheless, the point is that we do not know the exact figure, and a Scottish public inquiry would help us to address that lack of knowledge.

This is not about apportioning blame, but about learning lessons of responsibility for the after-care of the women so that the same mistakes do not happen in the future.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of her statement. I very much welcome what she has said to us. I, too, offer my condolences to the family of Mr Air, who died as a result of contracting legionnaire’s disease. I also offer our gratitude to the many staff of NHS Lothian who are involved in caring for the people who have been admitted to hospital and seeking to identify and treat the source of the problem. With more than 50 cases of legionnaire’s disease reported so far, this is the biggest outbreak in a generation and, unfortunately, there is the prospect of more to come before the outbreak peaks. It represents a serious threat to public health, which in the words of Professor Hugh Pennington, “shouldn’t be happening, it is preventable.” The three questions on everybody’s minds are how the outbreak happened, what our response was and what lessons we can learn for the future. The immediate priority, of course, is to focus on how we respond. Other questions will, no doubt, exercise us in the future. The NHS Lothian website identifies the first case of legionnaire’s disease as being on Thursday 28 May, not on 31 May as the cabinet secretary suggested. I therefore ask her how many people were suspected of having legionnaire’s disease on 28 May, and how many people were suspected of having it on 31 May. Given that having more than one case is sufficient to trigger the incident management team, why was it not set up until Sunday 3 June? Why was it a full nine days later before the Scottish Government resilience committee met? I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that anything that shortens the time before our response is to be welcomed, and I wonder whether she will reflect on whether the response could have been swifter. Finally, there is real concern in the local community about the lack of information. I welcome the helpline and the leaflet drop in the area, but again, that was a full nine days after the first case of legionnaire’s disease was identified by NHS Lothian. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it would have been much better to provide public information earlier?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I thank the cabinet secretary for her generosity. First it was the First Minister, and now the Deputy First Minister is following Diane Abbott. I am delighted that they have the time to follow Labour MPs on Twitter. Yvette Cooper, the shadow Home Secretary, who speaks for Labour on the issue, said that “the Government needs to make sure it does not just create a cash windfall for the supermarkets” and that it supports “better prevention and treatment of alcohol abuse”. Surely we can come together at 5 o’clock to agree with that.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to participate in the stage 3 debate on minimum pricing, and I too record my thanks to all involved. Throughout the passage of the bill, Labour has been clear that there is much on which we can agree. We agree on the scale of the problem and the need for cultural and generational change. We agree that a range of measures is required to tackle a complex and multifaceted problem. We agree that there is a relationship between price and consumption. However, we disagree on the best mechanism for achieving our aims. In essence, we do not think that minimum unit pricing is the answer. However, I acknowledge the parliamentary arithmetic, so it is important that we seek to mitigate the unintended consequences of the bill. There is no doubting the scale of the problem of alcohol abuse, which happens across the board and is not defined by age, gender or income. The cost to our public services is significant, as is the cost to people’s lives. We should focus on reducing the volume of drinking, but we need to consider how people drink. There is a particular problem with binge drinking in Scotland, which simply is not addressed by price and has not been modelled by the University of Sheffield—I hope that the cabinet secretary will consider the need for such work in future. North and south of the border, the price is the same, yet we drink 25 per cent more than people in England, so there is clearly an underlying problem, which is currently unaffected by price and is perhaps more to do with culture.

I think that the figure varies by income, which I think is the point that the member is making. I am sure that people will look forward to drinking more with Margo MacDonald in future. Drinking is not just a problem of the poor. I heard a telling comment from an Edinburgh wine merchant who told a middle-class audience that they should all support minimum unit pricing because it would not affect them—“We drink wine, not cider,” he said. However, the greatest growth in the number of people abusing alcohol involves middle-aged, middle-income women. Indeed, the rise in consumption in Scotland since 1994 is wholly explained by wine, while the consumption of beer and spirits has declined in that period. We have concerns about three main areas: the legality of the measure; its efficacy; and, related to that, the windfall of £125 million, which will go, in the main, to supermarkets. On the issue of legality, I note that the cabinet secretary is offering to notify the price-setting order to the EU, and that is welcome. However, the bill itself should be notified, and not simply as an accompanying document. The cabinet secretary knows that there is a difference. The bill forms an important context. It describes how minimum pricing will be applied and it contains the mechanism for calculating the price of products on the market. I believe that the Tories thought that the cabinet secretary had promised them that she would notify the whole bill, but she is not delivering that in full. On the issue of efficacy, there is little impact on young people or on binge drinking and there is no impact on caffeinated alcohol products such as Buckfast, which we know causes wired, wide-awake drunks who engage in a disproportionate level of violence on our streets. As I said, of all alcoholic drinks, the consumption of wine is increasing at a considerable pace, yet the minimum unit price will have only a marginal impact. I acknowledge that, for some people, the minimum unit price will have an impact. Further, at least people are talking about the issue and awareness has been raised in a way that it has not been before. Indeed, the level of consumption has helpfully, although slowly, been on a steady decline since the passing of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, under the previous Administration. The purpose of our reasoned amendment is to recoup the windfall of £125 million. The University of Sheffield model predicts that a minimum unit price of 50p will generate approximately £125 million each year as revenue for alcohol retailers. We know that supermarkets would be the biggest beneficiaries of that. The Confederation of British Industry believes that the figure will be in excess of £150 million. However, whatever the figure is, at a time when money is tight and the Scottish National Party is cutting the alcohol treatment budget by 7 per cent—more than £3 million—handing that money to supermarkets is, frankly, astonishing. I am disappointed that the cabinet secretary has set her face against using—at least for the foreseeable future—the social responsibility levy, a measure that we supported. She could, of course, use the public health levy. Contrary to the SNP’s assertions, Labour supported the public health levy at the Local Government and Regeneration Committee when the order was debated. However, the public health levy takes back only £35 million in one year and applies only to retailers who sell tobacco and alcohol, yet a minimum unit price will generate £125 million each year, which is four times more than the cabinet secretary will claw back. I know that the cabinet secretary believes that the supermarkets will reduce the price of bananas, which is, frankly, naive. Already I hear proposals to decrease the price of premium drink as a marketing ploy and to stock supermarket own-brand products in preference to others, but not one peep do I hear from the supermarkets about reducing the price of bananas. This will be a massive leap of faith. Labour believes that there will be significant unintended consequences if the windfall remains with supermarkets, and that they could undermine the very purpose of the bill. That view is supported by the Institute of Fiscal Studies. Our preference would have been to build on the alcohol duty escalator that was introduced by Alistair Darling and has been continued by the coalition, which brought about rises of 2 per cent above inflation, which this year meant a rise of 7 per cent. We supported a proposal from the alcohol commission that would create a duty floor, added to which would be the price of invoicing—the French have been using such a measure to good effect. We even suggested on a cross-party basis in the chamber that the restructuring of duty to link it to alcohol strength would be preferable; that was later suggested by the Institute for Fiscal Studies. All those things would have raised the price of alcohol considerably, and would have returned the money to the public purse to be used for public services. Under the SNP’s proposal, not one penny will be spent on education, enforcement or treatment. Instead, the SNP wants to give supermarkets, which make billions of pounds of profit anyway, even more money. The SNP is stuffing the supermarkets’ pockets with gold when budgets across the public sector are being cut and it is cutting the alcohol treatment budget. People in Scotland just do not understand that: it does not make sense. In closing, I observe that the cabinet secretary’s closing speech at stage 1 was very big on rhetoric but quite short on detail, which is surprising. I expect more of the same as the debate carries on, but I gently suggest that she changes her tone—[Interruption.] I think that she should, because in her last speech she said that I was putting a blanket over my head on the issue, in an apparently witty reference to the lack of blankets in our hospitals, although she denied that at the time. That spectacularly backfired, so a bit of caution is required. Tackling our relationship with alcohol is a serious issue. We have come forward with a serious suggestion to improve the bill and empower public services in tackling alcohol abuse in Scotland. There is time for the cabinet secretary to have a unified chamber, but she is in danger of losing it when she decides to fill the pockets—

—of large supermarkets at the expense of hard-working public services. I move amendment S4M-02967.1, to insert at end: “but, in so doing, strongly believes that the Scottish Government should bring forward proposals to eliminate the windfall to large retailers arising from the minimum unit price by means of the proposed public health levy or other targeted levy.”

I fear that I will not be earning any brownie points from you today, Presiding Officer. There was much that I could agree with in the cabinet secretary’s opening speech. When we last debated welfare reform in this chamber, I said that we were witnessing “the single most significant attack on the welfare state in my generation”.—[Official Report, 5 October 2011; c 2451.] I also said that it had little to do with fairness and even less to do with social justice, and that the so-called reform was simply a cover for cuts. I have seen nothing to change that view. A total of £18 billion has been stripped from out-of-work benefits and tax credits, and the Fraser of Allander institute estimates that the cuts will amount to £2 billion in Scotland alone. We well remember David Cameron’s words when he said to the Tory party conference in 2010 that “it’s fair that those with the broadest shoulders should bear a greater load”. What utter nonsense that was—just a few months later, he was presiding over a swingeing package of public sector cuts totalling £81 billion, including the £18 billion cuts to benefits. Further, all that happened while the most affluent avoid paying £120 billion in taxes and bankers continue to award themselves huge bonuses. Disabled people are indeed facing the biggest attack on their rights in my lifetime. The reality of the new Tory-Liberal Britain is that those with the broadest shoulders are the poor, the disabled, the sick and the elderly.

I thank the member for the information, which contained points that she made in the previous debate, so there is nothing new coming from the Tory party. Nobody is rejecting a simplification of the system; we are absolutely rejecting its being used as a cover for the imposition of cuts on the most vulnerable people in our society. Today, we must focus on the position in Scotland and think about what the changes will mean for people here claiming benefits and what impact they will have on a wide range of passported benefits such as free school meals, free national health service dental treatment, legal aid and the education maintenance allowance. If we do nothing, some people will fall through the net because they will no longer qualify for the new universal credit or the personal independence payment. Their need has not gone away, but that does not matter to the UK coalition. It must, however, matter to us. Labour’s strong belief, which is shared by the committee, is that those who will receive universal credit or a PIP should be eligible for passported benefits. We also believe that those who are currently eligible for benefits under the existing system should remain eligible to receive passported benefits, which will address current need. There would be no real budget increase as the budgeted amounts include an allowance for that wider group already. I will illustrate that point with reference to concessionary travel. Somebody with a learning disability currently qualifies for free concessionary travel. Given that many will no longer qualify for the disability living allowance or the new personal independence payment, their eligibility for concessionary travel would cease if we did nothing. However, the budget for concessionary travel still contains all the resources that are necessary to cover the continuing eligibility of that group of people. I welcome what the cabinet secretary said about eligibility. Of course, the challenge arises with new claimants in the future. If we are to address the real need of a new cohort of claimants, we must consider the principles of the type of welfare system that we want. It is not good enough simply to pass on the Tory cuts; our responsibility is to mitigate the damage and protect vulnerable Scots and I expect the Scottish Government to set out that direction of travel, to be clear about its policy intentions and to explain how its regulations add up to a comprehensive whole. The stakeholders involved want that from the Government and, after reflecting on the evidence, the two Labour committee members were clear that they wanted the same. Unfortunately, that move was blocked by a most interesting grand coalition between Scottish National Party members and the committee’s lone Tory—but more of that later. Labour members support the bill’s general principles; as principal movers in rejecting the legislative consent memorandum—a move without precedent in this Parliament—we recognise the need for this enabling legislation. I am very glad that the SNP supported our position to oppose the changes and afford greater scrutiny to the Parliament. Indeed, scrutiny is the issue that I want to turn to next. I have no doubt that the real interest lies in the regulations, which can make substantial changes to the system of passported benefits. The committee heard that the UK Government had provided insufficient information for regulations to be drafted—although it should be noted that the UK Government appears to contradict that. Whichever is the case, the UK Government will publish its regulations in mid-June, and we will then have all the information that we need to make progress. The oral and written evidence that the committee received was overwhelmingly of the view that the regulations should be considered under the affirmative procedure. I do not want to earn a reputation as an anorak, but I will run that risk in order to explain to the outside world the difference between affirmative and negative procedure. Essentially, affirmative procedure gives committee members and those outside Parliament with an interest in the subject the opportunity to scrutinise regulations more fully. As it takes 40 days—the same length of time as the negative procedure—there will be no delay. To suggest that there will be a delay and that it will mean that the regulations will not proceed is, in fact, a red herring; indeed, the very stakeholders who are calling for more scrutiny do not want that to happen. However, evidence in that respect was swept aside as the SNP—together, again, with the lone Tory—decided that it knew best. It ignored the evidence of witnesses and the Subordinate Legislation Committee and I believe that, in so doing, it has diminished itself and the Parliament.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I thank the member for her intervention, but I recall distinctly what happened in committee, including the way in which the Subordinate Legislation Committee’s view was rejected. I well remember Alex Salmond’s statement in this chamber that despite the SNP’s majority it would govern as a minority. How disappointing it is that his back benchers did not pay attention to that and instead have used their majority on the committee to block scrutiny with no regard either to the overwhelming evidence presented to the committee during stage 1 or to briefings issued today that they might care to look at. I used to think that the best committees hunted as a pack; indeed, we need look only at the previous Health and Sport Committee to see the truth of that. Witnesses could not distinguish between members’ political allegiances, because the committee cared about the issues and worked together to resolve them. I am genuinely depressed at the way in which the powerhouse of the committee system has been dumbed down. Political differences are one thing, but a deliberate distortion of the evidence is another entirely and we run the risk of the committee system becoming discredited. That said, I am encouraged by the cabinet secretary’s more positive response, which stands in stark contrast to the attitude of her committee members. In that light, I urge her to prove me wrong and agree that all the regulations should be considered under the affirmative procedure to enable greater scrutiny. Another area that was blocked by the SNP in committee related to looking at the economic and social impact of welfare reform in Scotland. The Government has looked at modelling for the impact on individuals and households, and that is very welcome indeed, but it has not gone far enough. Many of the witnesses acknowledged that the impact on services in Scotland could be huge. I and others have spoken in this chamber many times about the impact on social care services and how charging for services is dependent upon receipt of some of the benefits that are being cut. People will no longer be able to pay for their services and local authorities cannot afford to provide them for nothing. Who will pick up the tab? Those are the areas that we must understand better but, again, the SNP committee members knew better and blocked that. Looking to the future, there is much that I hope the Scottish Government will do. I urge the cabinet secretary to adopt a national framework that sets out clear eligibility criteria so that we do not end up with a postcode lottery for support. I recognise that the Scottish Government does not in and of itself have the legislative power to make benefit payments, so we rely on local authorities to do that. They might well be better placed to do that because they are more local, but we need to achieve consistency. Whatever we do, we need to ensure that the system is easy to administer and understand so that we avoid cliff edges and work disincentives when someone makes a return to employment. One issue that is emerging is the need to ensure that there is sufficient capacity in the advice sector to manage the changes. The uncertainty is already driving people into citizens advice bureau offices across the country, which cannot cope with the ever-increasing workload. As a consequence of the UK Government’s decision to provide extra funding for advice agencies in England, we had additional resources of almost £1.7 million each year for this year and the next two years. Those resources have yet to be allocated. I urge the Scottish Government to allocate that funding to the voluntary sector to allow it to provide the advice and support that are so badly needed now. There is, without a doubt, a need for a much wider debate about the kind of society we want to live in and the kind of support that we want to be in place for some of the most vulnerable people in our communities. We have a real opportunity to have that debate, to rethink how we do things, and to develop a system that works well and is underpinned by fairness and equality and focused on people’s needs. It is not a debate to be delayed. With all due respect to the cabinet secretary, people cannot afford to wait until some vague point in the future because everything will be all right if we are independent. That is nonsense; people need help now. I urge the Scottish Government to work with us to ensure that vulnerable people in Scotland are protected now.

The member knows, of course, the tenor and the length of the debate that we had in committee on some of those key points. It is surely not the number of paragraphs that were dissented from but their substance that is important. We feel that the paragraphs have particular import to the witnesses who provided evidence and the member has dismissed that evidence.

I found that last point quite pathetic, to be frank. The reality is that the entirety of the discussion—it took place in private, so I regret breaching that privacy—was about refusing to include those words in the report. Perhaps in future we should discuss reports in public, so that people outside will know the truth.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I welcome the opportunity to debate waiting times. We all know that if someone is ill, it can be an extremely worrying time. Getting a diagnosis and then getting treatment are, of course, essential to their recovery and wellbeing. We all appreciate that. We have family and friends who have waited anxiously for treatment, and we have constituents who are coping with that stress right now. Anything that reduces waiting times is very welcome indeed and, like many other members, I am sure, I commend national health service staff for their unstinting efforts and hard work to minimise waiting times and provide the best possible treatment for patients. Progress has been made. Members will be aware of the scandal of hidden waiting lists that has been exposed at NHS Lothian in recent weeks. Patients appear to have been offered treatment in England rather than in NHS Lothian as a means of removing them entirely from the waiting time guarantee. If the offer of treatment in England was refused, the patient was deemed to be unavailable and therefore exempt from the guarantee. Those patients were simply removed from the waiting list. Not content with that sleight of hand, which denied people their rights, NHS Lothian went further. It adjusted the data retrospectively to make it appear that it was meeting waiting time targets. As many as 1,417 patients were wiped off the list in that way. If anyone is in any doubt about whether that was deliberate, they need only look at the situation now. In the space of just a couple of months, NHS Lothian has gone from no people breaching the waiting time guarantee to 3,500 people breaching the waiting time guarantee. That is simply extraordinary. Just last week, we saw the publication of a damning report exposing the bullying and intimidation of staff in NHS Lothian with regard to achieving waiting time targets. I do not believe, unfortunately, that the deliberate distortion of waiting times or the culture of bullying and intimidation is confined to NHS Lothian. If we take even the most cursory look at the numbers of those patients who were deemed to be unavailable for social reasons and were therefore dropped from the waiting time guarantee, there is a dramatic and unexplained rise since 2008 across Scotland. In 2008, the number of patients in that category was 4,967. As of last December, it was 15,824. The high point was in June 2011, when 20,662 patients were removed from the waiting time guarantee. That represents a fourfold increase in just a few years.

In a minute. I welcome the fact that the figures are now going down, but if we are honest, that has happened only since the problem at NHS Lothian was exposed. The same is true across the country, not just in Lothian. We need only look at the local pictures to see the truth of that. In NHS Ayrshire and Arran, the number of people who were removed from the waiting time guarantee was up threefold. In NHS Fife, the figure was also up threefold. NHS Grampian’s figure was up fivefold, and NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and NHS Lanarkshire’s figures saw a fourfold increase.

I think that the cabinet secretary is dancing on the head of a pin. Patients in those circumstances do not have a waiting time guarantee. This is far too important a matter for us to divide on issues of semantics; it is incredibly important. People outside the Parliament will not understand the cabinet secretary’s intervention. The cabinet secretary’s amendment, which I studied closely, recognises that waiting times need to be monitored—and so say all of us—but the practice in question has been going on for the past four years. Was the situation monitored at any time over that period? Was the cabinet secretary told about the increases? Has she been let down by her civil servants, or did she know? Why has no action been taken before now? There were warning signs. ISD Scotland—the people in Government who are responsible for collecting the waiting time statistics—takes great pains to ensure the validity of its data. It is quoted in The Sunday Times as saying that “several health boards over the last few years” had been warned about the “high levels of social unavailability”. Again, I must ask whether the cabinet secretary knew and, if she did, what she did about it. Did her officials simply not tell her? In 2010, Audit Scotland produced and published a report that highlighted concerns about the way in which patients and their waiting times were recorded. At the time, Audit Scotland said: “NHS boards vary in how they deal with patients who do not or cannot attend appointments and this may not always be appropriate.” It went on to say: “The report also finds that the NHS is not accurately recording all relevant information about patient waits which makes it difficult to demonstrate that it is managing all patients correctly in line with the new guidance.” That is too true. Here is an early warning sign, if ever I saw one. It was a matter of public record. What did the cabinet secretary do to address those concerns? My fear is that the early warning signs were not heeded. After all, just days before the publication of the Audit Scotland report in 2010, the cabinet secretary addressed the annual Scottish National Party conference. On waiting times, she promised that “All patients are now covered by the guarantee and no one—no one—is on a hidden waiting list.” We know now that that is simply not true. What we have with the unavailable for social reasons category is nothing short of the SNP’s hidden waiting list. More than 20,000 people have no waiting time guarantee because they have been removed from the list to massage the figures. It would be bad enough if that were the culture in just one health board, but there is mounting evidence that the use of the social unavailability category is much wider. Frankly, it is not good enough for health boards to inspect themselves, which is the option that the cabinet secretary favours. I believe that the people of Scotland deserve much greater openness and transparency, so I was delighted that Audit Scotland responded positively to our request for a Scotland-wide independent review. In its letter to me, it said: “We share the widespread concern that there is evidence pointing to an inappropriate use of this code (describing patients as unavailable for ‘social reasons’ so they are removed from waiting lists)”. Despite that, the cabinet secretary continues to deny that there is a problem, other than in NHS Lothian. I turn to the culture of bullying and intimidation. It is shameful that any member of staff in the NHS should be treated in the way that was described in the NHS Lothian report. When shouting at clinicians and nurses in general surgery to move people on before it is clinically appropriate to do so becomes routine, we should all rightly be concerned. Such behaviour is unacceptable, but such was the pressure on achieving targets, both internally and externally, that a perverse incentive was created to distort waiting time figures. The report makes for uncomfortable reading. Staff were afraid to report their concerns for fear of reprisal. In a recent freedom of information request by my colleague Richard Simpson, we asked all health boards how many cases there had been of whistleblowing or of concern. The response from NHS Lothian was that there had been none—there was not one recorded case of any concern having being raised about anything at all. If ever something underlined the case for a whistleblowing hotline, that response alone does. There is a hotline in England and Wales, but the cabinet secretary resists having one in Scotland. One would be forgiven for thinking that she has something to fear from such an approach, given the level of resistance. However, whatever the reason, there can be no excuse for delaying any longer. I hope that the cabinet secretary heeds that call. The cabinet secretary believes that the issue is just about NHS Lothian and that there is no problem anywhere else in the NHS. Again, I say that she is in denial. The British Medical Association has said that feedback from its members—the very doctors who deliver for patients on a daily basis—shows that the culture is not isolated to NHS Lothian and is more widespread. I do not have a problem with the principle of setting targets, as they help people to focus minds and concentrate on what matters, but there must always be a balance between speed and clinical priorities. I fear that we are distorting clinical priorities in a way that is unhelpful to patients. The SNP amendment is revealing. The approach is to deny that there is a problem and, if that does not work, to blame somebody else. If that, too, fails, the approach is to adopt the view that attack is the best form of defence. The amendment attacks the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration. I regret the approach that health boards adopted that resulted in too many people being placed on availability status codes, thereby removing their waiting time guarantee. That was well over seven years ago. It was not acceptable then and it is certainly not acceptable now. There were fundamental differences, but I am running out of time, so I will not be able to explore them all. We should compare that previous situation with the cynical manipulation of figures by the SNP, involving the use of social unavailability codes and offering patients operations that they could not possibly attend. There is no excuse for that sleight of hand and distortion of statistics, or for the wholesale removal of 20,000 people from their waiting time guarantee. The cabinet secretary must act now to stop the figures being fiddled. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the progress on waiting times since 1999 underpinned by the hard work of NHS staff, however notes that recent progress has been in a context of declining staff numbers; also welcomes the principle of the New Ways waiting times system initiated by the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat administration and implemented by the current SNP administration; however believes that, for waiting times guarantees to be meaningful, the public must have confidence that published statistics are a true reflection of actual waiting times; therefore expresses concern at reports identifying the misuse of social unavailability codes in NHS Lothian as well as allegations of a culture of bullying and intimidation in relation to meeting targets, particularly given that an internal investigation failed to fully uncover such problems; also notes that the NHS Information Services Division (ISD) figures show that the number of patients across Scotland being removed from normal waiting time guarantees for so-called social reasons increased from below 5,000 to as many as 20,662 for inpatient or day-case admissions between 2008 and 2011; is alarmed by newspaper reports that the ISD has raised concerns about high levels of social unavailability with a number of NHS boards in recent years; also notes the comments of Audit Scotland that it shares widespread concern that there is evidence pointing to the inappropriate use of this code and therefore welcomes the decision by the Auditor General for Scotland to carry out an independent examination of the use of social unavailability codes by NHS boards across Scotland, and believes that this is a necessary step if confidence is to begin to be restored in the integrity of published waiting times statistics and to properly establish that there are no hidden waiting lists.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The approach of SNP back benchers and front benchers today has been to use NHS staff as a human shield for the failings of their Government. I take to heart what Jackson Carlaw said. There is a problem now and we need action now. Will the Government take action?

Although welcome reductions in Clostridium difficile and MRSA levels were reported yesterday, for which we should rightly praise national health service staff, does the First Minister share my concern that, in this week alone, we have seen six deaths at the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley, more than 30 wards closed and more than 100 people affected by norovirus across Scotland? Aside from sending our condolences to the families concerned, will he agree with me that, in light of the substantial rise in norovirus, we need to consider establishing a specialist laboratory to combat that rising level of infection?

Can I say how delighted I am that the First Minister pays such attention to tweets from Diane Abbott? I look forward to that continuing. The First Minister will be aware that we made it clear at stage 1 of the bill that Labour will support minimum unit pricing if the windfall to alcohol retailers is fully clawed back. The First Minister has the mechanism of the public health levy to do that, so why, at a time when his Government is cutting the alcohol treatment budget, will he not claw back the £125 million profit, rather than have it simply line the pockets of supermarket shareholders each and every year?

Will the cabinet secretary advise when, as a result of the national planning forum’s work, TAVI treatment will be provided in Scotland? Will it be routinely available on the basis of clinical judgment, as it is in the rest of the United Kingdom?

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the significant underspend that occurred in the first year of the change fund. According to the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, that was a result of pressure caused by “draconian procurement processes for working with the third sector.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 13 March 2012; c 1130.] Will the cabinet secretary outline how the Government plans to work with local authorities to amend the procurement procedure to address that issue?

I join in the congratulations to Alex Fergusson on securing the debate. Transport matters to us all at the best of times, and it matters even more when we have to get to and from lifeline services. Nowhere is it more important than in relation to access to local health services. I was struck by the report of the Dumfries and Galloway third sector forum, which highlights the importance of travel for our older people. I join other members in congratulating the forum on the public consultation that it undertook. There is much to learn from the forum’s conclusions about planning transport services more generally in rural areas, but members will forgive me if I focus predominantly on the challenges for health services. Many communities in Scotland experience the issues that the report raises. I know that an argument is often—rightly—made about rurality, but the issues are also challenging in parts of urban Scotland. I will relate my experience with constituents from the Vale of Leven hospital catchment area who have had to travel to the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley for key services. When the service change was made, travelling to the RAH—which I inform members from other parts of Scotland is on the other side of the River Clyde from the Vale of Leven hospital—meant a two and a half hour journey that involved two trains, a bus and a bit of walking in between. That was just one way, so getting back home doubled the time. That route, which took people into the centre of Glasgow and back out on the other side of the river, passed five hospitals. I am sure that members will agree that that was a ridiculous situation that defied understanding—it also shows some of the challenges in getting our transport right in urban Scotland, never mind rural Scotland. Despite all our protestations about the lack of accessibility of services, the health board considered our concerns to be largely second order. Health board views on health service configurations tend to drive change, and any commonsense consideration, such as “For goodness’ sake—how do you get there?”, does not feature in boards’ thinking. A previous Labour Administration put in place legislation to require boards to consider transport arrangements in any proposal for change. The current Government party supported that, and the measure is welcome, but health boards have not always translated it into adequate service provision. We now have a bus service from the Vale of Leven to the RAH that is subsidised by the health board and Strathclyde partnership for transport. It did not have the best start, but much progress has been made, so such services can be introduced. Now, people are not offered appointments at times before the bus service starts in the morning; the service is timetabled to link with bus services from outlying areas; it has even extended its area of operation; and more people are using it. There will always be room for improvement, but the key lesson is that the service was shaped by the experience of people in their community. I pay tribute to Helensburgh community council for its work on the issue. Another key lesson, which has yet to be properly learned, is that a transport service must be in place when a service changes and not two, three or four months afterwards. The provision of patient transport is a matter for the Scottish Ambulance Service, which is often regarded as a Cinderella service but which is essential for getting people to appointments and to hospital. I know that one complaint from my constituents is echoed elsewhere. They say that, when they get on patient transport, they sometimes have to drive round for a couple of hours while everybody else is picked up, and then the same thing happens in reverse. I know that the Scottish Ambulance Service is now operating a new system that is much more demand responsive and I look forward to hearing how that has panned out, because that offers hope for the future. Patients sometimes experience difficulty in securing transport because access is determined by their general practitioner on the basis of clinical need, which is not always well known, and because patients are reluctant to ask. The assumption is made that people somehow have their own transport. In my area, the voluntary sector plays a critical role. The Red Cross provides transport and community transport schemes assist people in getting to where they need to be. More can be done to enable such flexible transport options that are community based. I hope that the minister will reflect on that further with Keith Brown, the transport minister. I will make a general point in conclusion. The debate reflects positively not only on the group from Dumfries and Galloway and the work that it has done but on the Parliament. The Parliament’s community partnerships project was—I believe—an innovation of Alex Fergusson’s when he was the Presiding Officer. It is very welcome and is to be commended to voluntary groups across Scotland.

I am grateful for the minister’s on-going interest in the issue. Since the contract was awarded, there have been numerous cancellations of service for reasons beyond our challenging weather. Initially, replacement vessels were not provided, despite that being a contractual obligation. Instead of a 10-minute crossing, the replacement bus service took around an hour and a half. There is now a replacement boat that seats 12 people instead of 50. Aside from the unreliability of the service and the conflicting information that is given, passengers now have very little confidence in the service provision and the safety of the boat that is used. Does the minister agree that such poor standards fall below the service provider’s contractual obligations to SPT? Will he continue his extremely helpful approach and once again assist Duncan McNeil and me in securing a reliable and safe service for our constituents?

In a recent survey, the Royal College of Nursing identified a drop in morale, particularly among nurses. I think that we would all recognise the challenging environment that they work in, especially given that more than 2,000 nursing posts have been cut from the NHS. However, in a spirit of consensus, will the cabinet secretary join me in welcoming international nurses day, which is on 12 May, and in recognising that much of what our nurses do forms the backbone of our NHS?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what financial assistance is provided to West Dunbartonshire Council to tackle unemployment. (S4O-00954)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that response, but he will know that the number of young people in West Dunbartonshire unemployed for over a year rose by a staggering 630 per cent and that women’s unemployment has doubled. West Dunbartonshire is, indeed, one of the most challenging areas in which to find employment, with 30 people chasing each job. Therefore, I am disappointed that, when it came to enterprise zones, West Dunbartonshire was ignored. Enterprise zones there would have created growth and jobs. In addition, there was not one penny from the youth unemployment strategy fund. Can I implore the cabinet secretary to help to reverse the position for young people in my area and to agree to meet me to discuss the opportunities that we can progress together?

Nicola Sturgeon should watch her back; he is clearly ambitious.

10. To ask the Scottish Executive what support it will give to the Scottish Maritime Museum as part of the national strategy for Scotland’s museums and galleries. (S4O-00898)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that direct funding and for her existing support to the Denny tank museum, which is run by the Scottish Maritime Museum. The cabinet secretary will be aware that, later this month, the Queen will reopen the Cutty Sark, whose birthplace is, of course, Dumbarton. There is currently no memorial to the Cutty Sark at the Denny tank or anywhere in Dumbarton. I ask the cabinet secretary to accept an invitation to meet me at the Denny tank to consider how we could jointly establish a memorial to the Cutty Sark.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the report that was published this week by the House of Commons Health Committee, which criticised as “flying in the face of common sense” the situation whereby women who are entitled to the removal of PIP implants on the national health service for clinical reasons, because their private provider refuses treatment or because the provider no longer exists, must have any replacement surgery done separately, outside the NHS, even if they are prepared to pay for the replacement as part of the same surgery. In those limited circumstances, will the cabinet secretary give consideration to how a single removal and replacement surgery might be possible, particularly in view of the risk for women of undergoing two surgeries in rapid succession?

TAVI has been available for selected patients in England, Wales and Northern Ireland for the past four years, but no operations have been carried out in Scotland, so I welcome the cabinet secretary’s sense of urgency. However, can she assure me that clinicians will not encounter obstacles at the health board level? Can the 73-year-old woman who now has to travel to Belfast for a TAVI operation—we are both aware of her—have her treatment in Scotland at the Golden Jubilee hospital?

I thank the cabinet secretary for an early copy of her statement to Parliament and for sight of the PWC report on waiting times management in NHS Lothian. Someone who is much more cynical than I am might suggest that the timing of the statement has more to do with the fact that it is budget day and therefore a good day on which to bury bad news. The findings that the cabinet secretary has outlined are quite shocking. I share her disappointment and anger, and I associate myself with her remarks about the efforts of staff. We have discovered that periods of patient unavailability have rocketed, and that that was achieved by retrospective manual adjustments. In other words, the figures were fiddled. In one hour alone, more than 100 people were removed from the waiting list at the click of a button, and in one five-day period, almost 2,000 people were removed. Staff were under pressure to conform. No bad news about waiting times was allowed. Although we all recognise the importance of waiting time guarantees, we must acknowledge that increasing demand and reducing staff numbers mean that our hospitals are unable to cope, as the Royal College of Nursing highlighted this week. In October last year, we asked the Government for a Scotland-wide inquiry and we repeat that call today. We do so on the basis that the figures for patients who are unavailable for treatment for social reasons, and who are therefore dropped from waiting lists, have risen dramatically. In March 2008, for in-patient and day cases, it was 4,967. By December 2011, it had risen to 15,824, which is more than three times higher. There is a similar story for out-patient cases. It would therefore appear that the problem of creative reporting is not to be found in NHS Lothian alone. What advice was received by NHS Lothian from the Information Services Division about the recording of waiting times? Is the guidance completely clear? Does it leave no room for dubiety? I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that the people of Scotland should be able to trust the Scottish Government statistics on waiting times. Unfortunately, the report suggests that they might not be worth the paper that they are written on. Some might even suggest that this is the Scottish National Party’s hidden waiting list. To dispel any such notion, rather than allowing health boards to undertake internal audits, I ask the cabinet secretary to request that Audit Scotland undertakes a full and thorough review of each and every territorial health board in Scotland to restore confidence in the system.

I agree that considerable progress has been made in tackling heart disease. National health service staff should be congratulated on their efforts. However, the cabinet secretary will be aware that the recent Audit Scotland report on cardiology services showed that people in deprived communities “are not always getting the same level of treatment as the rest of the population”. What action will she take to ensure equal access to services?

It would be helpful if the member clarified whether the Tories intend that the entirety of the bill, or simply the order-making power, should be notified to the EU.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Does the member recall that Professor Stockwell stated in evidence to the committee: “Minimum pricing will be more in your favour if you can apply the levy that I thought was going to go ahead”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 10 January 2012; c 797.] Should we not agree to claw back the profits from the supermarkets?

No, he did not.

Will the member take an intervention?

Across the chamber, we have all acknowledged the real concern that exists about the overconsumption of alcohol in Scotland. We consume 23 per cent more than our counterparts in the rest of the UK. As Jim Eadie rightly pointed out, the consequences of that can often be seen in our ambulances, our hospitals and our prisons. We need a range of actions to tackle what is a complex problem. Parliamentary arithmetic means that the bill will succeed, so our focus has been to mitigate people’s genuine concerns about minimum unit pricing. I say at the outset that we have always agreed that there is a relationship between price and consumption—Labour members have never doubted that—but minimum unit pricing is simply one pricing mechanism. Our consistent preference has been for the use of targeted taxation measures on a UK-wide basis. The concerns about MUP include concerns about the windfall—which is the subject of our amendment—the legality of MUP and its impact. I will deal with each of those in turn. The University of Sheffield has estimated that a minimum unit price of 45p will generate a windfall of £103 million; at 50p, the windfall rises to £125 million; and at 55p, it is estimated to be £146 million. That money will be generated each year and all of it will go into the pockets of supermarkets and large retailers. Not one penny of it will go to alcohol education, enforcement or treatment. At a time of tightening budgets, when resources are scarce and when the alcohol treatment budget is being cut in real terms—it has been reduced by 7.5 per cent, which amounts to a cut of more than £3 million—the SNP Government is intent on giving the supermarkets increased profits through that windfall. We need to consider what the supermarkets will do with the money. I understand that the cabinet secretary thinks that they will make bananas cheaper. I say to her, as gently as possible, that that is a very naive view of the way in which the market behaves. A recent Institute for Fiscal Studies report discussed some of the economic issues to do with minimum pricing. It said that we needed to have an understanding of the measure’s indirect impacts. How will retailers change the price of alcohol that is currently sold at a level above the proposed minimum price or the price of other products? How will manufacturers change the range of alcohol products that are available once cheap goods are no longer competitive on price? As yet, we do not have clear answers to those questions, but such secondary effects are extremely important in assessing the overall impact of minimum pricing. We know that the sale of alcohol is important for the retail sector. Some retailers have sought to be creative to get round the discount ban, and they are likely to do the same with MUP. I can already picture some of the market responses and the unintended consequences—a depression in the price of premium brands and shelves and shelves of own-brand spirits. We supported the social responsibility levy in the Government’s Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill, but it is not to be implemented. During stage 3 consideration of that bill, Nicola Sturgeon said about the social responsibility levy: “Next, they said”— by “they”, I think she meant us— “that it would increase supermarket profits.” That is true. She went on to say: “They were knowingly misrepresenting the figures”. That is not true, because the figures came from the Sheffield study, which the Government commissioned. She continued: “but, even so, we suggested that we work together to use the social responsibility levy to claw back increased revenue for reinvestment in our services.”—[Official Report, 10 November 2010; c 30143.] We agreed to do that, and that is what we did. What a shame that the cabinet secretary has made it clear that there are no plans to implement the social responsibility levy until the economic circumstances are right.

In a minute. However, the Government has introduced a public health levy that is aimed at large retailers that sell alcohol and tobacco. We supported that measure in the Local Government and Regeneration Committee. When it started life, it would have taken £110 million from the supermarkets over three years, but that was reduced to £95 million. The profits for supermarkets that will arise from MUP over the same period range from £310 million to as much as £450 million, which is three or four times more than the public health levy would collect.

It is disappointing that raising genuine concerns about the efficacy of the Government’s legislation is apparently a fig leaf. We have been consistent on the issue, no matter how much the cabinet secretary may seek to deny it. The cabinet secretary should feel free not to listen to me—she does not have a history of doing so. Members: Oh! The debate is not so consensual now. Professor Stockwell gave evidence to the Health and Sport Committee in support of minimum unit pricing and on Canada’s experience of social pricing. However, the key difference is that there is a state monopoly in Canada, which effectively owns its off-licences. I am not suggesting that the SNP should introduce plans to nationalise Scotland’s off-licences, but Professor Stockwell expressed his disappointment to the committee when he said: “Minimum pricing will be more in your favour if you can apply the levy that I thought was going to go ahead”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 10 January 2012; c 797.] How disappointing it is that the levy is not going ahead. We have lingering concerns about the legality of minimum unit pricing. I note that the cabinet secretary is offering to notify the price-setting order to the European Union, but she asserts that there is no need to notify the bill. Others disagree, and argue that notifying only the regulations will not allow for full and proper scrutiny. The bill describes how minimum pricing will be applied and contains the mechanism for calculating the price of products on the market, so it sets an important context. Ruth Davidson is right: there is no indication at which stage notification will be made. The cabinet secretary should surely just notify the whole bill and end any doubt and uncertainty. I am sure that that is what the Tories wanted, but it is not being delivered in full. The Law Society of Scotland also has reservations on that point. On the question of impact, I say to Bob Doris that there is little impact on young people and binge drinking, and no impact on caffeinated alcohol products such as Buckfast. Where consumption of particular drinks—namely wine—is increasing substantially, minimum unit pricing does not begin to touch it at all. Where consumption within a particular demographic—namely middle-class, middle-income women—is increasing substantially, there is virtually no impact at all. In the Government’s early rhetoric, the policy was supposed to be a silver bullet and a magic solution to overconsumption of alcohol. Indeed, despite the Government protesting—as it is doing again—that this is not so, it has produced a bill that is so tightly written that it is incapable of being amended. Members should make no mistake about it: that was deliberate. [Interruption.]

I am conscious of time, but I must address what Christine Grahame and James Dornan said. Domestic abuse is not caused by alcohol. That is to misunderstand the nature of the abuse and its underlying cause—ultimately, it is an abuse of power. To quote the Government’s own rhetoric back at it, there is no excuse for domestic abuse. What has always struck me is the question why, since the prices in Scotland and in the rest of the United Kingdom are largely the same, alcohol consumption is 23 per cent higher in Scotland than in the rest of the UK. It is clearly about much more than price. I am genuinely disappointed in the SNP’s position. We on the Labour side of the chamber were prepared to meet the Government halfway. Our concerns were not a fig leaf, but a real opportunity for the Government to move forward collectively if it wanted to do so. I simply cannot understand why the SNP is signing up to put hundreds of millions of pounds into the pockets of supermarkets such as Tesco, which reported a £3.8 billion profit last year—that is £10 million each day, and I have not even begun on the others. The SNP wants to give them more. I am bemused, and the people of Scotland will be too. We are prepared to support the Government, but the SNP is stuffing the pockets of supermarkets with gold—

—when budgets across the public sector are tight and the alcohol treatment budget is being decimated. I urge members to support the amendment.

Will the member give way?

I remind the cabinet secretary of a little bit of history. Last summer, we brought forward alternative, worked-through proposals that were supported by the Conservatives, the Liberal Democrats and the Greens. That is consensus. However, of course, the cabinet secretary does not understand the meaning of consensus.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the Health and Sport Committee’s report on its inquiry into the regulation of care for older people. Like others, I commend the members of the committee for their work. As Duncan McNeil rightly reminded us, it was less than a year ago that we debated in the chamber the disturbing events at the Elsie Inglis nursing home, which is not a stone’s throw from the Parliament. The poor standards of care there resulted in two residents dying and six being admitted to hospital. There were distressing reports of residents sleeping on stained and ripped mattresses, of residents being forced to eat food with their hands and of open wounds and sores being evident. In 2010 alone, there were 20 separate recorded outbreaks of infection affecting 72 residents, yet, just a year earlier, the care inspectorate inspected the home and gave it a good report. Families had confidence in and relied on such good reports when they made decisions about which care home to place their loved ones in. It is clear that the change that happened at the home was dramatic and very quick, and was picked up only because the City of Edinburgh Council acted on a complaint and subsequently brought it to the attention of the care inspectorate. I understand from the cabinet secretary that the police investigation is still on-going. Although it is important to acknowledge that the majority of care homes provide first-class care, there are still too many where the quality of care leaves a lot to be desired. It is incumbent on the Government to ensure that people have confidence in the quality of care for older people across Scotland. A robust inspection regime is key to that, and the Scottish National Party has finally discovered that that cannot be done on the cheap. Members may recall that the care inspectorate was to start life with a 25 per cent budget cut and a 20 per cent reduction in staff, the majority of whom were to be inspectors. The regime was to move from twice yearly inspections to risk-based assessments, with some homes not being inspected for as much as two years. Given what we know about the speed at which the problems at Elsie Inglis mushroomed, that hands-off approach seems wholly misplaced. I therefore welcome the SNP’s conversion to more frequent inspections and the partial restoration of the care inspectorate’s budget. However, it is disappointing that the cabinet secretary, and even the First Minister, were in denial about the budget cut in the first place. Their ostrich-like behaviour meant that a number of staff who took voluntary redundancy or early retirement this financial year have now had to be rehired at an additional cost, over and above their redundancy packages, of approximately £400,000. That money could have been spent on ensuring the best care for our older people. Inspections are important in ensuring quality, but I think that all members agree that the quality of care staff is also key. We are talking about an area in which we know that wages are low and investment in training and upskilling the workforce is not generally a priority. The committee recommended that care staff be paid the living wage. If homes value their staff, they will be repaid in staff commitment and in the quality of the service. The Government’s response in that regard was disappointingly timid. If it had the political will to do so, it could use procurement and commissioning of services to drive up standards and thereby drive up quality. In many cases it is the local authority and ultimately the Scottish Government that provide funding for adult residential care, so we can do more. I will touch on the qualification standards that are expected of the workforce and on the committee’s recommendation that the Government accelerate the timetable for registration of care workers. It might be instructive for members if I outline the timetable for registration of workers in adult care homes: managers had to be registered by November 2009; workers with supervisory responsibilities have to be registered by March 2012; practitioners have to be registered by March 2013; and support workers, who make up the bulk of the workforce, have to be registered by September 2015. Support workers are expected to attain a Scottish vocational qualification at level 2, but they do not have to do that by 2015; they can take another three years, so we are really talking about 2018. The Scottish National Party’s response to the committee’s call to accelerate the timetable was non-committal, at best. If we want to drive up standards and if we care about the quality of care for our older people, where are the urgency, the drive and the ambition? The Government cannot afford to stroll along on the issue. Progress is slow in relation to a number of recommendations—for example, on commissioning, enhanced powers for the care inspectorate and changes to the national care standards. The Royal College of Nursing said that, given the increasingly complex care needs of older people, we require an increased number of qualified nurses in the care home sector, and called for a national approach to guaranteeing staffing levels. On the national care standards, we have been promised a review by the First Minister and by the cabinet secretary. The question is, when? The cabinet secretary said that the review would be under way by June, but that is too long a timescale for embedding human rights in our care system. The cabinet secretary has often talked about our sacred duty to older people, and rightly so, but she has a sacred duty to do more than just talk about the problem. Scotland’s older people want and deserve action, and that action must go at a faster pace than the SNP Government’s current glacial pace of change.

Like others, I welcome the debate. I congratulate the Public Petitions Committee and David Stewart on bringing the petition to the chamber for debate, and I join others in congratulating Andrea MacArthur, the principal petitioner. The problem with following all my esteemed colleagues, including members of the committee, is that they have covered it all. However, I will do my best to fill the four minutes that I have been given. At the heart of the petition is the call for the Government to review and overhaul the method of diagnosing and treating pernicious anaemia, or vitamin B12 deficiency. I understand that, in the western world, the frequency of pernicious anaemia is estimated at 127 cases per 100,000 of population and that prevalence increases with advancing age. As we heard, diagnosis is usually made using a blood test but, as Nanette Milne outlined, it is only about 30 per cent reliable. The alternative test that has been developed—the active B12 test—is much more accurate, but it does not appear to be routinely used in Scotland, and GPs are not issued with specific guidance in that regard. The Government’s response to the Public Petitions Committee was that GPs should be able to diagnose and manage any patient with pernicious anaemia as a matter of course and that “Healthcare professionals are expected to follow agreed local and national guidelines which are complemented by the agreed pathways in NHS Boards”. Although I welcome much of what the minister said, John Wilson was right to suggest that people’s experience highlights the fact that treatment is inconsistent and that there are delays in diagnosis. I was struck by Richard Simpson’s comment about the survey by the Pernicious Anaemia Society. If 47 per cent of those who were surveyed said that they waited at least two years for a diagnosis, it surely tells us that there is a problem. It appears to me that the nub of the problem is that there are no adequate guidelines and that there are major failures in diagnosis, so treatment is delayed. Kenneth Gibson touched on the consequence of the lack of adequate guidance. Of course, the condition worsens, but in addition the neurological problems increase, which affects people in doing their everyday tasks. It would be so much better to prevent that from happening in the first place. It seems that, on our journey of discovery about the condition, many of us visited the Royal College of General Practitioners website. It mentions management of the condition and asks whether practices maintain a database of patients with a diagnosis. It gives advice on testing, some of which is outdated, as Richard Simpson pointed out. It mentions an annual review including a full blood count and thyroid function and blood glucose tests, and it even mentions a system of identifying when injections are overdue. That information was provided in November 2003. It even mentions data collection and benchmarking, but if that is done, I am not sure whether the Government collects the information or whether any information that is collected supports the contention of this position. I always listen carefully to Richard Simpson. He called for SIGN guidelines because we know that they drive better diagnosis and treatment. I respectfully ask the minister to review the research and to ask the clinicians to bring forward SIGN guidelines so that we have clarity. That will ensure that patients’ experience of the diagnosis and treatment of pernicious anaemia is improved.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive whether the latest statistical bulletin shows that the Scottish Government is meeting its 2012 homelessness target. (S4O-00740)

I thank the minister for that response and welcome the progress, but I am sure that he will acknowledge that nearly 50,000 people presented as homeless in the past 12 months, so the challenge continues. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has said that welfare reform could lead to an additional 3,000 homeless presentations in Scotland alone. What measures is the Scottish Government taking to prevent homelessness arising from the welfare reform changes?

I welcome the survey that the cabinet secretary mentioned. The backlog of maintenance in Dumfries and Galloway is £58 million, but NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s backlog is £175 million, which includes the £27 million of work that is required at the Vale of Leven hospital, the £18 million that is required at the Royal Alexandra hospital and the £17 million that needs to be spent at Inverclyde royal hospital. What steps is the cabinet secretary taking to address the backlog? What is the likely timescale for dealing with the backlog in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and, in reference to the original question, in NHS Dumfries and Galloway?

I apologise for not having been present for the debate, but I heard the minister say that there is a real-terms increase in health spending. Given that there is a £319 million decrease in health spending over the spending review period, does he wish to correct that?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will hold a public inquiry into the PIP breast implant situation. (S4O-00662)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her helpful response. I am sure that she agrees that the women involved have had their lives turned upside down by the scandal and that they deserve answers. Will she provide us with an update on the number of women who are affected and the latest information on rupture rates? Does she believe that there is now merit in introducing a national register of surgical implants? How will we ensure that such a situation never happens to anyone ever again?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate and I, too, welcome the Government’s focus on prevention. Very few members would disagree that intervening early and preventing the need for more costly treatment or support later in life are absolutely the right thing to do. In that spirit, I welcome the change funds. However, our history as a Parliament is littered with change funds, which have not been particularly effective in creating the lasting change that we seek. If we pause and think, £500 million over the spending review period is not 1 per cent or even one tenth of 1 per cent of the overall spend—it is even less than one hundredth of 1 per cent, so it is extremely marginal. I encourage the Government to put its money where its mouth is and to take a sharper approach. We would support it in doing so. We have been told the level of spend in the older people’s change fund, the early years and early intervention change fund and the reducing reoffending change fund, but we have not—despite numerous parliamentary questions—been told how much is new money and how much is existing money. We know from local authorities that they are expected to contribute, but they do not even know how much. I would welcome enlightenment from the cabinet secretary. I will take the older people’s change fund as an example. The initial report on spending said that only 19 per cent of the fund was going to prevention, which is a damning indictment. A significant underspend is expected this year and the fund is being used to substitute for services that have been cut. I understand that, when local authorities were asked to contribute cash to the pot, there was—needless to say—considerable disquiet because of their tightened budgets, so the Scottish Government watered that down to contributing in kind. There is no new money, which is a shame, particularly if our collective ambition is to achieve and secure change. I acknowledge that preventative spending is difficult at the best of times, never mind when money is tight, but the timidity and compromise in the Government’s approach are disappointing.

It is clear that Graham Allen had not met me first, as I would have exposed the paucity of the Scottish Government’s approach. If the Government’s ambition is to be compared with a UK coalition Government that does not get prevention at all, that is disappointing. The average reduction in the local government settlement is 6.1 per cent, as the minister well knows. Let us compare that to the overall reduction in the Scottish Government budget of 2.7 per cent. Some 13,500 people were out of the door last year and another 13,500 are expected to be out of the door this year. I know that the cabinet secretary and his minister will tell us that local government is terribly well off, but even a primary school pupil can work out that local government is taking a bigger hit than the Scottish Government is experiencing. These are the SNP Government’s cuts, not Westminster’s.

No, thank you. Nowhere is that more evident than in social care: care packages are being cut; preventative services are being cut; and priority frameworks that deal only with acute need are the order of the day—and they were agreed by the Scottish Government. Charges are now being introduced in 32 different ways, with 32 different rates and 32 different sets of criteria. That does not chime with the Government’s approach to prevention and it is fundamentally unfair. We are approaching a perfect storm. As a result of the UK coalition’s Welfare Reform Bill, many people, particularly those with disabilities, will lose benefits—the very benefits that are used to pay for social care. Who will pick up the tab for those people who are most in need of support but who no longer have the means to contribute? That brings me to the wider issues of welfare reform. Until today, there was not one word on the matter in the whole of the SNP’s budget document. Now, we have £20 million in consequentials. I have to say that that feels like an afterthought. That is from a party that wants control over the benefits system but so far has failed to explain what it will do about community care grants, crisis loans and council tax benefit. All of that is devolved. The Government has responsibility for those matters but it has not even bothered to tell us about what it will do, never mind about the impact on passported benefits such as free school meals or concessionary travel. On health, despite what the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy might say, the numbers do not lie. There is a real-terms cut of £319 million in the NHS budget, by the SNP Government. Some 4,000 staff are already out of the door, including more than 2,000 nurses. The Government cannot tell me that that does not have an impact on patient care. NHS staffing is now at its lowest level since the beginning of 2006. This is not a budget for jobs; it is an SNP budget that is resulting in thousands and thousands of job losses.

The SNP cannot take money away and then, a few months later, give a little of it back and expect a pat on the back. That just does not wash.

There is one.

The cabinet secretary will recognise that members on all sides of the chamber support preventative spending. However, the amount that he is spending is one hundredth of 1 per cent. That is minuscule.

Aw.

You are deluded.

Will the member give way?

I hesitate to say it, but I think that the member is deluded this morning.

The debate is about kinship care—it is about the people who provide care for children in an extended family setting and the children who are cared for. According to the 2001 census, some 15,000 children are in that situation. Some kinship care arrangements are formal—the children are deemed to be looked after by their local authority—but often the arrangements are informal and have been arrived at between families. In 2001, one in 10 looked-after children were placed in kinship care. By 2010, that figure had increased to one in five. Now, more children are in kinship care than in residential care. The number of children who are in kinship care is fast catching up with the number in foster care. We are not sure whether that increase is the consequence of a change in demand or of a better response to existing demand. Whatever the reason, the needs of the children who are cared for in kinship care arrangements cannot be dealt with on the cheap. The underlying causes of children being placed in kinship care are remarkably similar to those of children being placed in foster care. The children might have experienced drug and alcohol addiction in their families, bereavement, neglect, abuse, violence or illness. It follows from those similar experiences that the children will have similar support needs. In 2007, the First Minister recognised that position. In an exchange with Labour’s former leader Wendy Alexander, he promised to deliver funding so that kinship care allowances would match foster care allowances. That was a straightforward commitment—with no quibbling and no caveats—to provide £10 million to deliver that by 2011. I say three cheers to that. I acknowledge that kinship care payments are at least being made in every local authority area, but the amounts that are paid and the criteria that apply vary hugely. In all but a handful of council areas, the disparity between foster care payments and kinship care payments remains stark. We need only look at the work that Citizens Advice Scotland has undertaken to see the truth of that. To be frank, the Government’s amendment is churlish. As with so much of the Government’s approach, it seeks to blame everybody else. The Government says that the fault must lie with the previous Labour-Liberal Scottish Executive, although—incidentally—that Executive started the consultation on the need to support kinship carers in 2006. Perhaps the Scottish Government blames the United Kingdom Government. Now, it also wants to blame local authorities.

Not at this point. I would be the first to recognise that there are issues to explore in the interaction of benefits and allowances that are paid to kinship carers, but that cannot be used as an excuse for inaction by the Scottish Government. Kinship care is firmly within the Scottish Government’s responsibility. It is devolved. The Government needs no more powers to do something to make a difference. I commend the Scottish Government for taking our consultation and developing a strategy for kinship care in 2007. Then, that strategy enjoyed support across the chamber, as it does now. When the First Minister promised to deliver £10 million so that kinship care allowances would match foster care allowances by 2011, we were all delighted. That was the Parliament and the Government at their best—recognising need, putting in place the right strategy and providing the resources to back that up. A promise from the First Minister himself—it does not get much better than that. He promised to support the army of kinship carers who on a daily basis provide vulnerable children with safety, security and a loving home. We are now in 2012, and the First Minister and his Government have failed to deliver. Is the First Minister a man of his word or is he not? So, exactly what happened? It would appear that the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities came to a new understanding. Let me be clear about this: I do not blame local government. It is for the Scottish Government to signal its priorities. It did so in the concordat, but then it downgraded that commitment. The Scottish Government said that the issue was not important to it any more.

I welcome the legislation, which enjoyed support among members on all sides of the chamber, but you promised the £10 million of support. The First Minister promised it. You then signalled to COSLA that it was not important any more. How can you take something that important and negotiate it away? Those children are among the most marginalised and vulnerable in Scotland today. What did you trade them for?

Indeed, Presiding Officer. Was it the class size pledge, which was later to be dumped too? Was it something else? I am sure that all members in the chamber want to know what was more important than kinship carers. Mark McDonald (North East Scotland) (SNP) rose— Mike Russell’s letter to COSLA, dated 9 December 2009, is most illuminating. It stated that COSLA had made a “major and significant contribution” to that commitment—in other words, “You can forget about it now—you can use the money for our other, more pressing priorities”. Mark McDonald rose— The Minister for Local Government and Planning (Derek Mackay) rose— That is what Mr Russell said. A promise that was made at the end of 2007 was dumped by 2009. When we raised the subject of kinship carers at the start of the year, we were told that the Scottish Government had met all its commitments. It said that it had “supported this with significant financial resources for local authorities.” Those are the same local authorities that were told by the Government that they did not need to bother now. On the same day came COSLA’s response, which challenged the Scottish Government’s claim that councils have been given significant resources. Already, the Scottish Government is trying to lay the blame elsewhere, but it has the responsibility and it needs to step up to the plate. Mark McDonald rose— Derek Mackay rose— The poverty truth commission looked at kinship care and came up with a number of focused and reasonable recommendations that I sincerely commend to the minister. However, it was the words from Jessie—a kinship carer—that struck me most. She said: “We’re saving the system £500 million a year and yet we are expected to just get on with it, with no recognition or help. It has been proven that kinship care is the best situation for these kids. In 6 years I have never known of a kinship child being taken into care ... early intervention most certainly works and if we can give them stability it would be in everyone’s best interest as these kids are the future”. The Government should listen to Jessie—or listen to its very own Twitter queen, Joan McAlpine, who I am delighted is in the chamber. At a kinship care round table, she said: “it is of great concern that there is a perception that the Parliament has not delivered: Parliament exists to deliver for the most vulnerable people in Scotland.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 17 January 2012; c 634.] Indeed it does—and so does the Scottish Government. I hope that Joan McAlpine will not label me as anti-Scottish if I demand that the Scottish National Party does something for kinship carers. Let us have an end to the postcode lottery. We need policies that are centred on the needs of the children who are cared for, access to social work, education, psychological and carers support services, and a fair kinship care payment that is on a par with that for foster care. I will close with the words of my constituent Anne Schwartz, who is a kinship carer looking after three teenage grandchildren. She says: “When I started caring for my grandchildren, my life was turned upside down. I lost my job. I felt like I was on my own, with nobody I could turn to for help. We face exactly the same challenges as foster parents, yet we do not get the same financial support or training. The fact is we are getting a raw deal from this government. Alex Salmond made us a promise—it is time he delivered on it. If he had made good on his promise back in 2007, I might have been able to keep my job and hang on to some of my savings. Children in kinship care face the same issues as children in foster care, yet there is a great disparity in that they cannot access appropriate services to meet their needs. At the end of the day, it is the children who suffer out of all of this.” It is about time that the SNP put that right. The First Minister and his Government must deliver on his promise. If he does not deliver, we will know that he and the SNP Government cannot be trusted. I move, That the Parliament recognises the crucial role that kinship carers play in supporting the most vulnerable children and believes that they should be supported financially at an equivalent level to foster carers; notes the commitment given by the First Minister on 27 September 2007 to fast-track £10 million to fund this; further notes commitments made by successive ministers for Education and Lifelong Learning and Children and Early Years that this promise would be met via the concordat with local government by 2011 at the latest; regrets that these promises to kinship carers and the people they care for have been broken, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that local authorities are provided with the funds to ensure that kinship carers are properly supported and that this promise is finally met.

I am supportive of much of what the minister says. However, given the terms of our motion, will she tell us what she will now do to ensure that the SNP Government fulfils the First Minister’s commitment, so that kinship care allowances will match foster care allowances? That is what we want to know.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

There are both SNP and Labour councils that are performing well on the issue and SNP and Labour councils that are performing not so well. It would be silly for Nigel Don to trade on that. In the spirit of consensus and given that we believe that kinship care is so important, will Nigel Don comment on why Mike Russell sold out kinship carers for smaller class sizes?

West Dunbartonshire Council—

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It would be useful to reflect that the quotation was taken from the Official Report.

Will the Scottish Ambulance Service be provided with additional money in this financial year to implement the recently agreed deal on rest breaks, or will it have to operate within existing budgets?

Where is Alex Neil?

Oh!

16. To ask the Scottish Executive what impact the 20 per cent reduction in college budgets will have in terms of staffing, student numbers and the range of courses available. (S4O-00624)

We have been listening to the cabinet secretary’s responses. He may have made the same point five times, but he has yet to shed any true light on the matter. I will, therefore, give him a sixth opportunity, in the interests of transparency. Is it not the case that his letter of 11 January is based on a comparison of an indicative budget allocation in December 2010 rather than the actual allocation in March 2011, and does that not represent a greater cut in budgets and places than he claims?

That is what you do: you shout.

Do it!

Like other members, I welcome the opportunity to debate the important contribution that Scotland’s six cities make to our economy and our society. My experience of cities is the reverse of the cabinet secretary’s. I was born and brought up in Aberdeen, Hong Kong, which is a truly global city that is on a different scale to our cities in Scotland. I now live in a city region, in Dumbarton, that ancient capital of Strathclyde, which is probably one of Scotland’s oldest cities. I acknowledge that Patrick Harvie is, indeed, a son of the rock. Regardless of whether someone lives in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dundee, Aberdeen, Inverness or Stirling, they will be fiercely proud of their city, its culture and its unique contribution to Scottish life. That has been demonstrated by every member this afternoon. We have heard today that the majority of our population lives in and around cities—some 86 per cent of us. However, it is their importance in driving our economy that truly sets our cities apart. Our cities are, without question, the powerhouse of our economy. It is right that we should pay them special attention and it is right for us to invest in them. That is the case because we face bleak and challenging prospects. No one can be anything other than deeply concerned about the significant rise in unemployment. In the past three months, unemployment has risen by 19,000—a staggering 200 people each and every day. The Scottish unemployment rate now stands at 8.6 per cent, which is higher than the UK average. All that comes on top of figures from the Scottish Retail Consortium that show the worst December of trading since at least 1999—despite my best efforts. We know that consumer confidence is low, that sales are declining and that cost pressures remain intense. We know, too, from the Scottish Chambers of Commerce survey that business confidence is low. That is due in part to the euro zone crisis, but it is also due to public sector spending cuts. The SCC warns that there are few signs of improvement and that many companies expect to cut jobs in 2012. The situation is undoubtedly grim, but that is all the more reason why we should strive to mitigate the impact that it will have on our people and communities. Therefore, like other members, I very much welcome the renewed focus on our cities. There is little to disagree with in the overarching principles of the strategy: improving connectivity and sustainability, developing knowledge and enhancing cities as appealing places in which to live, work and play. None of us disagrees with any of that—except, perhaps, Patrick Harvie. I know that for my constituency of Dumbarton—and, indeed, for the whole of the west of Scotland—to thrive, we need a vibrant and thriving Glasgow. Academics tell us that, as do experts who work in economic development. The same is true for each of the regions surrounding our six cities, so it is spurious to demand that the jam, such as it is, be spread even more thinly across non-city local authorities. Although I welcome the £5 million that the cabinet secretary announced in December and the further £2 million that she has announced today, I am sure that she will acknowledge that, in the face of the scale of the challenge that lies ahead, that funding is just a drop in the ocean. I welcome her recognition that it is a catalyst, rather than the totality of the resource that is available. Of course, the context is that of a real-terms cut in the local government settlement. The SNP is always keen to tell us that local government has an increased share of the budget. That is all well and good, but it does not fit with the information from the Scottish Parliament information centre, which tells us that the budget for local government will decline by 6.1 per cent over the course of the spending review period, while the overall Scottish Government budget will decline by 2.7 per cent, so I ask the SNP not to tell me that local government is somehow getting a better deal. We need to be honest and recognise the challenge that we face. I turn to the cities growth fund that was established by the Labour Scottish Executive, which, as we know, amounted to £173 million over a four to five-year period. The ambitions then were very similar to the ambitions that are set out in the present Government’s cities strategy. The difference would appear to be in the scale of the resourcing. What additional resources does the cabinet secretary envisage being directed to our cities that will enable them to do what we all want them to do, which is to step up a gear and put in place the very projects that will improve connectivity and harness the potential of our cities to grow our economy? I accept that funds are more limited now, but although I share her view that we need to ensure that every penny that is spent is spent well, we need to look seriously at providing extra investment for our cities. I understand from Richard Baker and Lewis Macdonald that in Aberdeen the focus should clearly be on the energy sector, including renewables. There are huge challenges to do with connectivity and broadband access that are severely hampering development. In Dundee, Jenny Marra rightly urged the creation of a high-level jobs task force to give more people in the city the opportunity to work, and Joe FitzPatrick rightly mentioned the Dundee waterfront project, which has transformed the cityscape and which, interestingly, was supported in its initial development by the cities growth fund. However, I say earnestly to Joe FitzPatrick that simply rolling up a dedicated fund into a general settlement inevitably reduces focus. The Government has acknowledged that by making two separate allocations amounting to £7 million, instead of rolling that money up in the local government settlement.

Losing the focus and rolling up specific funding into a general settlement does not work. The Government has accepted that by setting aside a separate £7 million for a new cities investment fund. For Glasgow, Drew Smith outlined the need for the air route development fund to help build our international links, the need for the Glasgow airport rail link and more besides. Sandra White highlighted Glasgow’s rich musical contribution: Celtic Connections starts today. I confess to some trepidation when she started to compare the cities strategy and its delivery to a kind of band. I had visions of the cabinet secretary as the lead singer, perhaps joining Jackson Carlaw in a duet. All our cities, but particularly Stirling, Inverness, Glasgow and Edinburgh, have a key role in attracting overseas tourists and pumping new money into the economy. We need to look to VisitScotland to do more in that regard. Jim Eadie rightly spoke about our academic and intellectual excellence and its importance to our economy and business. We need to support our academic institutions and ensure that they remain at the cutting edge of innovation and research. I say to the cabinet secretary that cities excite much passion, which has been demonstrated in the debate. We recognise their importance to our everyday lives, whether we live or work in a city, or enjoy the many and varied cultural diversions that our cities offer. Every member has recognised their importance to the economy. The cabinet secretary therefore has broad support for the cities strategy, but we urge her to put in place the resources that will make it real and let all our cities flourish.

I thank the cabinet secretary for providing an advance copy of her statement, and I join her in welcoming the deal that has been arrived at with the trade unions that represent Ambulance Service employees. I agree that it demonstrates that the priority of ambulance staff is their patients, not their personal gain. I have received several reports from paramedics that patient safety has been compromised as a result of the interim arrangements. I understand from those front-line staff that red emergency calls have been recategorised as yellow calls. The difference is that a red call is responded to within eight minutes, whereas a yellow call is responded to within 18 minutes. A red call merits a disturbance to the rest break, but a yellow call does not. However, the distinction in categorisation is driven not—I repeat, not—by a person’s condition but by where they phone. Someone could be having a heart attack. If they dial 999, it will be a red call, but if they call their general practitioner, their health centre or NHS 24, it will be a yellow call. Does the cabinet secretary share my disquiet at that news? Is that practice likely to continue in the future? I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that the importance of a call should depend on the severity of the symptoms, not the number that the person calls. Therefore, I ask her, in the interests of patient safety, to instruct an urgent and independent review of that revised system of categorisation.

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s most recent estimate is of the number of women in Scotland who have received breast implants manufactured by PIP. (S4F-00391)

I thank the First Minister for his helpful response. He will be aware that many private clinics refuse to accept any responsibility and are intent on charging thousands of pounds for removal of implants. How will the First Minister ensure that private clinics, which should not be let off the hook, meet their responsibility to their patients? In the event that he cannot do so, will he outline what safety net the NHS will provide for those women? Finally, will he agree to meet me and women who are affected to discuss their concerns?

If the Scottish Government takes its responsibilities seriously, why is there not one word on the matter in the Scottish budget?

As members will know, I am not often given to quoting David Cameron, but he was right when he said: “It’s fair that those with broader shoulders should bear a greater load.” Too true. He was of course talking in the context of the recession and the UK Government’s plan for recovery. What a shame it is that he did not really believe his own rhetoric. It took him less than a month to forget his promise of fairness when he embarked on swingeing public sector cuts of £81 billion, including £18 billion cuts to benefits. While the most affluent avoid paying taxes to the tune of £120 billion and bankers continue to award themselves huge bonuses, disabled people face the biggest attack on their rights in my lifetime. So, the reality of David Cameron’s new Tory Britain is that those with the broadest shoulders are the poor, the disabled, the sick and the elderly; it is certainly not the millionaires that he has around him in his Cabinet. The new Tories will tell you that we are of course all in it together, but clearly some of us are more in it than others. This is the single most significant attack on the welfare state in my lifetime. Let me be clear: I am not opposed to reform—the benefits system is overly complex and simplification is long overdue. However, the starting point for this reform is not fairness or supporting people back into work; it is purely about saving money, often from the most vulnerable in our communities. In Scotland, the cut amounts to £2 billion, which will have a direct impact on household spend and economic growth.

I thank the member for that intervention. Perhaps it was his Christmas party last night, too, and he is not firing on all cylinders, because if he had listened carefully he would know that we are not opposed to reform. Simplification of the benefits system is desirable. Helping people into work to make it much easier is desirable. However, what is being done is an attack on the poorest members of our society. There is no escape from that. The welfare reform proposals will result in increased levels of poverty in Scotland—make no mistake about that. I do not believe that the scale of that impact is fully understood yet, which is why I am so pleased that the Scottish Government accepted Labour’s amendment in the previous debate on welfare reform, because we explicitly rejected the legislative consent motion unless substantial changes were made to the UK legislation. Despite valiant efforts, even in the House of Lords, the shape of the bill, regrettably, remains largely unchanged. However, it would be churlish not to recognise some of the amendments that have been brought forward—for example, restoring mobility allowance to those in residential care and redefining underoccupancy in relation to housing benefit, although there is a suggestion that that will not survive the final reading in the House of Commons. Those amendments are indeed welcome, but they are but small drops of water in a vast desert. Therefore, we remain of the view that the legislative consent motion should not be supported. We accept the Health and Sport Committee’s view that in areas that are uncontentious, such as data sharing and industrial injuries benefit, it would be appropriate to consider an LCM. However, for those areas in which there is devolved responsibility, we want to see primary legislation in the Scottish Parliament. Can I at this stage fire a very gentle and friendly warning shot across the bows of the Scottish National Party? Just as the SNP was right to complain about the UK Government leaving everything to secondary legislation and not providing any detail, so would a similar approach be unacceptable to this chamber. Some voluntary organisations have questioned whether there is sufficient time for this chamber to legislate. They are worried about unintended consequences, and I acknowledge their concerns. Given what I know about the legislative process and the cabinet secretary’s determination, I believe that it is perfectly possible to legislate. However, the cabinet secretary may wish to provide reassurance about that when she sums up. I confess to not being entirely convinced about the idea of an ad hoc welfare committee, but a debate about form rather than substance is a distraction. Suffice it to say I believe that, as the cabinet secretary acknowledged, the Parliament excelled itself in its scrutiny of the welfare reform proposals. No less than three parliamentary committees and 23 individual members pored over the details over a number of months, which is considerably more than a single committee with perhaps as few as seven members could have achieved. I also genuinely worry about breaking the link between tackling poverty and promoting wellbeing that rests in the remit of the Health and Sport Committee. Ultimately, as the Presiding Officer knows, it is for the Parliamentary Bureau to consider the establishment of ad hoc committees, and with a Scottish National Party majority in the chamber and on the bureau, the proposal is likely to happen. However, ever the pragmatist, I hope that the SNP agrees that it is important for the Parliament as a whole to determine the remit of the new committee, hence Labour’s very reasonable amendment. We believe that the committee should consider the implementation of the Welfare Reform Bill and how we mitigate the impact where possible, what happens to passported benefits, and how those benefits that are now being devolved should be developed in principle and in practice. The implications that the ad hoc committee will need to consider are huge. The impact on social care is just one example. We know that local authority budgets are being squeezed. Many of them are, for the first time, cutting social care services and introducing charges. Many of the charges are determined by receipt of benefits such as disability living allowance. That very benefit will be cut by an arbitrary 20 per cent across the board. That will result in many vulnerable people, particularly those on the lower rate of DLA, no longer receiving benefit support and therefore being unable to pay for their services. The consequences will be felt by local government and by the voluntary sector, as they will be the ones to pick up the burden. Where is the money for that going to come from? Capability Scotland also highlighted another impact of the changes to DLA on the national health service. As the minister will know, many disabled people use their benefits to purchase and maintain their own wheelchair. If their benefits are cut in the future, their needs will have to be met by the Scottish wheelchair service, which struggles as it is to meet demand. What about those with a learning disability, the majority of whom are on the lower rate of DLA, who are entitled to passported benefits such as concessionary travel? We all know the benefits of travel for quality of life and in encouraging participation in community and society, but will that benefit continue? It is entirely in the gift of the Scottish Government for it to do so, but there is no confirmation of intent. There will be an impact on a wide range of devolved benefits: the blue badge scheme; free school meals; clothing grants; the energy assistance package; and lots more besides. The Welfare Reform Bill also proposes the devolution of some benefits to Scotland for the first time. Council tax benefit is being abolished, as we have heard, and responsibility is being transferred to Scotland, accompanied by a 10 per cent cut in the budget. I suspect that George Osborne and Danny Alexander might not be at the top of John Swinney’s Christmas card list, but Mr Swinney cannot simply blame the Tories and wash his hands of the matter; he needs to set out what he will do. Will he simply pass on the cut and leave local authorities to manage a diminishing budget, or will he meet the needs that exist in our communities? Will he find the money? Will the budget be ring fenced? Will it be available for local government to spend on other things if it chooses to do so? I have asked a number of parliamentary questions and I have yet to receive a straight answer—indeed, I have probably yet to receive any answer at all.

The SNP has control over those resources, and it has decisions to make on the essential character of how it intends to protect the most vulnerable in Scotland. We come to community care grants and crisis loans, now devolved to Scotland too. Who will be responsible for running that scheme? Will it be local government? Will it be the voluntary sector? Will there be national eligibility criteria? Will the scheme even have statutory underpinning? A million questions are raised but not a single answer is coming from the SNP and, of course, there are questions about childcare too. Let me touch briefly on housing benefit. We have witnessed reductions in allowances that have forced tenants, who are no longer able to afford the rent, out of their homes in the private care sector, with increasing homelessness as a result. Now substantial changes are proposed in the social rented sector, with the underoccupancy rule causing huge difficulty to housing and homelessness policies in Scotland. Many of the challenges that I have described are challenges for the Scottish Government. The decisions are its to make. It cannot blame anybody else; it is incumbent on the Government to live up to its responsibilities. When will the SNP bring forward proposals for the Parliament to consider? We have known about the Welfare Reform Bill for almost a year now, yet even the most basic questions have not been answered. What about the cost to the Scottish budget? Despite the protestations of the cabinet secretary, there is not one paragraph, not one sentence, not one word nor even a figure in the SNP Government’s 500-page budget document on that. The chamber well knows the SNP’s fondness for talking about its aspirations of independence as some magical cure for all ills; yet, for the party of independence, which wants control over the welfare state, not to have a view on the key aspects that are devolved to Scotland is, frankly, astonishing. Those who are more cynical than I am might suggest that it has more to do with the SNP playing its usual blame game. Because it is Christmas, and in the spirit of generosity, I will refuse to believe that and will set aside the desire to blame somebody else. However, I am left wondering about the Government’s snail-like response and the SNP’s competence. I move amendment S4M-01638.3, after “should be convened” to insert: “with a remit to consider the implementation of the Welfare Reform Bill insofar as it affects people in Scotland, in particular the impact on passported benefits and, where benefits are devolved, the principles and operation of these, complementing the work of other relevant committees in the Scottish Parliament, UK Parliament and devolved assemblies across the UK”.

Does the member recognise that reform accompanied by an arbitrary 20 per cent cut in disability living allowance is not the kind of reform that was envisaged by most decent-thinking people?

For the third time—perhaps he is hard of hearing—does Murdo Fraser not understand that we are in favour of reform because the system is overcomplicated but we are not in favour of a substantial reduction that takes money from some of the poorest in our communities?

Will the minister give way?

I remind the cabinet secretary that it was her support for a Labour amendment in October that places her in the position that she now occupies. She certainly reflected a different view than her own back benches. I invite her to clarify her comments because she seems to suggest that she will pass on the Westminster cuts. What is the point of having her in Holyrood if that is what she will do? Finally, the cabinet secretary has the power. She should bring it on. Bring the referendum to the chamber.

This week, the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy decided to close the Christie ward at the Vale of Leven hospital, which is a decision that has caused considerable distress in my community, with the lack of bed capacity at Gartnavel hospital leading to patients being boarded in Ayrshire, Lanarkshire and even Livingston. Is the First Minister aware that the cabinet secretary promised enhanced crisis intervention services, yet, in part of my constituency, those are available only in daylight hours? Will he agree to expand those services so that people who are suffering from acute mental illness are protected at all times?

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. Far be it from me to contribute to this debate at the last minute, but I felt that we could not mark this occasion with such a small number of speakers, even though their speeches were exceptional. First of all, I congratulate my colleague Siobhan McMahon on securing the debate, which I understand is the first ever in the Parliament on disability history month. Although the event has been going for two years, this is the first time that it has been recognised in Scotland. Nanette Milne was absolutely right to remind us of the legal aspects, changes to the law and Alf Morris’s considerable role in introducing disability legislation for the first time and creating the post of UK minister for the disabled. However, if this were simply a question of passing legislation, a lot of the issues that continue to trouble us today would have been resolved long ago. It is about mainstreaming approaches to equality and the treatment of equality, not only across the public sector but in the private sector and, indeed, in every part of society. I am very proud that this Parliament was very much founded on the principles of equality and that we have an Equal Opportunities Committee that is engaged in making progress on these issues. That is all to the good, because more progress needs to be made and we on these benches will work with the Government to ensure that that happens. That said, I cannot fail to reflect on the fact that, tomorrow morning, we will again debate welfare reform proposals that have emanated from the UK Government. I have no problem with reform of the welfare state, which is overly complicated and often cumbersome and difficult to work through. Simplifying it is not a problem, but applying a 20 per cent cut to disability living allowance in advance of anybody being assessed is surely wrong and unfair. I recall David Cameron saying in Parliament or in his Cabinet—I cannot remember quite where—that we did not need to worry and that the cuts, the changes to welfare and the consequences of the economic downturn would be borne by those with the broadest shoulders. Therefore, the disproportionate impact on disabled people is, frankly, astonishing. They will be hardest hit by the reforms. It is incumbent on members of the Scottish Parliament and our colleagues in the UK Parliament to change the proposals substantially and protect those people, who are perhaps some of the most vulnerable people in our communities. We will discuss that further tomorrow. The debate has been extremely useful. I would like us to consider—I am sure that the minister will point the way—how we can make a huge difference to the lives and experience of disabled people in Scotland, not just through legislation or mainstreaming approaches, but in practical ways.

This debate on the integration of health and social care is extremely welcome, albeit long overdue. I believe that the cabinet secretary’s view of what the objectives should be in providing better—and better integrated—health and social care is shared across the chamber. We also agree on the important role to be played by all the stakeholders: not just the NHS and the local authorities, but the third and independent sectors and the many community groups such as those that operate in my local area to support older people in their community. I do not think that anyone would disagree that the care of our older people is probably the most pressing social policy concern in this session of Parliament. No one can doubt the scale of the challenge that we face or the significance of the demographic change that we are experiencing. We will undoubtedly trade our favourite statistics during the course of the debate, but it is worth repeating some of them. There will be an increase of 40 per cent in the number of people aged 65 to 74 in the next 20 years, and a staggering 83 per cent increase in the number of those over 75. Scotland’s population is getting older, and people are living longer. We are thankful for the advances in medicine that have contributed to that trend, but it also creates a different set of challenges for us. I recall reading somewhere that, if we did nothing in the face of those changes, we would need at least 6,000 more NHS beds and about double the existing budget simply to stand still and meet the likely demand. Doing nothing is clearly not an option. Let me digress for a minute, because it is important to make it clear that not all our older people need care. About 90 per cent of them are sustained in their own homes and communities, with very limited input from care services. We should therefore think about older people in the context not only of their care but of the contribution that they make to our communities, through their experience, time and knowledge. Many of them are the volunteers who make our communities strong, but they need to know that, should the time come when they need care, it will be there for them. Scottish Labour started thinking seriously about the challenges more than 18 months ago. We set out our policy intentions last October, and followed that up with an expert group chaired by Sir John Arbuthnott and drawing in members with expertise in health and adult social care. I am grateful to them for their contribution in helping to shape the agenda before us today. At the outset, we recognised that older people were falling through the gaps between health and social care. They were ending up in emergency care unnecessarily, often because of a lack of integrated care on the ground. We need look no further than our constituency postbags to find evidence of that. We have seen a postcode lottery of care, costs shunted between different public organisations, differential charging and an emerging lack of fairness and equity. In an early Labour-led debate on Scotland’s older people, we set out our view of the future. We said that the way to cope with the demographic change in relation to the care of older people was to integrate health and social care by having local services and local accountability. Based on reformed community health partnerships, and involving general practitioners much more in the design and commissioning of local services, delivery would be focused on the needs of the older person. We suggested the need for a national framework, ending the postcode lottery of care and delivering better quality and better outcomes for older people. We also said that there needed to be one budget in order to stop health and local government playing pass the parcel with people’s care. We went further, advocating a charter for care in Scotland to set out what an individual could expect in terms of outcome, equity and quality. I commend that to the cabinet secretary. Members might be forgiven for thinking that that is all remarkably similar to the newly published Scottish National Party proposals. Let me reprise some of them. They include a national framework with agreed outcomes, an end to cost shunting, reform of CHPs, and clinical leadership. People say that imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, so I am flattered. However, in the spirit of consensus, I say that I am pleased that the Scottish Government has taken much of our approach forward. We will work with it to ensure that any future system of social care is fair and robust. We would have gone further because our vision was for a national care service as radical as the creation of the NHS, bringing fairness and raising standards in the provision of care. The SNP would have members believe that we were creating another quango or bureaucratic monolith, but that deliberately misunderstands the proposal. There would be no new body and no more civil servants; it would be about having national care standards for services that are delivered locally, which is a model that is currently used in the health service. It might suit the Government politically to rubbish Labour’s proposal, but there is no doubt that key elements of what we proposed previously are before us today, and I welcome that. The devil, of course, will be in the detail and we stand ready to engage positively in the debate. As I said earlier, we suggested a national framework because of the inconsistency of service provision. We have 32 local authorities, different eligibility criteria and different costs—in short, we have 32 different ways of doing things. We have seen the cost shunting that goes on between local authorities and health boards, whereby officials will openly say that they are cutting a social care budget because health will pick up the costs. Both are public sector bodies that use taxpayers’ money, but in many areas they are fundamentally unable to work together. Where is the focus on prevention, never mind on the person needing care? All that has to stop. We cannot afford to play pass the parcel any longer. I know that local authorities are struggling financially. For the first time, many of them are making substantial cuts and introducing charges for services, which are resulting in some older people cancelling services such as community alarms because they are worried about whether they will be able to afford the cost. Neighbouring local authorities are taking different approaches to charging. I am bored raising the fact that a service costs £30 in one area but right next door the same service is £300. I first raised that point almost three years ago, but it is as true today as it was then. The Learning Disability Alliance Scotland provided us with illustrations for a previous debate as evidence. The criteria for charging vary widely. For example, Argyll and Bute considers 100 per cent of somebody’s income, but across the water in Inverclyde only 25 per cent of their income is considered. How about the hourly rates for home care, which is just one social care service? The picture is one of different costs. In West Lothian, home care is £7.76 per hour, but in Angus it is £22 per hour, which is three times the amount. Clearly, that is not fair. It would therefore be useful to know whether the cabinet secretary envisages the framework dealing with those inconsistencies and considering matters of eligibility, charging and outcomes. I agree with her that Scotland is not such a vast country that we should experience such wide variations and injustice in the provision of social care. Whether someone lives in my constituency in Dumbarton or in Dunbar, Dingwall or Dumfries, they deserve a care system that supports them to live as independently as possible and which offers access to the best-quality care possible. The basis of the system and how much people pay for it must be fair. That brings me to the next point. When we access the NHS, we are provided with publicly delivered services that are based on need and free at the point of delivery. However, the culture in social care is different. Social care is rationed, prioritised, charged for and often delivered by the independent sector. Clearly, those different approaches and cultures need to be thought through. There is the need for a wider debate about how we afford and pay for care in the future. I wonder whether the cabinet secretary has considered the outcome of the Dilnot inquiry. What approach does she believe that we need to adopt in the future to ensure the sustainability of care? Preventing older people from requiring care in the first place is of course the real prize. I hope that that will feature explicitly in the outcomes in the national framework. It is the case that current eligibility is increasingly determined by the severity of need. That is understandable, but there are swathes of people with lower-level needs who will not be provided with a service because budgets are too tight. Even though we know that prevention is cost effective and that it is much better for the individual to be sustained in their own homes and community without the need for more formal care, we also know that cuts are being made to some community-based services that do not cost a lot of money but have such a huge impact on the potential for long-term savings. It is a matter of regret that such early intervention work and upstream activity, which is key to prevention, remains an aspiration rather than a reality. I hope that the cabinet secretary will use the national framework to change that. I want to explore with the cabinet secretary how accountability will be delivered. We were clear that clinicians have to have greater involvement in the planning and commissioning of services, and we envisaged a system of local democratic accountability in which councillors would be given oversight in a context of reformed CHPs and reporting to ministers. Given that much of what the cabinet secretary has outlined relates to delivery by local agreement, how will she monitor progress towards achieving outcomes? Concern has already been expressed that single outcome agreements are not sufficiently robust to deal with the issue, lack independent scrutiny and contain little sanction for failure. What power does the cabinet secretary have to ensure that all areas make the progress that we want them to make? On a different note, I understand that integration of health and social care is to be focused on older people. I agree with that move and welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to the principle of applying that approach more generally to adult social care. In the final moments remaining to me, I want to welcome the fact that, 10 months on and with a change of minister and a more robust approach from the cabinet secretary, it has been recognised that legislative underpinning is needed. That conversion from the position outlined in Shona Robison’s press release on 2 February is very welcome; indeed, such a move is necessary if we are to make the proposals work. The issue is too important for us to fail. After all, the debate is ultimately all about people. It is about supporting and caring for our older people, providing that care, involving older people in shaping it, driving up standards and ensuring that we have care of the very best possible quality. Our social care system needs to be overhauled and today we are taking some welcome steps in that direction. However, we must continue to focus on the delivery of fairness, certainty and top-quality care for all Scotland’s people. I move amendment S4M-01585.1, to insert at end: “, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s acceptance of the need for legislative underpinning following the conclusions of the Expert Group on Future Options for Social Care established by Scottish Labour.”

We are mindful of the issue of self-directed support, too. Does the member believe that self-directed support can apply to health services as well as to social care, given that some people who receive that support will enjoy services from both areas?

I think that the member would be well advised to change his last comment. [Laughter.]

I welcome the work of the Long Term Conditions Alliance Scotland and its approach to self-management, which is supported by the Government. In relation to another long-term condition, what action and resources are in place from the Government to deal with chronic pain?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the balance of spending between administrators, beds and nursing staff in the NHS. (S4F-00357)

This week, the Auditor General reported that half of the 2,500 national health service staff who have left their jobs since 2009 are nurses and midwives. Does the First Minister agree with the comments of the Scotland Patients Association’s chief executive, Dr Jean Turner, that “It is crazy to train them and then lose their expertise and experience.”

Just like you.

11. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will maintain the level of council tax benefit going to local authorities in any revised system from April 2013, despite a 10 per cent reduction in the funding transferred by the United Kingdom Government. (S4O-00499)

I thank the new minister for his response. Given the critical importance of council tax benefit to people on low incomes, I am sure that he shares my regret at the 10 per cent cut that the UK Government has imposed on it. However, I believe that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has been told to expect the cut to be passed on. As it is so close to Christmas, will the new minister take the opportunity to protect the most vulnerable people in our community and keep council tax benefit at current levels, or is COSLA right that he is simply going to pass on the cut?

When I think back to the inception of the Scottish Parliament, I recall early debates on the challenge of tackling domestic abuse and violence against women. Since then, there has been significant investment in—and attention from all parties on the provision of—services for women and children who experience domestic abuse, their protection in law and the real prize, which is preventing the abuse from happening in the first place. That consensus and that focus have been invaluable in allowing us to make progress. I associate myself with the minister’s comments on the cross-party group on men’s violence against women and children and the commitment of its new convener, Malcolm Chisholm. It is always worth while to remind ourselves of the scale of the challenge that we face. Domestic abuse affects thousands upon thousands of people. There have been 51,926 reported cases since last year alone, and 80 per cent of them were women. It impacts on women in each and every part of the country and women from all backgrounds—rich and poor, working class and middle class alike. It is unfortunately the case that one woman in four will experience domestic abuse in some point in her lifetime. It is right that, in the early years of the Parliament, we focused on securing services and put in place the domestic abuse service development fund, with £11.5 million to provide a much-needed increase in refuge accommodation so that, wherever a woman lived in Scotland, she would have access to safe, supported accommodation—a place of refuge. We also recognised the need to provide support for children who are caught up in such circumstances. We developed a network of children’s support workers to help those children work through the trauma of experiencing domestic abuse. Then came the pilot domestic abuse courts, which have made a significant and positive difference to the approach of the legal system. I hope that they will be extended elsewhere, most notably to the other cities. That was followed by the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001, which, members will recall, was ably taken forward by my former Labour colleague Maureen Macmillan on behalf of the Justice 1 Committee. It ensured that powers of arrest were attached to interdicts. We then saw the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005, the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Act 2011 and the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Act 2011. Members will recall that the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill was introduced by my Labour colleague Rhoda Grant. It built on Maureen Macmillan’s earlier efforts and strengthened the process of obtaining interdicts. In all that work, we have been encouraged and advised by organisations such as Scottish Women’s Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland, Zero Tolerance and many others. Their views and experiences informed and shaped the approach that was taken by the previous Government, as they inform and shape the approach that is taken today by the current Government. I join the minister in congratulating Scottish Women’s Aid on its 35th anniversary. I recall that one of my first ministerial engagements in 1999, as a brand new and fresh minister, was to speak at a Women’s Aid rally. It was clear that I had not done something right, because the civil servant who accompanied me almost died of shock when I joined the march and demonstration before speaking. That was certainly a first for him and I suspect that it was a ministerial first in Scotland. The timing of today’s debate is fitting, as 25 November was the international day for the elimination of violence against women. It also marked the start of 16 days of activism against gender-based violence, which end on 10 December—international human rights day. That makes it clear that violence against women is a human rights violation. The United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Human Rights Act 1998 and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child all provide a framework for action on violence against women and children. The challenge that lies ahead is about prevention—how we stop violence against women or at least reduce its incidence. That requires understanding of the causes, education, awareness raising and nothing short of societal change. That is easy to say but much more difficult to deliver. The groundbreaking and hard-hitting advertising campaigns that we all remember, which run on television and radio particularly at this time of year, must continue. However, we need to build on that and take other action, too. As I am sure many other members were, I was struck by the letter to Santa initiative from the violence reduction unit and Children 1st, which starkly highlights the impact of domestic abuse on children and young people. No one can fail to be moved or challenged by the contents of the heartbreaking letter from a young boy to Santa, which many members will have seen in today’s Daily Record. Most children wish for toys or gadgets whereas, in that devastating letter, a young boy begged for an end to the violence that blighted his childhood. The organisations in that initiative revealed that, last Christmas and new year, cases of domestic violence rocketed to 9,812, compared with 7,900 in the previous year.

That comment shows a lack of understanding of the complexity of domestic abuse. I encourage Mike MacKenzie to look further into some of the causes. It is too easy simply to blame alcohol. We need to deal with an underlying societal problem, so I encourage him to consider the complexity further. Earlier in the week, we heard about a study that was undertaken by eight young people who had been victims of domestic abuse and who came together in the voice against violence project. Their study revealed some shocking attitudes—one in 10 young people thinks that it is okay for a girlfriend or boyfriend to force them to have sex and 28 per cent would accept violence from a partner. It is clear that we need to make education a priority. If we can shift attitudes early, we have a chance of preventing the unacceptably high levels of violence against women. I remember the Zero Tolerance respect materials that were used in primary and secondary schools and I welcome the updated resources and websites aimed at schools and young people that were launched in June. However, the funding for that project has ended and the websites are not being refreshed. What support is available for teachers who are struggling with a wide curriculum and who want to use such materials in schools? If we are serious about the issue, we need to adopt a much more systematic approach to delivering preventative education in our schools. I commend the National Union of Students for its campaign to tackle violence against women. Its “Hidden Marks” report found that one in seven female students had been the victim of serious sexual assault while at university or college, that 14 per cent had been stalked and that 60 per cent of cases of sexual assault involved another student. The NUS has taken robust action, is looking at creating zero tolerance organisations and accepts its responsibility to help end the culture of acceptability by challenging the behaviours that I described. The task that we face is ending the culture of acceptability in our schools, colleges and universities, on our streets and in our homes. We will do that by working with those who have expertise, such as Women’s Aid, Zero Tolerance, Rape Crisis and young people who have been shaped by their experiences. We must harness their knowledge and match their determination to create change. The challenge for us to meet is to ensure that it is never in any circumstances acceptable to use violence against women. Prevention is indeed a means to an end and is absolutely the right approach. We will work with the Government in seeking to end violence against women. I move amendment S4M-01523.1, to insert after “victims”: “building on the work taken forward under the previous Labour/Liberal Democrat administration that was informed and shaped by the views and experiences of a wide range of women’s organisations including enacting the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001 and the Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005, the establishment of a National Group to Address Domestic Abuse in Scotland and a comprehensive national strategy, including substantially increased funding and a groundbreaking advertising campaign aimed at changing wider public attitudes as well as encouraging reporting of abuse”.

On that point, will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take a brief intervention?

Thank you, Presiding Officer—I thank the minister, too. [Laughter.] That was wonderful, Presiding Officer. I take the minister back to guidance from SNH, which is important, on the proximity of wind farms to national parks. What role does he envisage for the national parks and SNH in looking at wind farm applications?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has any discussion with the families of victims prior to deciding not to proceed with a case. (S4O-00375)

The Lord Advocate may be aware of the case of Dean Geary, who tragically died outside Gartocharn on 6 February last year. A related case was due to be heard in Stirling sheriff court. It was dropped, but Dean’s parents found out about that only through the media. Given that a lack of information to the family has characterised that case, will the Lord Advocate be good enough to agree to meet me and Mr and Mrs Geary to discuss their experience?

I am very pleased to lead the debate on protecting the NHS. It is true to say that the NHS is probably one of our most-valued public institutions. We are all very grateful to the staff who care for us and our relatives daily, contributing to the NHS that we know and love: the doctors, nurses, laboratory technicians, porters, cleaners, occupational therapists and so many more besides. All of them play a critical role in the patient journey and are central to the quality of healthcare and the experience of patients. I think that that view will be shared across the chamber. I say at the outset that I regret the tone of the Scottish National Party amendment. It is inaccurate, but what is perhaps more worrying is that it reflects a degree of complacency about how wonderful things are that is absolutely not mirrored by the experience of health service workers on the ground. It is incumbent on politicians of all parties to be honest. People understand that times are tough. They understand that budgets are tight—for goodness’ sake, it is happening to families across Scotland, too—yet they are treated to spin, fudge and dissembling. I recognise the tactic in the SNP amendment: in a tight corner, blame somebody else. In fact, SNP members are masters at playing the blame game; they excel in the it-wisnae-me school of politics. However, the NHS is just too important to play those kinds of games with. I want to shatter two myths that the Scottish Government is fond of peddling. The first is that it protects health service spending and the second is that there are more staff in the NHS now under the SNP than there were under Labour when we were last in office. Let me start by talking about resources. The SNP makes great play of protecting the NHS. It promised increased spending and promised to pass on the Barnett consequentials. It added up all the money and stuck a figure up on a billboard, which the First Minister unveiled during the election. There was a veritable plethora of promises, one surpassing the other—promises, promises, promises. Perhaps someone can explain to me why, when health funding was rising under the previous United Kingdom Labour Government, the SNP failed to pass those increases on. Let me see, the rises in England were an average of almost 6.7 per cent year on year, yet the SNP passed on an average of only 4.1 per cent. Historically, the SNP has not passed on the extra money for health, leaving the NHS in a weaker position to deal with the cuts. Perhaps someone can also explain to me why there is a real-terms cut in funding. There is a cut of some £319 million over the spending review period. Those are not my figures but independent analysis by the Scottish Parliament information centre.

We did, indeed, agree that all the Barnett consequentials should have been passed on. I made that commitment in the chamber—the member can check the Official Report. However, what the SNP provided was not an increase, as promised, but a cut. When we consider that health service inflation runs at more than 4 per cent, we begin to understand the scale of the challenge ahead. It will be tough for health boards. They are faced with ever-increasing demand on services and a declining budget. It does not take a rocket scientist to work out that it will be difficult for them to spread their resources even more thinly without that having an impact on patient care. Rather than acknowledging that openly, the SNP simply changes its mantra from, “We are protecting health,” to, “We are protecting health boards.” Yet, is the SNP doing that? The briefing from the Royal College of Nursing prior to this debate is instructive. Again, we see that some of the so-called new money passed on to health boards is not that at all: it is in effect money that has already been committed. The briefing points to the £76 million of waiting times funding that has simply been transferred from one health directorate budget heading to another—from non-recurring funding in 2011-12 to health boards core recurring funding allocations for 2012-13. Removing the impact of that money, which the RCN points out is not new funding, on health boards means that their combined cash uplift drops to 1.6 per cent. If we look again, we see that, for the first time, the cost of delivering healthcare in the prison service is being transferred from justice to health without the corresponding transfer of resource. That will cost the health service an additional £20 million a year. Strip that out and we are left with an uplift of 1.4 per cent set against inflation pressures of more than 4 per cent. Even a primary school child can understand that arithmetic. Simply transferring already committed money from one heading to another and pointing like a conjurer at what you want people to see does not hide the reductions elsewhere. The alcohol treatment and tobacco control budget lines have reduced by £3 million in real terms, the mental health budget line is down in real terms, the budget for specialist children’s services is down in real terms, and the clean hospitals and MRSA line is down in real terms, too. Let us have an honest debate about what our priorities in health should be, because the money is not there. Demand is increasing, resources are decreasing and we cannot just stick our heads in the sand. The second substantive issue that I want to raise is staffing. It is truly astonishing and breathtaking that the SNP expects us to believe that, while there are unprecedented cuts to staffing levels, it is still somehow protecting the NHS. Since 2009, 4,000 staff have been cut from the NHS. Some 1,700 of those are nurses and a further 1,000 nurses will be out by the end of the year. However, it is not just nurses. There are fewer occupational therapists, fewer speech and language therapists and fewer physiotherapists. Numbers have declined across many staff groups, and the situation is worse than the figures suggest because they include posts that are frozen and unfilled. The staff left behind are having to shoulder the burden, pick up the pieces and cope with the increasing workload. It is interesting that staff reporting of safety concerns has risen in the same period. The Government cannot remove that level of staffing without having an impact on front-line patient care. I know that, in the modern world and in the Parliament, too, we like to talk about outcomes, but let me talk about some old measurements that should give us an early warning of the problems that lie ahead. The number of operations cancelled by health boards is up. Bed numbers are being reduced, which is not in itself a bad thing except that the data show that readmissions are going up in cases where people have to go back into hospital because they were discharged too early. If members are not convinced by any of that, let me tell them about the RCN survey of employment and morale. Less than a third of nurses felt that nursing will continue to offer them a secure job. Two years ago, the figure was 82 per cent. Some 74 per cent reported increased stress at work and 66 per cent were more worried about job cuts than they were a year ago. Members will remember that the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy is fond of telling us that there are more nurses in the NHS than there were when Labour left office. She has repeated that mantra time and again, and her boss, the one and only Alex Salmond, who was keen to get in on the act, said in the chamber on the day before the summer recess began: “The protection of the health budget has meant that, even in these difficult times, health” unemployment—sorry, I mean employment; that was a Freudian slip— “in every single category—through medical consultants, general practitioners, dentists and nurses to allied health professionals—is substantially up today on the level that we inherited in 2007.”—[Official Report, 30 June 2011; c 1270.] That is simply not the case. The First Minister and his Government are coming to believe their own propaganda. His statement is a complete fantasy and has no basis in fact. The Government’s own statistics on workforce numbers demonstrate that one has to go back to before 2006 to find fewer nurses and midwives in our hospital wards and communities. The SNP has taken us back almost six years and there are even more cuts in nurse numbers to come. The SNP promised to protect the health budget and promised that there would be no compulsory redundancies, but we are seeing a real-terms cut in the health budget and thousands of staff are being shown the door. Those are real cuts that are happening to our health service right now. The SNP’s promises on the NHS are sounding hollow to me. Back in 2010, the SNP had an election slogan, “More nats, fewer cuts”, to which Scottish Labour replied, “More nats, fewer nurses”, a claim that the SNP vigorously denied. I take no comfort in being right but, today, there are more nationalists in the chamber and, regrettably, fewer nurses in Scotland’s hospitals. I believe that we are on the brink of a crisis in the NHS, but do not take my word for it. This is what the RCN had to say about the workload and morale of staff: It is “at breaking point”. It is time that we had an honest debate about the challenges that the health service faces. The SNP must stop spinning and wake up to the reality of staff struggling to cope in hospital wards, health centres and communities across the country. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern that, since 2009, almost 4,000 whole-time-equivalent NHS staff have left their jobs, including more than 1,700 nurses and midwives, leaving the number of nursing and midwifery posts in Scotland’s NHS at its lowest point since 2006; further notes that the latest NHS workforce statistics also show a decline in other workforce categories, including consultants and allied health professionals; notes that the declining trend in Scotland’s NHS workforce began prior to 2011-12, at a time when the overall Scottish budget was rising; believes that the proposed £319 million real-terms cut to the overall health budget over the spending review period threatens further frontline job losses, including the reduction of nearly 1,000 whole-time-equivalent nurses and midwifery posts that have already been projected by NHS boards in the current financial year; further believes that such a rapid and disproportionate reduction cannot be explained by changes to service delivery and that it will impact adversely on the care of patients as well as the workloads and morale of remaining staff described as being at "breaking point" by the Royal College of Nursing in Scotland, and calls on the Scottish Government to take responsibility for its own cuts and to accept that such a deep and disproportionate loss of frontline healthcare professionals is not compatible with protecting Scotland’s NHS.

Nonsense. Not true.

The Scottish Labour Party manifesto might not be bedtime reading for the cabinet secretary, but would she accept that it contains an absolute commitment to pass on all the Barnett consequentials to protect health spending?

Will the member take an intervention?

I start by apologising to members for the fact that I will be unable to be in the chamber for the closing speeches. I have, of course, sought your permission for that, Presiding Officer, and am grateful that you have graciously agreed. I will study the Official Report with considerable interest to read the speeches that I will miss when I am absent. I welcome the opportunity to debate rehabilitation and reablement. I welcome the minister’s comments about a national delivery plan, which I will touch on later. There is considerable support on Labour benches for both approaches, which are, of course, complementary, with rehabilitation involving services that are designed to help with recovery after a hospital stay, getting the person better more quickly and enabling them to return to their own home sooner, and reablement involving services that restore independence to people and enable them to manage their own condition, which decreases hospital admissions and reliance on home care support—it is very much a case of doing it for oneself rather than having someone else do it. The attraction of both approaches is self-evident. When money is tight, getting people out of acute beds by providing focused rehabilitation that continues in a community setting saves money. Enablement provides for more self-care, saving money on hospital admissions and lessening the need for home care. Much more importantly, it is also better for the individual. Studies tell us that enablement leads to better health and social care outcomes, improved physical functioning and the restoration of independence. There is no argument about the principle of or the direction of travel for approaches that are founded on rehabilitation and reablement; as ever, the test is how that is delivered on the ground. There is a pressing need to get this right, as the minister says. We all know the statistics about the growing population and changing demographics. The number of people over 75 is set to increase by 23 per cent by 2018 and by a staggering 84 per cent by 2033. In my view, this is the biggest challenge that we face in public policy, and I am genuinely worried that we do not yet have in place all the elements that we need in order to meet that challenge. We should of course be empowering our older people to live active and full lives and preventing them from coming into contact with the formal care system for as long as possible. When they need help, there needs to be access to home care, to reablement and to rehabilitation. There is no doubt that, for rehabilitation and reablement to work well, teams need to be integrated between health and social care. Nurses and allied health professionals such as occupational therapists, physiotherapists and speech and language therapists all have a critical role to play, working alongside social care staff. I very much agree with the minister’s positive comments about allied health professionals. Better integration is indeed required if we are to get the relationship with social care right. However, some seven months after the election, I am still waiting to hear the detail of the Scottish National Party’s proposals on how integration will be achieved. Scotland’s older people cannot afford to wait much longer. I urge on the minister a greater pace of change. In recognising the importance of allied health professionals, how will the SNP deliver on a challenging agenda while it is presiding over a decline in workforce numbers? The numbers of occupational therapists, physiotherapists, speech and language therapists and podiatrists are down. Since the high point in 2009, the numbers have declined year on year. In reality the position is worse, because the figures do not include vacancies in posts that have, in effect, been frozen or maternity leave. I know that the minister was an occupational therapist, but the workforce is predominantly female and maternity leave levels are higher. The royal colleges have made the point that the workforce statistics mask a change in the skills mix, with the numbers in lower-paid grades increasing and less-qualified staff providing care. In some cases that might be appropriate, but it is not appropriate if it diminishes the quality of care. There are also huge problems for newly-qualified professionals in finding employment, but there remain long waiting times for services in many areas throughout Scotland. I will give members a flavour of what is happening. In a 2011 survey, speech and language therapists said that health boards were widely operating a policy of natural wastage and downgrading and freezing posts. The therapists talked about reductions in service. They said that there is less speech and language therapy coverage on wards, that they are increasingly “firefighting”, and that waiting lists and times are growing, particularly for people with communication disability. Some 93 per cent of physiotherapists said that they are required to make savings from the budget, and 43 per cent expected the cuts to have a negative impact on services. Some 80 per cent of managers reported that vacancy management is preventing recruitment to most if not all posts and 87 per cent reported an increased workload in the past year. I think that all members would agree with the 100 per cent of respondents who said that they expect demand for physiotherapy to increase; almost 70 per cent thought that they do not have the resources to meet demand. There is a difficult backdrop for allied health professionals who want to deliver on the agenda that the Government and the Labour Party want. What action will the minister take to ensure that he arrests the decline in numbers among the people who have such a central role to play in rehabilitation and reablement? What action will he take to tackle waiting times—which he acknowledged are sometimes considerable—for essential services, which will be so important in shifting the balance of care? The minister is a former occupational therapist and he will bring to the issue welcome understanding and insight. I also welcome the national delivery plan that he announced, but I wonder whether it will address all the concerns that have been expressed and I encourage him to make the scope as broad as possible. The second issue that I want to raise is about the nature of reablement teams. Throughout the country, the teams that are being established and the staff recruited are—I think without exception—the preserve of the public sector. However, the independent and voluntary sector are the principal providers of care in most homes and communities throughout Scotland. In anticipation of the reablement agenda, many organisations in those sectors have been investing in training their staff to fulfil some of the reablement roles that the Government envisages. However, none of them has been involved in any way whatever. I do not want to think that that is deliberate; I think that it is perhaps an oversight. Whatever the reason, I will be grateful if the minister gives further consideration to the matter. The third issue that I want to raise with the minister is the change fund for older people’s services. I think that we would all acknowledge that £70 million is but a small fraction of the £4.5 billion spent on social care, and the test—again—will be the change that that pot of money generates. There is some disquiet about the operation of the change fund so far and concerns about substitution. John Downie of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has said: “The funds must not simply be spent on the same or alternative means of providing existing services or be used by local authorities and NHS Boards to plug existing funding gaps.” There are concerns on the ground that that is, indeed, what is happening. There are also concerns that the change fund is not focused on prevention, which I think we all acknowledge is the way forward in lowering public spending and improving outcomes. Only something like 18 per cent of the spend is currently identified for prevention. What is perhaps even more worrying is the discovery that the change fund is heading for a £12 million underspend, with real fears that it will end up being more than that. It would appear that only £10 million—one seventh of the change fund—has been spent in the first half of the year and that local authorities are going to attempt, valiantly I am sure, to spend £60 million in the remaining six months. The difficulty with that is that it seems to be more about getting money out the door quickly than about considering what it is best spent on. I invite the minister to consider whether there is a better way of doing that and of enabling some of the money to be carried forward into the next financial year. The minister will be aware of another challenge in helping people to stay in their own homes, which is the apparent reduction in budgets for aids and adaptations. Often, a small piece of equipment or an adjustment to a home is enough to give people the control and independence that they need to remain in their home and community. However, waiting times for them appear to be lengthening, people are facing charges that were not there before and local authority budgets are tightening.

I am about to share with members an example of something that happened in the context of registered social landlords. A family had to wait a year for vital assistance, which resulted in their child having to be readmitted to hospital because the registered social landlord and the local authority, working together, were unable to provide timely support in the way of aids and adaptations. The minister will have the support of Labour members if he can improve at all the situation in that regard. Finally, I want to address the issue of delayed discharge. I am sure that we would all agree that this area requires further action. I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy announced to the Scottish National Party conference that she wants to reduce delayed discharge to two weeks, and I support her in that aspiration. However, there is an immediate problem. Having reached zero through the successful delayed discharge plan that the previous Labour Administration implemented and that the SNP carried on, we are now starting to see delayed discharge figures going the wrong way.

In a minute. Despite a promise made in the chamber by the minister’s predecessor, Shona Robison, that the number of waits of more than six weeks would be zero, 95 patients were delayed for six weeks according to the July 2011 census, compared with just 12 in April 2011. The overall number of those awaiting discharge was 722. Again, that is up on the previous quarter’s figure. In addition, we have received quite disturbing reports that consultants are being encouraged to designate patients as having complex needs so that they do not appear on the quarterly statistics. I hope that that is not a case of an SNP hidden waiting list.

Had the member cared to listen carefully, he would know that the plan and the resources were actually put in place by the previous Labour Administration and, to its credit, continued by the SNP. So, we took the action that was required to deliver on the zero target. Now, surely, this is something on which the Parliament can unite. To have an older person in a hospital bed for longer than they need to be is not something that we on the Labour benches want to see and I hope that Kevin Stewart joins me in that. Integrating health and social care is the route to eradicating delayed discharge. Rehabilitation and reablement teams will help with that, too, but the challenge is great and the minister must get delivery right on the ground. There is clearly more work to do in that regard. I hope that the minister knows that we will help him on that journey as a critical friend, urging him to do more. The prize for us all is great indeed, because this is about providing dignity and security for our older people along with the right care, at the right time, so that we enable them to live full and active lives. I move amendment S4M-01262.1, to insert at end: “; believes that allied health professionals (AHP) perform a central role in rehabilitation and re-ablement as well as in delivering quality NHS services and the preventative health agenda more generally; therefore notes concerns expressed by the various Royal Colleges regarding reducing budgets and skills mix in the AHP sector as well as severe recruitment problems for newly qualified professionals in recent years, and calls on the Scottish Government to address these issues as a matter of urgency.”

Does Nanette Milne agree that if health service inflation is taken into account, there is in fact a real-terms reduction in the health budget of £319 million? That has been confirmed by the Scottish Parliament information centre.

I do not recall the figure of £50 million. I certainly recall a leaked document from COSLA anticipating £140 million. Perhaps the member’s absence from COSLA has meant that it has been reduced by half.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member acknowledge that the plan to tackle delayed discharge and the resources to do so were put in place by the Labour Administration and were continued by the SNP, and that that is what has resulted in the improvements that we have seen?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am grateful to Mark McDonald for taking an intervention, and for highlighting that at the point when the SNP took over, the number of delayed discharges was 233. That was 233 too many, and there are currently 95 too many. It would be better if we agreed on how we get to zero, as the Scottish Government has so far failed to be consistent in its approach. I point Mark McDonald towards a statistic from 2009 that I used in order to give the SNP credit for achieving a high in the number of allied health professionals, while expressing my genuine disappointment that there has been a decline year on year in the number of the very people whom we want to deliver rehabilitation and reablement services.

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government is doing to ensure that respite provision for carers is available across Scotland. (S4F-00237)

I join the Deputy First Minister in acknowledging the valuable work that carers across Scotland do each and every day. However, does she share my disappointment that more than a third of Scottish councils are cutting respite provision for unpaid carers? Does she really believe that it is right that double-counting of respite care is taking place, with a seven-night stay in a residential home somehow counting as two and a half weeks of care? Finally, does she agree with her own Government’s statistical service, which has acknowledged the double-counting and in effect confirmed that Scotland’s carers have been misled and let down?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last wrote to national health service boards about their budget allocations for 2012-13. (S4O-00253)

The letter of 21 September to health boards showed that 80 per cent of the uplift allocated to them is, in fact, already committed to things such as waiting times and prison services, and is therefore not new money available for general use. Is it not therefore the case that, when the spin is stripped away, there is a real-terms cut in health spending?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement and thank her for an advance copy of it. We all agree that there should be no delay in responding to category A 999 calls, just as we all agree that ambulance staff deserve appropriate breaks. I note that negotiations are continuing and I hope that there will ultimately be a satisfactory outcome. I have three questions for the cabinet secretary. First, can she assure me that the halving of the Scottish Ambulance Service overtime budget will not impact on response times? There are real concerns about that, given that the budget has been relied on to provide the existing service and we know that the number of calls is growing. Secondly, the cabinet secretary will recall that, over a year ago, she took a trip to Belfast. It took that trip to expose the problems with the control rooms in the Scottish Ambulance Service. Despite assurances to the Parliament, there appear to have been a further five breakdowns in the control room telephony, leading to a possible fatality due to the delay. Can she give an update—if not today, perhaps in the future—on the arrangements to ensure that the control rooms are working effectively? Thirdly, members of the public, like me, will perhaps be surprised to learn that the Scottish Ambulance Service is not classed as an emergency service. That might make a difference to how rest breaks are considered. As part of the negotiations, will the cabinet secretary consider making appropriate parts of the Ambulance Service an emergency service?

The cabinet secretary is imagining things.

I welcome the opportunity to debate welfare reform and I congratulate the Government on finally bringing the matter to the chamber. Given the significance of the issues that are at stake, I am slightly surprised that it took so long for the Government to act, but I do not want to be churlish to start off. We in the Labour Party support the simplification of the welfare system and the use of benefits to ensure a smooth transition to employment. However, what we are currently witnessing has little to do with that or, for that matter, with fairness or social justice. It amounts to the single most significant attack on the welfare state in my generation; it is nothing short of a cover for cuts. A total of £18 billion has already been cut from out-of-work benefits and tax credits. In Scotland, the Fraser of Allander Institute suggests that the benefit cuts will amount to £2 billion, which will have a direct impact on household spend and growth. “It's fair those with broader shoulders should bear a greater load”. So said David Cameron to the Tory conference last year. Yet, in October 2010 the coalition Government announced public sector cuts of £81 billion, including £18 billion cuts to benefits. While the most affluent avoid paying £120 billion in taxes and bankers continue to award themselves huge bonuses, disabled people are facing the biggest attack on their rights in my lifetime. In the reality of the new Tory Britain, the broadest shouldered are the poor, the disabled, the sick and the elderly.

That is a very weak justification for continuing to consider tax avoidance as somehow acceptable. Clearly, this is the new brand of Conservative compassion combined with Liberal love. Beveridge would be ashamed to see the modern-day Liberal Democrat party cosying up with the Tories to attack the poorest and most vulnerable in our society. With regard to the practical effects of the new Welfare Reform Bill, I note, first of all, that there will be a new universal credit encompassing a myriad other benefits including income support, jobseekers allowance, child tax credit and working tax credit. However, what is unclear is the amount of benefit that will be paid; how childcare costs will be included; and the taper for withdrawing benefit as earnings increase. All that will be left to secondary legislation, so we are unable to scrutinise the detail. However, we know that eligibility will tighten, which means that fewer people will qualify. Will there be more or fewer people in income poverty as a consequence of the bill? The answer is less than clear. Secondly, disability living allowance will be replaced by a PIP—or personal independence payment. It all sounds good and empowering, but the reality is very different. Given that PIPs will start life with a 20 per cent cut in budget, it is perhaps more a case of empowering people to manage with less. I have warned the chamber many times of the perfect storm that we face in charging for social care. If local authorities are charging for services based on disability benefits, what happens if those disability benefits are reduced? Who will pay? Are people to be abandoned and left to struggle at home when their care service is withdrawn? What estimates have been made of the costs that local authorities might now have to pick up? There will be an impact on devolved policies and devolved services across the board—and nowhere is that more evident than in the proposed changes to council tax benefit and housing benefit. Yes, council tax benefit is to be devolved, but—guess what—with a 10 per cent cut. How will local authorities, with their increasingly constrained resources and with demand rising, cope with that? Housing benefit will be centralised, but it will be subject to a range of new conditions that directly interfere with our housing and homelessness policy direction in Scotland. If that is not bad enough, it will also have practical adverse consequences for tenants. Changes to housing benefit for private sector tenants that have already been introduced have resulted in reductions in allowances and have forced tenants out of their homes as they can no longer afford the rent. Now we have the proposed changes to housing benefit for those in the social rented sector. The removal of direct payments to social landlords—in the name of choice—will increase rent arrears and in many cases will lead to court action. It is difficult to manage budgets at the best of times, but people who are on low incomes often make immediate choices that might be more important than keeping money for the rent. Because they are unable to cope, more people might well fall into debt and consequently end up homeless. The criterion for underoccupation also needs urgent revision because we simply do not have the housing stock to allow people to move into smaller accommodation. I must confess that I am left wondering what dialogue or consultation has taken place between the two Governments. How often has the UK Government spoken to the cabinet secretary and how often has the cabinet secretary met her counterpart to push Scotland's case? The Scottish Government is not known for its reticence. However, I am slightly troubled. The Government has been remarkably slow in coming forward with this debate, never mind lodging a legislative consent motion that would afford time for scrutiny. We are in danger of sleepwalking through this bill. I am told that there has been a lot of analysis of the scale of the problem—which is indeed helpful—but little has been done about the solutions that are fast becoming urgent. We on these benches stand ready to help with the process in any way we can. It is appropriate for the chamber to ask about the posture that will be adopted by the Scottish Government in its negotiations with the UK Government. Are we suggesting a compromise—and, if so, what is it? Are we seeking changes—and if so, what are they? What will the deal breaker be? I would welcome it if, in his summing up, the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment could say something about the approach that is being taken. There has been little indication—

I am sorry—I need to make progress. There has been little indication of what the SNP wants to do about council tax benefits, which are soon to be devolved. Moreover, there has been little, if any, indication of what will happen to community care grants and crisis loans, both of which, too, will be devolved. Who will run the scheme of grants and loans in the future? Who will benefit? Will there be national eligibility criteria and will they have statutory underpinning? The SNP has not yet provided any answers, and I encourage it to do so. What about entitlement to passported benefits, such as free school meals, clothing grants and the energy assistance package, all of which will be affected by the changes? We have no indication of what will happen in Scotland. I have lodged numerous parliamentary questions, none of which has received a substantive response, even though those are decisions for the Scottish Government and the Parliament.

No, I cannot. I do not have sufficient time. Members: Aw. Listen, the cabinet secretary has had months to answer questions and bring forward proposals, but she has not done so. Some of this is devolved to the Scottish Government and it has to assume responsibility. If people who are on lower rate DLA lose their benefit, as they will, will the SNP continue to make them eligible for concessionary transport? I have a confession to make—I am sad enough to have read all 500-odd pages of the budget document. I could not find a single line, figure, word or reference to the welfare reform proposals that we are discussing today, but they have huge financial implications for the Parliament. Nicola Sturgeon rose—

Just as there is little detail from the SNP, there is little detail underpinning the Welfare Reform Bill at Westminster. Too much is unknown; too much is consigned to secondary legislation. We should resist attempts to railroad this through without being able to see all the detail, either in draft regulations or—preferably—on the face of the bill. We should demand that of the UK Government. I will stand shoulder to shoulder with any party or group to challenge the UK Government’s welfare reform agenda, which attacks the very poorest members of our society but, equally, I will challenge the SNP to meet its responsibilities, too. Nicola Sturgeon talked about the SNP’s aspirations for independence. For a party that believes in independence and wants control over the welfare state not to have a view on how that would be organised, when key aspects are to be devolved to Scotland, is simply baffling.

This is my final sentence, Presiding Officer. Others more cynical than I might suggest that that is so that the SNP can blame Westminster or local government if things go wrong. I urge members to support the Labour amendment. Let us leave the UK Government in no doubt about the views of the Scottish Parliament. We will oppose the legislative consent motion if substantial changes are not made to the Welfare Reform Bill. I move amendment S4M-01008.1, to insert at end: “and is otherwise minded, subject to consideration by the appropriate committees, to oppose the forthcoming legislative consent motion pertaining to the Welfare Reform Bill.”

I, too, thank the Conservatives for bringing the debate on access to cancer drugs to the chamber, because it gives us all an opportunity to consider how well or otherwise the system is working in Scotland and what changes might be necessary. However, we do not support the development of a cancer drugs fund in Scotland. We know that treatment is changing—more and more cancer patients are diagnosed early and use of surgical intervention and use of radiotherapy are increasing. The real prize will be gained by investment in early diagnosis and treatment, which we know lead to better outcomes for patients. Our lack of support for a cancer drugs fund does not mean that we believe that the current system is functioning as well as we all wish it to. The recent changes that the Scottish Government made, following a petition to the Parliament, are welcome and have made substantial improvements to the system. A process has been introduced whereby a clinician can initiate an individual patient treatment request. Let us look at that in a little more detail. We are all aware of the role of the Scottish Medicines Consortium in making decisions about which drugs are licensed for use, based on clinical evidence and cost effectiveness. However, we then have 14 separate area drug therapeutic committees—one for each health board. Given that the same guidance applies to all health boards, it is difficult to understand why NHS boards take such different lengths of time to decide on cancer drug use. I will illustrate that with one example. A cancer drug that the SMC deemed to be okay to use in April 2009 was agreed by two out of the 14 health boards within a month, but it took a further 16 months before the drug was agreed for use across Scotland. We still have a postcode lottery. A second issue that I want to raise concerns the system of individual patient treatment requests. We absolutely approve of that innovation to improve our system, because it enables clinicians to make judgments in the interests of their patients and was supposed to be our equivalent to the cancer drugs fund in England. When the process works effectively, it should support clinicians to make medicines available to those who will benefit most, regardless of cost. However, there is a growing body of anecdotal evidence to the effect that the process is being undermined in several ways: by local rules that prevent initiation of individual patient treatment requests; by routine rejection of requests; by refusal even to consider requests in the first place; and by the considerable administrative burden that is placed on clinicians, which poses an added difficulty in getting into the system. Frankly, it is hard to determine whether that perception is correct, because the Scottish Government has no mechanism that I am aware of to compare the number of requests with the number of approvals.

That will be helpful. I hope that we can access the information soon. I encourage the Scottish Government to make further improvements. I pose the question whether we need 14 area drug committees. Perhaps we do, but they seem to act as a block in the system, in that they duplicate the work of the SMC and delay availability of drugs. If we are monitoring and collecting data, can we apply that to ensure that the individual patient treatment request system works effectively in every health board? We value the work that is being done on value-based pricing of medicine, and we support any approach that leads to early detection and treatment of cancer, but we should not be proud of the fact that cancer patients in Scotland are perhaps three times less likely than cancer patients in England to have access to treatments. We need to make a difference by ensuring that our system enables access to cancer drugs.

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on reported concerns by the Royal College of Nursing that nurses are at breaking point due to fears over workloads, job security and falling care standards. (S4F-00165)

There is no doubt that nurses’ morale is plummeting. They are desperately worried about falling care standards and they are uncertain about the future. As the SNP and the First Minister are fond of reminding us, they promised to protect all the health budget, not just health boards or part of the budget, and yet there has been a real-terms reduction of £320 million of revenue alone. That is a fact. Will the First Minister give me a simple answer? If the SNP is protecting the NHS, why this year are there fewer doctors and consultants, fewer allied health professionals, and fewer nurses and midwives in the NHS than there have been at any point since 2005?

2. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority and what issues were discussed. (S4O-00215)

I am delighted to hear that. The minister will therefore be well aware of the concerns raised by the community in Luss regarding the use of the visitor centre for commercial purposes. He will be aware that the national park authority dealt with that property, but has now leased it out. That is having a detrimental impact on the future viability of other local businesses, which I am sure the minister regrets. Will the minister suggest to the national park authority that it takes action quickly to resolve the matter before any local businesses close?

Will the member take an intervention?

I join other members in congratulating Paul Martin on securing the debate. I also congratulate and welcome to the public gallery the save Lightburn hospital campaign. I add my tribute to Gerry McCann and the east Glasgow support group, who have been vigorous in their efforts to protect their local services. We should make no mistake: this is not a parochial response that is simply about retaining a local hospital; it is about recognising an extremely valuable service for older people, people with Parkinson’s and the wider community. I regret the fact that some members have failed to recognise that. The decision is for the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government—it is for nobody else—and it is proper that we should debate it here. I agree with George Adam—who made an otherwise disappointing speech—that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is extremely difficult to deal with; I have experience of that. Paul Martin is right to say that it operates with sleight of hand. Its removing services even before the cabinet secretary has had a chance to reflect and make a decision is entirely inappropriate. The health board has also taken a heavy-handed attitude to the Parkinson’s group. Closing down opposition may be something that Governments like to do, but for the health board to do it by throwing people out of its premises is entirely inappropriate, and I hope that all members will condemn such action. It is not enough—and I do not have sufficient time—to consider the merits of the proposal. I always do two things: I listen to the clinicians and I balance their view against the interests of the local community. There are clinicians who are against the proposed change and it is clear that the local community, with a petition bearing 14,000 signatures, a march through Carntyne and a rally, is also against the change. Therefore, we need to consider the proposal extremely carefully. We hear that there is no evidence that the change will improve health and wellbeing. The benefit of keeping services local, which we know about, is that it aids recovery. If people have visitors, family and carers around them, that improves their experience in hospital and supports their re-ablement and rehabilitation. We all agree on that. However, for me, this is also about the east end of Glasgow being one of the most deprived areas in Scotland. The proposal would create a health desert, and that is not an appropriate action for anybody in the chamber. Let me illustrate the reality and the consequence of the proposal with two stories that I got from members of the hospital campaign group. The first involves Anne McCaffery and is about travel. She left her house at 6 am for an appointment at 9.30 am. She arrived at 9.25 am. It had taken her 3 hours and 25 minutes to get from the east end of Glasgow to Stobhill hospital. Anne has had two strokes and has a tumour on the right-hand side of her brain. She took the bus to Baillieston Main Street, from Edinburgh Road to the back of the royal infirmary, from the royal infirmary to Springburn, and from Springburn to the old Marie Curie hospice. Then, she had to walk uphill along a back road with poor lighting for 30 minutes. It took her four bus journeys and a half-hour walk when she was not feeling well. That is not appropriate. The second story is about older people, as the closure of Lightburn hospital will see the transfer of beds for the care of the elderly: two wards to the royal infirmary and two wards to Stobhill for reassessment—that is what was promised to the people in the east end. On the face of it, that seems fine, but that is not the reality now. They will not go to the royal and Stobhill—there are no beds there. Older people are currently being sent to the Southern general and the Western, and I even heard of somebody being sent to Wishaw. That is not keeping services local. The SNP went into the 2007 election with a policy of keeping health services local and, given my experience locally, I agreed with that policy. I am the shadow health minister for Labour, and Labour Party decisions about health policy in Scotland are made in this chamber. It is also the responsibility of the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament to make a decision on Lightburn hospital—they should not duck that responsibility. I urge the minister to ensure that the cabinet secretary listens to community concerns and, more important, backs them and keeps Lightburn hospital open.

That is outrageous.

Will the member care to comment on who, ultimately, will decide on NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s recommendation to close Lightburn hospital?

I welcome the minister’s comments. Can he give us an indication of the timetable for the cabinet secretary’s decision?

Does Fiona McLeod accept that GPs seek alternatives to medication? The point is about access to psychological therapies, on which I think we can all agree.

I always accept invitations to speak for longer, Presiding Officer. I begin with an apology to you and to members for having had to leave during the opening speeches, along with my colleague John Wilson. As you are aware, Presiding Officer, we missed the opening part of the debate because we were engaged in a live broadcast interview. There was no intention to be disrespectful to colleagues. Of course, we rushed straight back. I welcome the debate and congratulate the Government on proposing a new mental health strategy. This has been a useful opportunity to shape its contents. I start where the minister did with the subject on which a number of members focused their remarks today: prescribing antidepressants. The statistics show a substantial increase in the level of such prescribing. I listened very carefully to the minister’s explanation, but the numbers are still increasing and we should be troubled by the fact that the number of people who have mental health problems is also increasing. Rather than argue with the minister about the figures, I believe that members share the view that we need to give GPs choice so that, instead of their only option being to provide medication, they should be increasing access to psychological therapies. I welcome the new target on psychological therapies but it will depend upon having sufficient capacity to meet what we know is an increasing demand. In its briefing, SAMH sensibly called for an audit of the current capacity so that we know how far we need to travel. I hope that that is a reasonable request and that the Government will accept it. We have heard some considered speeches during the debate. Malcolm Chisholm, Margaret Burgess and Siobhan McMahon talked about the importance of tackling stigma and mentioned the valuable work of the see me campaign. Dennis Robertson talked about the need for training and Kezia Dugdale mentioned the importance of advocacy, so that people are not left speechless and their voices are heard. I look forward to Fiona McLeod leading us in a session of tai chi at the start of every parliamentary meeting. Mary Scanlon and a number of other colleagues were right to make the point that mental health is about so much more than simply treatment by the NHS. It is about education, prevention, employment, the economy—it is about how we live our lives. The links between addiction and deprivation are all too evident. I urge the Scottish Government to widen the strategy’s focus because it will get support from around the chamber for so doing. Richard Simpson and John Wilson spoke about focusing on prevention, starting when children are newly born, and undertaking preventative work in primary schools, and I agree with all that. We know that such an approach will be cost-effective and, more important than that, it will be more effective for the individual. That also applies to community services. We need to get the balance right between community and in-patient services. I will start with community services. As Mary Fee pointed out, it is disappointing that some local authorities are reducing services because of reducing budgets. They are introducing things such as zero-hours contracts, which are impossible for the voluntary sector to deliver and which reduce staff terms and conditions and might cause distress because of a constantly changing stream of support workers. We also know that charges are being applied now, often for the first time, and that doing so relies upon people’s receipt of disability living allowance. Siobhan McMahon was right to talk about welfare reform. We are approaching a perfect storm. Compared with all those who are in receipt of disability living allowance, the changes are disproportionately affecting people who have mental health problems. They are losing income. What will happen when they cannot pay for services? Will that responsibility fall back on to local authorities? If we do not invest in community services, there will be more cost to the NHS in the long term. I turn to the balance between community services and in-patient services. It is always desirable for mental health services to be available in the local area, and community mental health teams, backed by the crisis services, do an extremely valuable job. However, it is also critical to have access to in-patient beds. There will be times when people need that degree of acute and intensive care. Unlike other specialist health services, mental health services are best delivered locally, and that also applies to in-patient services. I will illustrate that, as I am sure that the minister expects me to do, by talking about my area. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde wants to close the Christie ward and it expects my constituents to travel to Gartnavel. On the face of it, that might be considered to be reasonable, but let us take a closer look. There is no space at Gartnavel, so my constituents are being sent to Lanarkshire and Ayrshire; the next available bed might be in Livingston. Those journeys are difficult for people who do not have a car, so the travel implications are enormous. Mental health professionals warn that we are approaching a crisis. They are concerned because no beds are available, demand is increasing and plans are being made to reduce capacity to save money. We are indeed storing up trouble for ourselves. I urge the minister to be cautious in continuing to reduce capacity. With regard to suicide prevention, although I commend the suicide training that has been taken forward in the NHS to really positive effect, I believe that we need to widen it to others in the community and the statutory sector. Given that all of us in the chamber should avoid complacency, I point out that, contrary to what has been said, suicide rates are going up. No one should take any pleasure in that and the strategy must look again at how local authorities engage and help with suicide prevention at local level. In the few minutes that I have remaining—I realise that I might be stretching time a little—I turn to employment, which was the focus of SAMH and Action in Mind. Mental health problems at work cost Scottish employers £2 billion or an average of £1,000 per employee. Some of that is down to sickness absence, some of it lower than average work performance and some of it unemployment itself. As we know, employment plays a central role in our society. However, we also know that appropriate employment actively improves our mental health and wellbeing; that people with mental health conditions can and do pursue successful careers; and that most people with a mental health condition who are out of work say that they would like to be in paid employment. How do we sustain that? As part of the Parliament’s community partnerships project—which I commend, particularly given the Presiding Officer’s involvement—Action in Mind is working with employers in Stirling to develop a much better understanding of mental health in the workplace. I hope that the Scottish Government and the Parliament will learn from that work. There is considerable support in the Parliament for a mental health strategy and I hope that the minister takes on board the very positive suggestions that have been made by members across the chamber. However, he has a responsibility to engage now. In many communities, local services are being reduced, changed and cut. That is not having a positive impact on people’s lives and I hope that the minister will take on board our concerns about not just getting the right strategy in place, but protecting the local services that we all agree are critical to prevention.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I wish to associate myself with the cabinet secretary’s remarks. I want to ask her about the uptake of breast cancer screening and bowel cancer screening. There is a lack of uptake in both cases, particularly in deprived areas. What action will the Government take to increase uptake?

The First Minister will be aware of the mass resignation of the lay members of the Vale of Leven monitoring group—a group set up by the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy. They resigned because they felt that their views were substantially ignored by the health board, as demonstrated by the board’s proposal to close the Christie ward, which provides in-patient mental health services. On the basis that there is an increase in the number of mental health cases, that Gartnavel is unable to cope with the numbers, and that patients from my community are being sent to Lanarkshire and Ayrshire, will the First Minister or the health secretary meet me and the lay members involved to discuss their concerns?

I, too, congratulate Jamie Hepburn on securing the debate and I congratulate Save the Children and the Daycare Trust on their report. Other members have covered the issues that the report highlighted, but I think that it is worth repeating some of them. It struck me that I did not know that the cost of childcare is significantly higher in Scotland than it is in the rest of the UK. I did not know that eight out of 10 low-income families struggle to afford childcare. Although I did know that the lack of affordable childcare is a major barrier to accessing employment, the fact that 25 per cent of parents living in severe poverty have had to abandon working to stay at home with their children because it costs too much should be a staggering statistic for us all. Hugh Henry was right to remind us that we have solid foundations on which to build. I am grateful for other members’ acknowledgement of the initial work of the Labour Government on improving access to childcare. I remember that the expansion of such access occurred in 1997, when I was the mother of a five-year-old and it was too late for my family to benefit from it. I was most jealous of those who did. However, it was critical then for parents who relied on going out to work. We have positive examples of good practice around Scotland that show what we can achieve in that regard. I came into Parliament with a mission, as many of us do, which was to tackle poverty. I had worked in disadvantaged communities, where I saw not just poverty of income but the poverty of aspiration that was visited on successive generations. I learned a number of valuable lessons there. First, I learned that a strong economy and a strong society are different sides of the same coin and that one of the best routes out of poverty is through employment and having a job. I witnessed people not just improving their income but having a sense of achievement and walking taller, with a sense of self-esteem. For many of them, it was the first time that they had seen a sense of their own worth reflected by employers. Having a job mattered; it mattered to income levels and it mattered in all sorts of subtle ways in relation to raising aspirations in the community. The second lesson that I learned was that, when we try to intervene to break the cycle of poverty, it is necessary to do so early. Appalling though it may be to think about this, a child’s life chances are determined by the time that child gets to the age of three. We know that if we intervene early and work intensively with those children and their families, we can begin to turn things round. The other thing that struck me was that, if we provide childcare to enable parents to work, as we did in many of the communities that I worked in, and at the same time provide a supportive, nurturing environment for those children, we get a win-win. If we truly want to target poverty, that is the kind of approach that we must adopt. We know that parents in Scotland are struggling to cope with childcare, we know that the biggest barrier to employment, particularly for women, is childcare and we know that the very poorest parents are being priced out of work. In my remaining time, I will focus on the provision of 15 hours a week of free early childhood education and care for two-year olds, because it brings both those strands together. We know and can identify the children from disadvantaged households and we know where the parents are struggling. If we correlate that with employment, we should be able to identify those families; it is not rocket science. A cost-benefit analysis would show us that, if we invest now, we will save the public purse in the long term, never mind what we will save some of the poorest families in terms of experience. I recognise the minister’s personal commitment to the issue. I know, because she has told us, that she regularly chases her Cabinet colleague Mike Russell—and more power to her elbow—but I have to say that we need to do more than chase the cabinet secretary. If she does that, she will have the support of MSPs across the Parliament for the kind of action that I know she wants to take.

Go on! [Laughter.]

Perhaps I am much mistaken about this, but does the member recall that his own First Minister promised to do exactly that during the election campaign, when he promised to introduce the living wage to every local authority? Perhaps it is the member’s memory that is a bit hazy.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the Government’s spending review proposals. There has been a recurrent theme in the debate: times are tough, there is a tight financial settlement and the money that is coming from the UK Government has been cut or at best flatlined. As ever, the Government is shaping up to play the blame game. That is something at which it is extremely proficient, but politics is about choice and the Scottish Government cannot shirk the responsibility for the choices that it makes. As members would expect, I pay extremely close attention to the outpourings of the First Minister and his deputy. I remember clearly the promises to protect the NHS budget, which they shouted from the rooftops. However, I invite members to look a little closer. During the debate, the Scottish Parliament information centre has been doing some number crunching for me. Over the period 2011-12 to 2014-15, the overall health budget falls in real terms—the SNP is keen to talk about real terms—from £11,652 million to £11,325 million. That is a real-terms cut. It is not an increase; it is a cut of £327 million.

Health service inflation runs at more than 4 per cent, so there is real pressure on staff and services throughout the NHS. Perhaps Kenny Gibson does not believe me, so here is what the British Medical Association said: “The NHS faces an unprecedented real terms reduction in its budgets for the first time since devolution and, because the Scottish Government delayed the first round of cuts last year, this year will prove to be the most challenging as the service faces a double whammy of cuts. It would be naive to expect that this will not have an impact on patient care and access to healthcare services.” I will be delighted to let Kenny Gibson in to tell me why the BMA is wrong.

The member should sit down. I asked him a specific question, which he failed to answer. Clearly, the BMA is right. The SNP might choose to lay all the blame at the door of the coalition, but I remind members that in the previous parliamentary session the SNP failed to pass on the 6.7 per cent average year-on-year increase for health spending that was applied to the NHS in England. Instead, it chose to divert 3 per cent elsewhere, leaving the NHS in Scotland less able to weather the current financial storm. It beggars belief if the SNP thinks that we believe that the NHS is being protected, when it is slashing thousands of front-line staff from hospitals across Scotland. The two positions are entirely contradictory and no amount of conjuring on the part of the SNP can hide that. Last year, 4,000 staff were to be cut from the NHS. The figure included 1,500 nurses. This year, a further 1,000 nurses will be lost. In total, 2,500 nurses will have gone, leaving their colleagues to pick up the pieces and cope with the increasing workload. Members will remember that the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy is fond of telling us that there are more nurses in the NHS than was the case when Labour was last in office. She has repeated that mantra time and time again. Her boss, the one and only Alex Salmond—who was keen to get in on the act—said in the chamber on the day before recess began: “The protection of the health budget has meant that, even in these difficult times, health employment in every single category—through medical consultants, general practitioners, dentists and nurses to allied health professionals—is substantially up today on the level that we inherited in 2007.”—[Official Report, 30 June 2011; c 1270.] That is simply not the case. The First Minister and his Government are coming to believe their own propaganda. It is complete fantasy and has no basis in fact. The Government’s statistics on workforce numbers demonstrate that one has to go back to 2005 to find fewer nurses and midwives in our hospital wards and communities. The SNP has taken us back six years, and there are even more cuts in nurse numbers yet to come.

The Government needs to be honest with people, and if that is how John Swinney protects the health budget, heaven help us.

I am sorry to make the cabinet secretary so uncomfortable. The argument is not muddled. He promised to protect the health budget and that there would be no compulsory redundancies, but there is a real-terms cut in the health budget and thousands of staff are being shown the door. Those are real cuts that are happening to the health service right now on John Swinney’s watch, and there is no escaping that. The SNP was elected on a promise that it would keep services local, but early evidence, such as the proposed closure of Lightburn hospital, suggests otherwise. Health boards have been clear that, in saying how they would cope with the cuts in their budgets, they would need to consider substantial service redesign, which would include the closure and downgrading of many facilities throughout Scotland. Who is right? Will the SNP keep its promise and keep services local? I think not. I am conscious of time, so in the last few moments that are left to me I will touch on welfare reform. We are facing the most seismic changes to the welfare state in my lifetime, and there are substantial implications for devolved services, from the changes to housing benefit and council tax benefit, to the implications for passported benefits such as free school meals and clothing grants, and the payment for social care and concessionary travel. Where in the 250-page budget document is there any mention of that? The SNP is sleepwalking into this. It is not clear about the implications, and it appears that there has been little dialogue between the Scottish and UK Governments, and certainly little—if any—dialogue with local government. We know that the SNP wants control of benefits in the new and shiny independent Scotland, but when it has been given control, as it has been with the devolution of community care grants and crisis loans to Scotland, it cannot even answer simple questions on what it wants to do or how the funds would operate. On the basis of current evidence, the SNP appears to prefer constitutional change to sorting out how our poorest people put bread on the table.

I suspect that the SNP is simply waiting in order to blame it all on someone else. In that regard, it is disappointingly consistent.

For the purposes of clarity, I will repeat the statistics that SPICe provided. The cabinet secretary claimed a real-terms increase, but he did so only very narrowly, in the context of territorial health boards. The wider health budget includes, for example, early detection of cancer, which matters to people in Scotland. SPICe told me that there is a £327 million cut in real terms in the health budget. If the cabinet secretary is simply blaming Westminster for that, so be it—but he should not say that a cut is an increase.

How we care for the old, the vulnerable and the young is considered to demonstrate the essential character of a society, its values and its beliefs. The provision of social care is an essential service to our older people, those with learning disabilities, physical disabilities and mental health problems. At its best, it is about providing care and support to help people to live independent lives. It plays a key role in sustaining people in their own homes, in their own communities, without the need for more formal care. Social care is provided by local authorities, the voluntary sector and the private sector. We all know about the pressures facing local government, with an average 5.5 per cent real-terms reduction in its budget this year. Nowhere is that financial pressure more evident than in the social care budget. Local authorities are facing real challenges, such as increased demand set against a backdrop of tightening budgets. We need to be creative about how we do things and how we deliver good outcomes for people and design services to meet their needs and aspirations. There are some positive examples of that, yet they are few and far between. What appears to be happening across local authorities is a race to the bottom in the procurement of social care, driven solely by cost, and the inevitable sacrifice of quality. Let me be clear: that is not just happening this year; it has been going on for some time. We need only consider what is happening with employment conditions among voluntary sector care providers to see the truth of that. For the past three years, 79 per cent of staff have had no cost of living increase equivalent to local authority rises; 57 per cent of them have had pay freezes. Sixty per cent of voluntary sector care providers have made cuts to their training budgets. Only 15 per cent have any link to public sector pension arrangements. If members need any more convincing, they should consider what is happening at Quarriers today. Ninety-day redundancy notices have been issued to all staff, front-line staff have been asked to take a 23 per cent pay cut and changes have been made to terms and conditions. Quarriers is not alone: that is happening across the social care sector. I welcome the Unison members from Quarriers who are in the public gallery today and remind members that those front-line staff are being asked to take a 23 per cent pay cut, which, on a modest salary, is staggering. Although I do not want to comment on industrial relations at Quarriers, it is clear to me that the problem that is being experienced there lies with the procurement system. Local authorities are questioning the hourly rates of care employees of other organisations—interfering, in effect, in the internal pay arrangements of provider organisations. Surely, we should seek to commission services on the basis of the outcomes that are delivered and on quality, rather than on the volume of service that is delivered boiled down to an hourly rate. What does the kind of cut that is being experienced at Quarriers do to staff morale? We would all do well to pause and think. We all agree that the quality of care is of primary importance and that that quality is delivered by people: by families, by friends and by social care staff. In my experience, the people who work in social care are well motivated and care passionately about how they do the job and the people whom they work with, who are often the most vulnerable in our society. We all value what they do—we have said so many times in this chamber. They are at the very heart of ensuring the quality of care that we all care about so much; yet, we choose to reward them by cutting their terms and conditions and slashing their pay. There is one central truth in all this: we cannot get good-quality care on the cheap. In the past few years, local authorities have increased their charges for services to make up the shortfall in social care budgets. I have some sympathy with the principle that, when people have sufficient resources, they should be asked to make a contribution. However, the approach across Scotland is piecemeal. We have a postcode lottery of care, with different eligibility criteria, different costs and 32 different ways of doing things, which creates an inherent lack of fairness in the provision of social care. Let us consider the illustration that was provided to members by the Learning Disability Alliance Scotland for further evidence of that. The criteria for charging vary widely. Argyll and Bute Council considers 100 per cent of somebody’s income; across the water in Inverclyde, only 25 per cent of income is considered. How about the hourly rates for home care, which is just one social care service? A picture is painted of wildly different costs in that, too. In West Lothian, home care is £7.76 an hour, but in Angus it is £22 an hour—three times the amount. How is that fair? The guidance on the procurement process has been revised, but the opportunity to do it differently was missed. There are risks in our approach: the unforeseen costs, the disruption to service continuity and the real anxiety for the people who are being supported, their families and their carers. Even leaving those things to one side, it is increasingly clear that the guidance is being ignored in practice and that there is a need for stronger enforcement mechanisms. The Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities have published guidance on eligibility for social care. However, frankly, that is being used in local authorities as a rationing system to deny people with needs access to social care, as only the most critically ill and those with the highest needs are getting services. Where is the focus on prevention now? I know that the Scottish Government and COSLA intend to review care charging, but members will forgive me for being slightly impatient. I have been raising the matter for almost three years and voluntary organisations have been doing so for a lot longer—we are nothing if not persistent. It is becoming boring, but every time that we raise the issue, we are told that COSLA and the Scottish Government are going to sit down and review care charging. If they were on performance-related pay, they would take a salary cut for that kind of approach. Let me resist the temptation to apportion blame, because doing so would not serve us well. I acknowledge that local authorities are struggling to do the best that they can with increasingly limited resources. I want to look ahead. We must urgently ensure that our social care provision is the best that it can be, and I believe that that ambition is shared across the chamber. It is therefore not good enough for the Scottish National Party to sit to one side and say that responsibility lies with the 32 local authorities. The Scottish Government must provide a lead; it must provide a coherent framework that brings together all the different strands of social care—setting minimum expectations across the country, but at the same time stimulating innovation at local level. The framework could include how to promote choice and independence, and I commend the Government for introducing a bill on self-directed support. The Government knows that it will enjoy the support of members on this side of the chamber for that bill. The framework could also ensure consistent criteria and fairness in the determining of care provision and charging. The framework could focus on prevention and early intervention, not just on crisis, and it could set out a new form of commissioning based on outcomes and quality, not on volume and unit price. Scotland is not such a vast country that we should experience such wide variation and injustice in the provision of social care. Whether a person lives in Dumbarton or Dunbar, in Dingwall or Dumfries, they deserve a care system that supports them to live as independently as possible and which offers access to the best-quality care possible. The basis of the system, and how much people pay for it, must be fair. Today’s debate is about people, standards and quality of care. I am therefore disappointed that the cabinet secretary is unable to be here with us, given her personal commitment to the issue. I am astonished that the planning minister is leading in this debate for the Government, and I hope that the Government is not sending a signal that it is more interested in producer interests than in vulnerable people receiving a service. This task is not for local authorities alone. This is a task for the Scottish Government, and it needs to get on with it. There is no room for complacency. We will contribute; we will feed in ideas; and we will push the Government to do more, as it would expect us to. Above all, this chamber must ensure that our system of social care is overhauled so that it is fair and available to the most vulnerable in our society. I move, That the Parliament notes the 5% real-terms cut to the local authority settlement by the Scottish Government; further notes the demographic and financial challenges facing local government in the delivery of social care; recognises that these financial pressures have resulted in substantial reductions in service, with some care providers proposing changes to staff terms and conditions and pay cuts of up to 23%, leading to unprecedented industrial action; further notes the increasing postcode lottery of care, with differing criteria for eligibility and charges across Scotland; believes that the procurement of social care is characterised by short-term decisions based on reducing the cost of existing services rather than having a focus on the improvement, development and redesign of services to provide long-term value for money; further believes that quality and continuity of care is of primary importance and cannot be achieved on the cheap, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward a framework for social care to ensure consistency and raise standards for the benefit of some of the most vulnerable people in society.

Does the minister not accept that a signal is perhaps being sent that the Government is reflecting producer interests in this debate?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that the Scottish Government’s amendment is factually inaccurate because, actually, the Scottish Government budget rose year on year under Labour and the most recent resource budget that was received rose again in real terms, from £25.2 billion to £25.9 billion? I look forward to the apology and correction.

It is astonishing the number of SNP members who have mentioned the national care service. Perhaps they misunderstand the fact that the motion is about social care procurement now; it is about the services that are provided to the most vulnerable people in Scotland now; and it is about voluntary organisations that are going to the wall now.

Does the minister recognise that the resource departmental expenditure limit to the Government has increased in real terms from £25.2 billion to £25.9 billion? That means that there was an increase to the Scottish Government’s budget in every year of the Labour Government.

Will the minister give way?

The member might recall that my involvement came about three years ago when constituents raised the issue of charges for care in my constituency. A constituent in Argyll and Bute paid £300 a week for exactly the same service that was being delivered in West Dunbartonshire for £30 a week. The Government has done nothing for the past three years.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to increase the availability of affordable childcare for the poorest families, in light of the Save the Children report, “Making Work Pay”. (S4O-00159)

I think that we all know that the lack of affordable childcare is a barrier to employment, particularly for low-income households. One of the specific calls that is being made by Save the Children is for the entitlement to nursery care to be extended to two-year-olds from the most disadvantaged households. Does the minister agree with that? If so, what action will she take?

The cabinet secretary and I are in complete agreement that improving the care of our older people must be a top priority. I welcome the improvements in regulation. We called for increased frequency of inspections, unannounced visits, statutory underpinning, a more user-friendly name for SCSWIS, financial monitoring of care home providers and the reinstatement of resources to the care inspectorate, so I very much welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitments. I am sure that the cabinet secretary would acknowledge that robust inspection cannot be carried out without adequate resources. Peter Ritchie from the care inspectorate’s Unison branch gave evidence the other day to the Health and Sport Committee that the reduction in the care inspectorate’s funding over four years amounts to 25 per cent. The Government has tried to deny that, but the number of inspectors has been cut by 60 so far through early retirement and voluntary redundancy, and a further cut in numbers is expected by the end of the financial year, taking the figure to almost 100 fewer inspectors. Will the cabinet secretary commit to fully restoring the resources and staffing that the care inspectorate requires in order to ensure the best-quality care that we can provide for our older people?

We live in interesting times. For the first time in our history, we have a majority Parliament with the power to reshape our country, to create change and to be bold and radical for the Scottish people. Although I will touch briefly on the two health and social care bills, I will spend some time on the opportunities that have been lost in the legislative programme—opportunities to be bold and radical for the Scottish people. I turn first to alcohol pricing. I recognise that it is entirely legitimate for the SNP to return to the issue and, given the majority in the chamber, it is clear that the measure will be passed. We will engage with the process and will continue to question, as you would expect us to do, the effectiveness of minimum unit pricing as a single measure to tackle the problem of alcohol abuse. We want to engage positively on a range of other measures that we believe will contribute to tackling alcohol abuse in our country. I am clear, as I am sure that all members in the chamber are, that minimum unit pricing is not a silver bullet. I am keen that what comes before the chamber is an alcohol bill and not a minimum unit pricing bill that will be drawn so tightly and so narrowly defined that it does not allow a range of other measures to be included. I hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy will listen to the call. On self-directed support, I welcome that extension of direct payments. Enabling individuals requiring care to be in control of their budgets and in control and empowered about how their care is delivered is the right thing to do. I encourage the Government and the cabinet secretary to look beyond the bill being about social care budgets controlled by local authorities, to extend it to the interface between social care and healthcare and to look at how much wider the bill could be drawn in the interests of those receiving the care. Although I welcome the opportunity to debate these matters—and we will scrutinise them closely—opportunities have been missed. What about the bold measures that could have been brought forward to deliver the better integration of health and social care? There is agreement around the chamber on these issues that require our pressing concern. No one can have missed the problems with care of the elderly that came before this chamber and were debated before the summer recess. At the Elsie Inglis care home—not a stone’s throw from this Parliament—two residents died, six were hospitalised and the home was subsequently closed. Southern Cross, with 96 care homes across Scotland and thousands of residents, went to the wall. Over the summer, we found that the quality of care was questioned, there was uncertainty for families, charges for older people’s services and for care services more generally went up, and wider concerns were expressed about whether the current system of care is as good as it can be, as well as concerns about inspection. In that context I wanted to see legislation to better integrate health and social care. I also wanted to see measures to improve the standards of care with statutory underpinning, to give the care regulator enhanced powers so that requirements placed on homes that are failing in some regard are quickly enforced and that where closure of homes is necessary, it is quicker than the current process of requiring a sheriff’s ruling. I wanted to see measures to enhance financial scrutiny of care providers, so that we do not drift into a Southern Cross situation again, and measures to enable the regulator to inspect the commissioning process. Quality lies behind all that. Quality is not gained by a race to the bottom in tendering for social care; the Quarriers staff strike demonstrates that. I am disappointed that the Scottish Government is not taking action on quality. Quality means investing in staff and their training. I ask the cabinet secretary why residential childcare workers were required to register by 2009 and need as a minimum to be qualified to Scottish vocational qualification level 3, whereas equivalent support workers who deal with older people in adult care homes require to be qualified only to SVQ level 2 and do not require to register until 2015. I implore her to correct that anomaly and make lifting those standards a hallmark of the Parliament. We need changes to the inspection system. I understand that risk-based assessment is considered to be more proportionate, but it is insufficient. The first complaint about the Elsie Inglis home was made in November 2010. A complaint was made to the City of Edinburgh Council on 25 March, and it took from then until 20 April for somebody from the care regulator to inspect the home. It then took until 15 May to close the home. If we had acted more quickly, could any of the deaths have been avoided? In the ministerial statement next week, which I am looking forward to, the cabinet secretary should make a stand. If we believe in improving standards and the quality of care, she should reverse the cuts to the care regulator’s staffing and budget. A year before the new care regulator was born, the predecessor organisations had 360 posts. Now, that number is 289, which means a loss of some 70 posts. If anybody is in any doubt about the nature of those posts, I say that seven or eight were administrators and that the rest were front-line inspectors. Let us not be in denial about the budget.

From 2011-12 to 2014-15, the budget will decrease by 27 per cent. If the cabinet secretary is serious about the care of older people in Scotland, she must restore the staffing and budget so that we have a robust system of regulation.

I am curious about where the money will come from. I am not questioning Aberdeen’s case for it, but would his colleague Derek Mackay in Renfrewshire perhaps contribute from Renfrewshire Council’s budget?

Is the member denying that he wishes to avoid an opportunity to raise standards for older people and to seek legislative underpinning that would give that force?

We absolutely accept that pricing is part of the answer—I am sure the cabinet secretary agrees. However, across the parties, we brought an alternative suggestion to her that she rejected. I would be happy to remind her of the detail. Will the proposed bill simply be a minimum unit pricing bill or will it be an alcohol bill that will afford the Parliament another welcome opportunity to put in place additional measures to tackle alcohol abuse?

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take in response to figures showing that one in 10 care homes have been assessed by Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland as weak or unsatisfactory in at least one area of inspection. (S4F-00087)

If a significant proportion of our care homes are being assessed as weak or unsatisfactory, that is still a matter of concern, as we all want the best standards and the best possible quality of care for our older people. The new care inspectorate has a key role to play, of course. A couple of weeks ago, the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy was adamant that the cut in that inspectorate’s budget was 1 per cent and that I was wrong to say that it was 25 per cent. This week, the inspectorate’s corporate plan for 2011-14 shows a 25 per cent cut in its budget, and let us not forget the 20 per cent reduction in staff. Who should we believe—the cabinet secretary or the care inspectorate? Will the First Minister now act, reinstate the budget and stop the staff cuts, so that we can protect the quality of care for Scotland’s older people?

9. To ask the Scottish Executive for what reason the budget and staffing for Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland have been reduced. (S4O-00030)

The cabinet secretary knows that the overall reduction in the budget is 25 per cent. Does she consider that a reduction of almost 20 per cent of staff in the care inspectorate, the majority of whom are front-line inspection staff, is in keeping with securing the highest possible standards of care?

I welcome the opportunity to open this debate on caring for Scotland’s older people. I can think of nothing more important that deserves the Parliament’s urgent attention. We often remark that a society is judged by how it treats its young people, older people and most vulnerable people. Given the events of the past few weeks, I am afraid that we have been found wanting in the case of caring for our older people. Although much of the debate will focus on the challenges that we face, we must not lose sight of the fact that there are some really good care homes and excellent care providers across Scotland. However, it is a matter of considerable regret that some are just not fit for purpose. In the past fortnight we have witnessed shockingly poor standards of care at the Elsie Inglis nursing home, the case of the most appalling treatment of Mrs V at Ninewells hospital in Dundee and the potential that Southern Cross Healthcare will go into administration, which threatens continuity of care for 4,700 of its elderly residents. There has been one problem after another. It appears from my mailbag that those are not isolated incidents, and that concerns about standards of care are emerging in different parts of Scotland. Elsie Inglis nursing home is but a stone’s throw from Parliament. The poor standards of care there have resulted in two residents dying and six being admitted to hospital. There have been distressing reports of residents sleeping on stained and ripped mattresses and being forced to eat food with their hands, and of open wounds and sores being evident. In 2010 alone, there were 20 separate recorded outbreaks of infection affecting 72 residents. Yet, just a year earlier, the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care inspected the home and gave it a good report. Relatives of old people studied those reports before securing places in the home for them, believing that it would provide their loved ones with a good standard of care. They have little confidence in those reports now. How could something go wrong so quickly? What will happen in the future under the new risk-based approach to assessment? The care commission joined with the Social Work Inspection Agency on 1 April to create a new body: Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland—otherwise known as SCSWIS. It is not exactly the most user-friendly title, but I believe that it is right to bring together inspection and improvement in seeking to raise the standards of care across the sector and the country. What was not right was to start the new organisation off with an overall budget cut of almost 25 per cent and, by the end of this year, a staff reduction of just under 20 per cent—that is a recipe for trouble. Let us remember that the new care inspectorate is not responsible for inspection only of care homes for older people, but that it also inspects a range of children’s services and other adult services. So, the new organisation is starting out with a huge range of responsibilities but fewer resources to deal with them effectively. We have moved to a position in which the new care inspectorate will base its inspection regime on a system of online self-assessments, with targeted unannounced inspections of a smaller number of care homes. There is to be a greater maximum period between inspections for better-performing services and more focus on poorly performing services. We are therefore moving from a position in which there were twice-yearly inspections to much less frequent inspections in cases of good-performing homes. Although that may, on the face of it, seem to be entirely reasonable, it is less than clear what would trigger more attention from the inspectorate. How is risk determined? I would hate to think that there could be a scenario in which people who are skilled at filling in self-assessment forms could escape inspection for longer periods but may not operate to the standards of care that we would deem acceptable. Might I offer a little observation on self-assessment more generally? It was a system of self-assessment that was in place for health boards to report on their activities in relation to hospital-acquired infections and it was a system of self-assessment that underpinned infection control in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and which operated in the Vale of Leven hospital, which witnessed the worst outbreak of Clostridium difficile in the United Kingdom, so members will forgive me if I am slightly cautious about self-assessment systems. I will go back to the care centres and take the Elsie Inglis care home as an example. It had a good report; there were no problems a year ago. The first intervention of the inspectorate appeared to be in April, but I know from relatives who have e-mailed me that there were concerns in October last year. Was the care commission aware of that? Could it have acted sooner? Would the new risk-based assessment approach have helped or hindered the process? If problems were identified more than six months ago, it is unforgivable that action to close the home was taken only in the past fortnight. If we are serious about inspecting and improving standards of care, we need to ensure that the new inspectorate has the resources to do so. It cannot start life with one hand already tied behind its back. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s personal commitment to making care of the elderly a priority. I had hoped that that would have been the case during the past four years of the Parliament, but I welcome the renewed focus. However, I would be grateful if she would outline what that “personal commitment” will mean. What differences will be made to policy? What resources will be in place? How can the cabinet secretary ensure that the standards of care remain the highest possible? I respectfully suggest that a welcome sign of her intent would be to reverse the budget cut to the new care inspectorate, but from her amendment I see that she is unlikely to do so, and that is truly disappointing. In the context of the recent news about Southern Cross care homes, will the cabinet secretary consider giving the care inspectorate responsibility for addressing the financial viability of care providers as a condition of continued registration? The situation at Southern Cross is serious. The possibility of the company going into administration has been known for some months now. With 98 care homes and 4,700 residents, Southern Cross is the largest private care provider in Scotland. There were more than 3,000 staff in Scotland, but after yesterday’s announcement of job losses, there will be 400 fewer, which will have a direct impact on the quality of care. Frankly, Southern Cross is putting its shareholders’ interests before the care needs of its elderly residents. That is shocking and should be condemned by all parties in the chamber. It is becoming increasingly likely that Southern Cross will go into administration and our paramount consideration should be the continuity of care for the elderly residents. The scale of that challenge is such that it cannot be left to 32 individual local authorities; it must be for the Scottish Government to develop the contingency plan. I know that some local authorities have done little in the way of contingency planning, while others openly acknowledge that they will be unable to cope with relocating all the elderly residents because they lack local capacity. Others have said that they will need to use hospital beds, which will take our policy on care for the elderly back decades. Local authorities also point out that they have powers to take over the running of care homes in emergencies, although few can afford to do so. That might not be required for every Southern Cross care home, but it might apply to a few where there is no local capacity. In those cases, will the Scottish Government make emergency resources available, should that be necessary in the short term? Last week, the First Minister said that the cabinet secretary was in “daily” contact about Southern Cross, but we have discovered that, by that point, only two meetings had taken place: one in March and one in April, and those were with Scottish Government officials. That information came from a written answer to my colleague Neil Findlay on 2 June, which was the very same day that the First Minister said that contact was “daily”. There is a real need for urgency in the Scottish Government’s approach. Sitting on the sidelines waiting to see what will happen is not the proactive approach that I expect the Government to take in ensuring that our older people are protected and cared for. I will comment briefly on the case of Mrs V at Ninewells hospital. She suffered from dementia and died in hospital at the age of 80. The indignity of her treatment was quite extraordinary. Mrs V was not given any food orally and when she became distressed at that, the response was to medicate her. In the space of 16 days, she was administered with 95 separate doses of sedative. Her care and treatment were described by the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland as “degrading, unnecessary, and may have breached her human rights”. I welcome the new dementia care standards, but we must ensure that those standards are the norm across every health board and in every hospital and care home, so that what happened to Mrs V does not happen to any other older person. For me, what all those cases have exposed is that older people and their relatives feel quite powerless and confused in navigating our care systems. They place their loved ones in homes after following all the advice, reading all the inspection reports and even visiting the homes themselves, but that still does not offer comfort. They complain but feel that nothing is done and are not convinced that lessons are learned more widely across the system. They need someone who is very much on their side—someone who is independent of Government and who can look across care and hospital services and give voice to the wider concerns of older people more generally. In short, they need an older people’s champion. By working with all levels of government, voluntary organisations such as Age Scotland and older people themselves, such a person could help to drive fundamental change. I hope that the Government will give that proposal serious consideration, and I will be happy to discuss it further with the cabinet secretary. I turn to prevention and resources. In many areas of Scotland, local authorities are struggling. For the first time, they are making cuts to care services and introducing charges, which is resulting in some older people cancelling services such as community alarms. Different approaches to charging are being adopted by neighbouring local authorities—a service that costs £30 in one area can cost £300 in the area next door. I first raised that issue two years ago, but those differences still exist. The national eligibility framework for determining who should receive care sets out priorities. Understandably, those who are in the most acute and critical need are top of the list, but there are swathes of people with lower-level needs who will not be provided with a service because budgets are just too tight. I hope that the Government will ensure that local authorities collect data so that we can capture and identify the scale of the unmet need. That approach flies in the face of everything that we in this Parliament and the Government have said about prevention. We all know that prevention is the real prize. Even though prevention is cost effective, and it is much better for the individual to be sustained in their community without the need for more formal care, cuts are being made to some community-based services that do not cost a lot of money, and which have the potential to save in the long term. It is a matter of regret that prevention on the basis of what is happening on the ground remains an aspiration rather than a reality. Many of the organisations that are involved in the provision of care at local level are leading the way in preventative work, but they are being squeezed, too. The terms and conditions of staff who work in the voluntary sector are being substantially diminished. Some care staff are being asked to take a wage cut from £17,000 a year to £13,000 a year, while others are being asked to work on zero-hours contracts—they are being asked to do more, but they are being paid less. Worryingly, there is evidence of the emergence of cuts to training budgets, with the result that care staff are being forced to do their own training in their own time and to fund it themselves. It is inevitable that that will have an impact on the quality of the care service that is provided, so there is an urgent need for us to look again at procurement policies and to put in place minimum standards that seek to protect the quality of care. I turn to the challenge ahead. Before the debate is over, we will all have swapped figures to illustrate the scale of the demographic change that we face. Whether we cite the statistic that there will be 75 per cent more 75-year-olds in about 15 years or the one that the number of people over 60 will rise to 50 per cent of the population by 2033, what is clear is that the status quo is not an option. Scotland’s population is getting older and we are living longer. However, not all of our older people need care. About 90 per cent of them are sustained in their own homes and communities with very limited input from care services, so we should think about older people not in the context of their care but in the context of what they offer our communities: experience, time and knowledge. Many of them are the volunteers who make our communities strong, but they need to know that should the time come when they need care, it will be there for them. Labour believes that we will cope with that demographic change only by integrating health and social care and by having a local service with local accountability that is based on reformed community health partnerships and involves general practitioners, but which has one clear priority, which is to focus on the care of older people. The issue is not about structural change; it is about a better vision for the care of our older people, and I am happy to co-operate with the Government on that. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government’s new focus on the care for older people; further welcomes the commitment given by the First Minister that vulnerable residents in Southern Cross homes will not be compromised as a result of Southern Cross’s business model; notes with concern the report by the Mental Welfare Commission regarding the appalling treatment of Mrs V at Ninewells Hospital and the recent disturbing events at the Elsie Inglis Nursing Home in Edinburgh where standards of care were totally inadequate; further notes that one in 10 of the city’s care homes have been criticised and deemed weak or unsatisfactory in at least one area of assessment in the past year; believes that the 25% cut to the budget of Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland (SCSWIS), charged with the inspection and improvement of care standards, should be reversed; agrees that radical reform of community health partnerships is urgently required following the serious failings identified in a recent Audit Scotland report; recognises that funding prevention work will delay services for older people requiring formal care; believes that the care and safety of Scotland’s older and vulnerable people must be a major priority for the Scottish Government, and therefore calls on it to come forward urgently with plans to integrate health and social care so that Scotland’s older people and their families can have full confidence that they will receive the best possible standard of care when they need it.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

It is really just to correct what the cabinet secretary said. For the record, I have received no such e-mail.

Does the member acknowledge that the overall spending on social care, particularly for older people, runs to billions of pounds and that free personal care is but a small part of that?

Will the member take an intervention?

If the member reflects at all on history, he will know that it was Labour that led the debate about the integration of social care. I am, of course, happy to co-operate with the Government and share our detailed plan for a national care service.

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome that comment, because the point is critically important. SCSWIS has already lost something like 55 staff and is due by the end of the year to lose another amount, the majority of which will be inspectors.

I am delighted that the minister has mentioned self-directed support, which currently applies to local authority care services and budgets. Does he see a possibility of extending that into the NHS?

Does the cabinet secretary agree with Pam Duncan, of Inclusion Scotland, that the cost of the council tax freeze in 2009-10 was £310 million but the new charges for care services for some of the most vulnerable people brought in £350 million? Does the cabinet secretary think that that is fair to our older and disabled people?

The cabinet secretary will be aware of my strong support for the retention of Luss primary school, which is a vibrant part of my local community and central to the long-term future of the village, so I welcome the commission and the moratorium on rural school closures, and I urge Argyll and Bute Council to reflect carefully on that. I ask the cabinet secretary about a long-standing Audit Scotland report that commented that capacity across the school estate should not fall below 60 per cent. Specifically, should that be a material consideration for local authorities?

I welcome this early opportunity to debate some of the headline issues in the cabinet secretary’s expanding portfolio and look forward to working with her and, indeed, her colleagues over the next few years. I welcome in particular the promotion of Michael Matheson, whose contributions to the Health and Sport Committee and in the chamber have been at times challenging but always thoughtful and fair. Of course, he is also a fellow Partick Thistle supporter. I also welcome Shona Robison to her new post, which gives prominence to sport. In the short time available, I want to touch on health and the challenging financial context in which the NHS will operate; the care of Scotland’s older people; how poverty will tackled; and the cities strategy. Despite the rough and tumble of election hustings, more actually unites than divides us with regard to the future direction of health policy. Driving down waiting times is already a shared commitment. Both Labour and the Scottish National Party want to go further by reducing the wait for cancer patients, given that early diagnosis and earlier treatment lead to much better outcomes for patients. As a result, we will work with the Government to make that promise real. We also agree with the need for further action on tobacco and alcohol and, on that basis, we will support the Government in bringing forward a refreshed tobacco control strategy. As ever, the cabinet secretary has made clear her intention to return to the chamber with minimum unit pricing proposals. She will not be surprised to learn that we are still not convinced, but I am always happy to engage in dialogue with her. Across the chamber, we agree on the scale and seriousness of the problem of alcohol abuse so I suggest that where we agree we should simply get on with things. The cabinet secretary knows of my disappointment that the measure on discount bans, which we both supported, has yet to be implemented; according to the University of Sheffield study, that measure alone would have had the same effect as minimum unit pricing. We will also bring forward proposals for a legal limit on caffeinated alcohol, fine diversion schemes with alcohol counselling as an alternative and early identification of and support for children in families where alcohol is abused. I hope that the Government will engage with us on those issues.

Such moves are clearly disappointing. After all, if we do not fund projects on the ground to enable diversion to take place, we are simply storing up trouble for ourselves later on. On the tight financial context in which the NHS is operating and workforce planning issues, I know that the cabinet secretary was very fond of telling us how the SNP would protect the NHS and of claiming that it had given the service a real-terms increase over this session of the Parliament. However, that is just not the case. The SNP’s history with regard to health funding is instructive. At a time when the United Kingdom Labour Government was increasing the health budget by 6.7 per cent, the cabinet secretary was passing on merely half of that, leaving the Scottish NHS more exposed to the chill wind that is now blowing. The British Medical Journal, the British Medical Association and even the Scottish Parliament information centre, among others, have pointed out that there is now a real-terms decrease in the health budget. We need to stop the pretence and be honest about the scale of the challenge that the NHS faces. The cabinet secretary is right to point out that health service inflation runs much higher than the standard rate of inflation and that efficiencies alone will not close the gap. We are already seeing cuts to services and staff, and some health boards are even talking about service redesign as a means of saving money. How does that begin to square with the SNP’s promise, which I support, to keep services local? I am very proud of Labour’s commitment in the very first session of the Scottish Parliament to no compulsory redundancies in the NHS, and I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has committed to continuing the policy. However, it is equally clear that health boards will view staffing reductions as a principal means of reducing budgets. Last year, workforce plans indicated a reduction of 4,000 NHS staff, 1,500 of whom were nurses. That number of nurses cannot be taken out of the NHS without some impact on patient care. However, this year those figures might be higher. Indeed, I understand that the Government has been so spooked by the prospect that it is changing the mechanism for measuring the numbers. I will, of course, be curious to see how it does that, because it would be quite strange to measure the loss of a nurse as anything other than just that. I never underestimate the Government’s creativity when it comes to statistics, but the effect, however it is measured, will be devastating. The loss of experienced staff will place a disproportionate burden on those who are left behind, struggling to cope. On the surface, blanket recruitment freezes appear to be painless, but they lead to unplanned gaps in services that may have unforeseen consequences. We have already seen problems emerging. Bed numbers are reducing to make savings, not for the positive reasons that the cabinet secretary outlined; the number of cancelled operations is rising; readmission rates are up; and, despite the Government’s considerable efforts, delayed discharges are starting to go the wrong way. When all those things are taken together, they paint a picture of a service that is starting to creak at the seams. All members rightly praise the work of health service staff. Consultants, nurses and cleaners are all guardians of the NHS, and warm words and acknowledgement of their hard work are always welcome, but they are no substitute for practical support and resources to enable them to do their jobs well. We need only look at the Vale of Leven public inquiry to see the truth of that. There was a tragic set of circumstances, with 60 people affected—38 died as a consequence of what happened. When people go into hospital, they expect to get better, not to get ill. We should all pay attention to the outcome of the Vale of Leven public inquiry so that lessons are learned throughout Scotland.

I am happy to acknowledge that. The cabinet secretary will recall that we wanted a tougher target than that which the Government set at the beginning, as we recognise the importance of the matter. However, families at the Vale of Leven have told stories about the nurses being rushed off their feet and trying to do their best under enormous pressure, with a lack of support from the health board, no adequate systems in place, infection control measures not used and no appropriate training given. Therefore, we must be ever vigilant. I move on to tackling poverty. I came to the Parliament with a background in community economic development. I recognised that a strong economy and a strong society were different sides of the same coin. My passion then—it still is now—was to provide people with opportunities to improve their economic and social wellbeing and get skills or qualifications and a job, and to build the capacity of individual families and whole communities so that they could break out of the cycle of poverty. Grinding poverty visited itself on successive generations, limited ambitions and aspirations, and damaged confidence. I believe that employment is one of the best ways out of poverty. However, we need to do much more.

No. We need an approach that has early intervention at its heart. It is tragic that a child’s life chances can be determined by the time that they are three. Intervention needs to happen very early. I welcome family-nurse partnerships as just one element in challenging those life-limiting circumstances, but we need to take more concerted and joined-up action, and to work with families, children and all generations. We also need to tackle poverty of people and place together, because poverty has an unwelcome geography. People who have very different futures live in areas with similar postcodes. I am disappointed that the cabinet secretary did not spend much time on that matter, which I hope will be picked up, perhaps in the Government’s closing speech. We need to be explicit about targeting resources at people in the most hard-pressed communities through additional support whether for local authorities or for general practitioner surgeries in areas with the most need. We need to acknowledge that we need to disinvest in some more affluent areas in order to do that, as there is not enough money to go around.

I am running out of time. The poverty strategy was published only at the tail end of the previous session. I am disappointed that that was the case, but there is little in it to disagree with fundamentally. The key questions are how it will be implemented and funded, and how we will know what success looks like. I urge the Government to produce an action plan and monitoring framework so that we can co-ordinate action across Government and begin to see the strategy making a difference. Child poverty declined sharply under the UK and Scottish Labour Governments. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation found that, in the decade from 1998, there were sharp declines that were to be welcomed. Progress has now stagnated. We face difficult circumstances, so poverty is now likely to grow. We are already facing a substantial rise in fuel bills. I urge the Scottish Government to undertake talks with Scottish Power and other providers to try to provide relief. The cabinet secretary has said that she is personally committed to improving the care of Scotland’s older people. I welcome that and I look forward to exploring with her tomorrow exactly how she will do that. I am delighted that she said that there will be a dedicated debate on cities strategy. I look forward to contributing to it.

5. To ask the First Minister what measures the Scottish Government will take to ensure the highest possible standards of care are in place for older people. (S4F-00015)

The First Minister will be aware that this is an extremely anxious time for families and older people in homes run by Southern Cross Healthcare, which is the largest private sector provider of care in Scotland. I know that the Government’s position is to monitor the situation, but essentially to leave planning to local authorities. Is the First Minister aware that planning in West Lothian includes removing respite beds, ceasing to deal with hospital discharge and even utilising hospital beds? Such measures take us back decades and, as has been said, will release only a small amount of capacity. Does the First Minister believe that that is acceptable at any level? If not, will he intervene to ensure that we plan for the care of our older people across Scotland?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. Like others, I will start by making an observation about the character of the new Parliament. The SNP has an overall majority, which is a substantial achievement, but the achievement comes with a need to exercise power with responsibility. The First Minister is often keen to say that he and his party do not have a monopoly on wisdom. In that regard, he will be pleased to know that I already agree with him. However, I would like to offer him a positive suggestion: where we agree, and where there is common ground, let us make early progress, and where we disagree, let us have robust debates. Just on occasion, the Government may compromise. If we can do all that, we will be serving the people of Scotland well. On health, our common ground offers opportunities for progress in driving down cancer waiting times; in eliminating hospital-acquired infections from the NHS so that there will be no repeat of the tragedy of the lives lost at the Vale of Leven hospital and at other hospitals across Scotland; in protecting staff and investment in the NHS; and in integrating health and social care so that we can improve care for older people. We face challenging times, and we need to be honest with people about that. The NHS has not been provided with a real-terms increase over the next five years, as the Government claims. In any event, with the rate of inflation in the NHS running much higher than the normal rate of inflation, there will, in effect, be a cut in the NHS budget. Health boards are already struggling, and we need to acknowledge that. They are struggling to cope with reduced bed numbers, which is why more operations are being cancelled, and they are struggling to cope with tighter efficiency targets. The workforce plans that the boards produced last year indicated a loss of 4,000 jobs, of which 1,500 were nurses. If the rumours emanating from health board corridors are to be believed, the situation this year and next will be much worse. The First Minister said in his statement that he would seek to extend the no compulsory redundancy policy to the 160,000 workers in the NHS. I hope that that was a slip of the tongue, because I gently remind him that the commitment already exists—Labour made that promise in the first session of the Scottish Parliament and his health secretary reaffirmed the commitment before the election, which was welcome. Therefore, I hope that what the First Minister said was not a watering down of the commitment—I hope that it applies now, and I look forward to receiving confirmation of that. I would also be interested to know when the SNP will apply it to all of the public sector, including local government, because if it is not done this year, it will be too late in the context of the cuts that we know are coming. I have a question for the First Minister, in his absence. In his speech, which I listened to extremely carefully, he talked about the society that “we will build and protect”. He offered protection from the market and from ideology but, although the text that we received in advance included the offer of protection from “barbaric budget cuts”, he did not make that offer. Does that mean that he will not offer protection to the vulnerable, the old, the unemployed and people who rely on services from budget cuts? That is too important to be dismissed as a simple slip of the tongue. I look forward to hearing the SNP give a commitment to protecting people from budget cuts. We agree on the scale of the problem and on the need to take action on Scotland’s relationship with alcohol. Although it will come as no surprise to hear that I do not believe that minimum unit pricing is the silver bullet, I recognise that the SNP has a mandate to introduce the measure, but I point out to the Government and to the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy that it is not necessary to pursue control over excise duties to implement the policy because, after all, according to what Nicola Sturgeon and Shona Robison said in the previous session—I will dig out the quotes—that is what the social responsibility levy is for. I look forward to continuing that debate with the cabinet secretary. I will finish by touching on what I believe is one of the biggest social challenges that we in the Parliament will face in the years ahead. We know that the number of older people is growing substantially and that, if we do nothing, that will increase the impact on our care services. All of us, with the exception of the Liberal Democrats—none of whom I can see in the chamber at the moment—agreed on the need to integrate health and social care to improve the experience of older people, their families and their carers. Equally, we know that prevention is essential if we are to meet the challenges ahead, yet the eligibility framework on the basis of which decisions about social care are made prioritises those in most critical need and prevention is no more than just wishful thinking. This week, we hear of the unacceptable treatment of older people at the Elsie Inglis nursing home. Today, we hear of the degrading treatment of an older woman with dementia in one of our Scottish hospitals. Our older people deserve more than that—they deserve dignity and respect. Whether they are young or old, advantaged or disadvantaged, and whether they live in rural Scotland or urban Scotland, people will look to the Parliament to ensure that we focus on what matters to them in their everyday lives and, frankly, that does not include independence.

It is not often that I agree with the cabinet secretary, but let me do so in relation to her comments on Dr Ian McKee, who has made a considerable contribution to the Parliament. We will miss him. The cabinet secretary is right to point out that final salary pensions including distinction awards are inappropriate in the current financial climate. However, the previous Administration initiated a review that she signed off a couple of years ago, and we now have another review. What does she intend to do to take the issue forward beyond asking the UK coalition Government, which is busy dismantling the national health service as we know it, to do so?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As you would not let me in to ask a supplementary question, I am forced to raise this point of order. A number of retiring members have been mentioned in the chamber today. I pay tribute to the Presiding Officer, as this is the last time that she will preside over themed questions. She has made a significant difference to her constituents and to this Parliament. [Applause.]

Although I do not often agree with Maureen Watt, I am happy to do so today. Her opening sentences were particularly insightful. This debate is more about the Lib Dems searching for a dividing line for the election, which is desperate stuff indeed. As other members have shown, the Lib Dems’ talk does not match up to their actions in government in Scotland or in the United Kingdom coalition with the Tories. I say to Robert Brown and Jeremy Purvis as gently as I can that, following a debate in the Parliament in which the national care service was mentioned, I e-mailed the Lib Dems to offer discussions and explain our approach, but I never heard back from them. If there is confusion on Jeremy Purvis’s part, it is entirely his fault. I have worked in local government and the voluntary sector. Indeed, for much of my working life, I have supported and valued community development approaches and community capacity building. I will take no lessons from the Liberals on localism, particularly not when they are acting as handmaidens to the Tories, who are intent on wrecking the NHS—or is dismantling the NHS by giving doctors a commissioning budget an example of their new-found localism in action? If it is, we do not want any of it.

Oh, but by your actions you will be known. How the Liberal Democrats operate in the rest of the UK is of clear interest to people in Scotland. Let us look at what the Liberal Democrats are doing in our capital city, where real changes are taking place. There are cuts in social work budgets and services for the elderly and the closure of nurseries. Those are attacks on some of the most vulnerable people in our community. Frankly, if that is an example of localism in action under the Lib Dems, they can keep it. Unfortunately, the Lib Dems have got it wrong again. I will leave it to other members to talk more eloquently than I can about the police and fire services; I will focus on social work services and Labour’s proposal for a national care service. Three parties in the chamber—the Conservatives, SNP and Labour—believe that there is a greater need for integration between the NHS and social work. For others to argue that there is a centralising tendency in our approach lacks intellectual rigour. The argument fails to recognise the scale of the challenge that we face with increasing numbers of older people. The demographic change will be significant. I expect that the Minister for Public Health and Sport will trot out a plethora of statistics on the subject, but the figure that stands out for me is that there will be 75 per cent more 75-year-olds in about 20 to 25 years’ time. There will be many more older people and an increased demand on services. Simply adopting the status quo is not an option. Most if not all of us agree that working together is essential. The joint future strategy is now 11 years old. That policy was about encouraging local government and the NHS to work together to pool budgets and join up their services but, frankly, the results have been patchy. In some areas, there has been excellent joint working; in others, relationships can best be described as dysfunctional. The tragedy is that people still fall through the gaps. I have a constituent who saw an occupational therapist in the acute sector, an OT in the primary care sector and an OT in the council. All of them are great OTs, but the constituent still had to wait six months to get the aid that they needed. It is not right that, in a country the size of Scotland, there is a huge postcode lottery in care. Can anyone genuinely explain to me why a particular service costs a couple in West Dunbartonshire £35 a week, whereas in neighbouring Argyll and Bute—five minutes away—it costs £300? Is that the kind of localism that the Liberals want? The scale of cuts that social work services and community groups that sustain so many people in our local areas are currently feeling will have a negative impact on older people. Ninety-three per cent of older people do not come into contact with formal care, which is great. They are sustained by friends, families, carers, their local library, their lunch club, their befriending project and their Age Concern branch. However, those are some of the very services that are being cut.

No. Doing nothing in the face of all those challenges is a recipe for disaster. Labour would create a national care service, sitting within the NHS—not a new agency, as the Liberals mistakenly believe, but a service based on local integrated teams, delivering in communities and managed by reformed community health partnerships. We would have new governance arrangements, putting elected members in charge and increasing accountability.

No. I point out to the Liberals that there are 20 more community health partnerships than there are local authorities, making them a much more local unit of accountability than is currently the case. I hope that that is welcome. We would provide local delivery, local management, new local accountability, a national framework setting minimum expectations and local budgets. We would deliver what older people tell us they want—fairness and consistency, and to know that care will be provided, should they ever need it. I return to the 93 per cent who do not come into contact with care. Our new dialogue must be about prevention, which is key. We know that, unless we provide general community facilities and support, more older people will need to engage with the care system earlier. Unless we provide people with appropriate care packages in their homes, sustaining them in their communities, inevitably they will end up at the front door of their local hospital as admissions. We have talked in the chamber about shifting the balance of care, but that has not happened to the degree that is required. The money remains locked in the health sector and, on the ground, local authorities are finding it increasingly difficult to fund prevention work, never mind care packages. Of course, there are two different cultures in health and social work. Both are respected and valued, and there is a key role for social work moving forward. However, both are united by their common purpose, which is to focus on the needs of older people and to deliver the best possible outcomes. With the exception of the Liberals, we recognise the need to bring the services closer together if we are to meet the challenges that lie ahead. From their motion and the contributions that they have made so far, it appears that the Liberals want us to stand still. If we do that, we will fail this and the next generation of older people in Scotland.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will fund continuing care beds at the St Margaret of Scotland Hospice. (S3O-13064)

Given the collapse of the plans for 60 continuing care beds at Blawarthill, will the cabinet secretary encourage NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to fund the continuing care beds at St Margaret’s without the need for yet another review? Will she ensure that the chair of the health board meets St Margaret’s because, despite her telling him to do so in March and November of last year, he singularly failed to do so in advance of the most recent members’ business debate on the issue, which was a few weeks ago?

I am happy to say that Labour members support amendments 31, 34 and 35, in the cabinet secretary’s name, and we thank her for the briefing in advance of the debate. I recognise that the bill might not be the most appropriate legislative vehicle, but it has the benefit of being quick, and timing is all in politics. It is right that those infected with hepatitis C as a result of treatment by the NHS with blood or blood products should be compensated. However, if she is able to do so, will the cabinet secretary detail the likely funding impact that that will have over a number of years and whether that funding is being identified within the health budget?

As Mary Scanlon said, we have travelled far with the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill, which has been considerably improved since its introduction. I thank the Health and Sport Committee, the bill team, the clerks and everyone who contributed to the process. We all supported the concept of patient rights in principle, but it is fair to say that many members were less than convinced by the bill when it was introduced—we heard from the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives in that regard. Indeed, the need for legislation was questioned. The Health and Sport Committee was unable to make a recommendation to the Parliament because its members thought that the bill would lead to confusion and that far from enshrining all patient rights it was narrowly focused. We shared those reservations but we decided to persist and try to make the bill better. The Scottish National Party’s manifesto pledge was to give every patient “a legally binding waiting time guarantee”. The bill falls short of that commitment. It was interesting to hear from Ian McKee, who is passionately against such an approach. I am not sure that he felt like that when he stood for the Parliament on the SNP manifesto in 2007, but I welcome all converts. Many witnesses thought that the lack of sanctions in the bill is a potential weakness. However, we do not want to foster a culture of litigation or create a bonanza for lawyers, so the approach is ultimately right. Ross Finnie was right to question the basis for legislation. The bill has little legal effect and we need to be careful not to heighten expectations among the general public of what it can achieve. We need to be careful to ensure that legislation is more than simply declaratory or assertive of something. We need legislation that sensibly advances patient rights within a framework that recognises the mutuality of the NHS and the balance that should exist between rights and responsibilities of patients and staff. We favoured an approach that would enable the cabinet secretary to introduce a comprehensive charter of rights. Like many members, I pay tribute to my colleague Richard Simpson for his work on framing amendments to give effect to that. I am also grateful to all the parties that are represented in the chamber and to organisations that supported that change, such as the RCN and SAMH. There are many things in the health service that are not conditioned by legislation, but health boards are in no doubt about their importance. Richard Simpson was, of course, correct to point out that the charter mirrors the approach that was taken by the previous UK Labour Government in England. That is welcome. There is no doubt in my mind that we need to improve the NHS complaints system. It is not fit for purpose and I am not sure whether the NHS learns lessons as a result of the complaints that it receives. Helen Eadie was right to point out that most people who come to us to describe an unhelpful experience in the NHS do not really want to complain; in many cases they simply want the NHS to apologise. We should never underestimate the power of just saying sorry, but it is important that people also want the NHS to learn from mistakes so that no one else has to experience what they experienced. The modernised system, which reflects that used by the state hospital, is much more positive. There should be compliments, as it is right to praise people when they do something right, comments that may be an early indication of potential problems, concerns that enable people to prevent a problem from escalating, and, finally, the possibility of making complaints. Members have referred to no-fault compensation as being the missing link in the complaints system. We welcome the review group’s report. We should look closely at how such a scheme would work in practice for the benefit of patients, the NHS and its staff. If it enables us to say sorry, which is what most relatives want to hear, we should embrace it. We acknowledge that the passing of the bill will bring renewed focus on patient rights, but we need to be careful not to overclaim what it will achieve. We are all passionate about the NHS, which Labour created in 1948, and we all value NHS staff and all their hard work in treating our constituents and families. We believe in a mutual NHS that is patient centred and we all want the best for every patient every time. Labour members believe that the bill represents a further step on that journey and we are pleased to support it.

I am clear that the intention behind the SNP’s commitment to a legally binding guarantee was to give patients recourse to litigation. The bill does not do that.

Like the cabinet secretary, I, too, send my condolences to the families affected. I thank her for an advance copy of her statement. I found it disappointing that the cabinet secretary used the majority of her time to attack the Opposition, rather than shining a light on the scandal of people dying, perhaps unnecessarily, while awaiting discharge from hospital. I think that we would all agree that the situation in Fife is deeply concerning. As recently as three weeks ago, there were 156 delayed discharges; 61 of those cases were waiting more than six weeks. Each of those statistics represents a person. We discovered that in the past year in Fife alone, 93 people died in hospital while awaiting discharge—that figure has almost doubled in the past two years. Let us be clear: all those 93 were deemed medically fit for discharge—clinicians said that they should not have been in hospital because they did not need to be there. Does the cabinet secretary have any more information as to the circumstances of the 93 people who died? Many other health boards claim not to record the information, but we believe that Fife could be the tip of the iceberg. Can the cabinet secretary tell us whether this is a problem in other Scottish health boards? Will she as a matter of urgency publish data for all Scottish health boards on people who have died in hospital when they were deemed medically fit to leave hospital but remained there waiting for a care package?

Like others, I pay tribute to my colleague, Des McNulty, for securing this debate on St Margaret’s hospice and for his persistence in making the case strongly. I recognise the consensus that exists on this matter in the chamber. Gil Paterson, Jackson Carlaw and Ross Finnie are not new to this debate and have supported the case for the continuing care beds at the hospice. Timing is everything in politics, and we meet today with the knowledge that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s plans for continuing care beds at Blawarthill are now in disarray. I do not know whether to be astonished or disappointed to note that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde appears to be determined to pursue continuing care beds at that site. Although I recognise that what has happened is of concern, it provides an opportunity for ministers and the health board to consider matters afresh. In that regard, I want to return to the debate that we had in March last year. At that time, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing urged NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to engage with St Margaret’s, which was welcome. Even at the most recent annual review of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde in November last year, there was the promise of more meetings and a resolution. What has happened in the intervening period since November? How many meetings has Andrew Robertson, the chair of the health board, had with Professor Leo Martin, from St Margaret’s? How many meetings has Robert Calderwood, the chief executive of the health board, had with Professor Martin or, indeed, Sister Rita Dawson? Given that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has clearly signalled the importance of finding a solution, we would expect a flurry of activity. At the very least, we would expect there to have been a few meetings, but my understanding is that there has been none. Frankly, I find it incredible that there has not been one meeting. Andrew Robertson stated in a recent e-mail that he meets Professor Martin regularly, but the last meeting was in October 2010. That is not regular; it is ages ago, and it predates the health board’s annual review. The time for playing games is long past. St Margaret’s is an excellent facility that is second to none. It has rightly been praised by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care and by all members in the chamber. The hospice care is exceptional, as is the continuing care provision. I know people who have been cared for at St Margaret’s, people from my community who volunteer there and people throughout the west of Scotland who hold it in the highest regard. It is the support of ordinary people from all walks of life that gives us all a sense of how much St Margaret’s is valued and loved, and the petition with well over 100,000 signatures demonstrates that. Des McNulty said that this is the third such debate. The uncertainty over the future of continuing care beds is now long-standing and it continues still. Gil Paterson rightly quoted the health board’s statement about the review of care beds concluding in late summer, but members should read on, because later in the statement the chief executive states: “I am optimistic that we can still secure a major care home and social housing development at Blawarthill”. Does that mean that the decision of the review is already determined? Does west Glasgow include St Margaret’s or is it too far away in West Dunbartonshire? Is the review simply about the number of beds that will be at Blawarthill? We will clearly be waiting some time for answers, because the health board’s lack of transparency has already been well documented. Its dealings with even its non-executive board members who sought to question the basis of its decision making is frankly the stuff of legend. I will support—I am sure that this is the case for every member in the chamber—any measure that makes progress for St Margaret’s and secures funding of the continuing care beds, wherever the suggestion comes from. For my part, I am pleased to confirm the Scottish Labour Party’s support for St Margaret’s. We have given an unequivocal commitment to funding the continuing care beds and we will ensure funding for the future for many years to come. I echo Jackson Carlaw, because his speech was excellent. He said, “enough is enough”. There is a window of opportunity. We should not wait until the end of the summer. It is time to take action; the time, minister, is now. I hope that the minister can offer certainty to St Margaret’s in her closing speech.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am grateful for the opportunity to contribute to the budget debate. Although I want to focus on health, I want first to take issue with the cabinet secretary’s comment about Argyll and Bute Council. Let us be clear—councils across Scotland have lost supporting people funding. Argyll and Bute Council has suffered worst, followed swiftly by West Dunbartonshire Council. The cabinet secretary’s announcement fails to close the gap in the allocation. Mr Swinney knows that the COSLA leaders’ meeting of 19 November agreed the formula for distribution, which is very different from what has subsequently emerged from the Scottish Government. Under that formula, Argyll and Bute Council expected to receive £6 million more. As I understand it, the cabinet secretary is giving back £1 million to the council, but where is the missing £5 million? Dick Walsh, the leader of Argyll and Bute Council, wrote to me: “it is clearly disappointing that my Council is now in a position of having to make cuts to services that it would not have had to make.” Argyll and Bute is represented by an SNP MSP who is a minister. There is an aspirant SNP candidate who is a cabinet secretary. Surely they could have convinced the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. If the position does not improve, they will be accused of being responsible for wholly unnecessary cuts to services for some of the most vulnerable people in Argyll and Bute. This is entirely a debate between COSLA and the Scottish Government about the formula that was agreed on 19 November; it sits separately from the wider debate on the budget. I look forward to the cabinet secretary resolving the matter. Of course, the SNP already has form in this regard. What about social care? The true scandal of the SNP term of office is exposed when we consider what it has done with social care. When the SNP came into office, it inherited a social care budget of £3.2 billion. However, in a few short years that budget was cut to £2.8 billion—£400 million less. [Interruption.] I am disappointed that the cabinet secretary is sighing about the issue, because we are talking about £400 million that has been taken from the most vulnerable in our community.

I look forward to the cabinet secretary’s apology, because the numbers come from Audit Scotland. It is not for me to cite duff numbers—that is more the province of the Government.

I have already given way. Although the Scottish Government has introduced a £70 million change fund, the strong view on the ground is that that will simply substitute for the cuts. There will be cuts to community and voluntary organisations on the ground and to care-and-repair projects. Funding for pensioners lunch clubs will be halved. Mental health services have changed so dramatically that workers are now on zero-hours contracts. New charges will be placed on services for people with learning disabilities. All those measures will have a negative impact on people in our communities, driving them into the formal care system more quickly than would otherwise have been the case. That is the consequence of passing the budget today. There will be no protection for older people who require care, those with learning disabilities and those who require support due to mental illness. What about the much-vaunted protection for health? In the previous budget debate I challenged the accuracy of the SNP’s promise, which was made by the First Minister on the day of the party’s election launch. He told us that he would spend £1 billion extra over the next parliamentary session. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth is always keen to intervene when I get something wrong—he is always keen to correct me. I see from the Official Report of the previous debate that, remarkably, he did not take the opportunity to do so on that occasion. Let me give him that opportunity again. The First Minister said: “We’ve protected the health service in real-terms ... and we’re now extending that commitment to the next four years.” That is just not accurate. I will tell members the facts. The SNP’s health budget will drop by £8.6 million in real terms. That is a real-terms cut, not an increase and not protection. Here is another fact: the SNP’s 1.6 per cent cash increase for the NHS in this budget equates to a 0.3 per cent cut in real terms, so there is a reduction of £33.9 million this year—a cut, not an increase.

I love the cabinet secretary’s assertion, but do I prefer to believe his rhetoric or the independent information from the Scottish Parliament information centre? There is no contest: SPICe every time. The pledge that the SNP made on the very day of its election launch now lies in tatters. It is just not accurate. The present settlement is the lowest for the NHS since devolution. If the budget was set to rise, as the SNP claims, the Scottish Government would not be implementing plans to cut thousands of nurses and other front-line staff. Four thousand staff are gone from the NHS—1,500 of them nurses—this year alone, and that is before the budget bill is passed. That is in the good times, before the UK coalition’s budget cuts have begun to bite, and the cuts are entirely down to the SNP. Shame on you.

As the First Minister will be aware, the mortality rate for death from Clostridium difficile at the Vale of Leven hospital has been revised upwards. Instead of the 55 people affected and 18 deaths that were originally reported, the public inquiry is now considering 60 people affected and 38 deaths—a staggering number that confirms that this has been the worst outbreak in the United Kingdom. Does the First Minister agree that further steps need to be taken to ensure that C diff is recorded appropriately on death certificates? Is he able to advise the chamber whether he or the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has been told of the further delay to the conclusion of the public inquiry?

Yesterday, the SNP’s election campaign was launched. There was not very much razzmatazz; rather, there was a poster and pledges on what appeared to be beer-mats. There was not much substance either, but there was a huge amount of spin. As we will see from the budget that has been presented to us, yesterday’s election pledge on the NHS is already in complete disarray. It is more to do with sleight of hand and misdirection rather than the unvarnished truth. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing promises protection for the NHS, and the First Minister tells us that he will spend £1 billion over the next session. If that amounts to protection, they must be deluded—or worse, they think that we are deluded. Their version of protection amounts to cuts.

I have annoyed the member. Sit down. The First Minister said: “We’ve protected the health service in real-terms”

No. We know that, because of the higher cost of drugs among other things, the rate of inflation in health is around 4 per cent in real terms. Therefore, there has been a cut in real terms that is being felt in hospital wards throughout the country. If the budget was set to rise, as the SNP claims, the SNP would not be implementing plans to cut thousands of nurses and other front-line staff. Some 4,000 staff—1,500 of them nurses—will be gone from the NHS this year alone. That is in the good times, before the UK coalition’s budget cuts begin to bite. Those cuts are entirely down to the SNP. They are the SNP’s cuts, and it cannot blame anyone else. SNP ministers failed to pass on the 6.7 per cent year-on-year increases that Labour delivered for the NHS in England. The SNP took a deliberate decision to give the NHS in Scotland a lower spending settlement of just 2.4 per cent. The NHS is not safe in the SNP’s hands. It has not left the NHS in a strong position to defend itself from Tory cuts. Let us take a closer look at the health board allocation. The Scottish Government claims a 3.2 per cent increase for territorial health boards but, looking a little closer, we find that the increase reduces to 1.8 per cent and, potentially, it reduces further when we consider the new burdens on health boards. Responsibility for free prescriptions now falls on health boards rather than being funded from the centre. Responsibility for running health provision in the Scottish Prison Service now falls on health boards. That was at a cost of £10 million. The responsibility was transferred from the justice budget to the health budget—it is just a shame that the £10 million did not accompany the transfer of responsibility. It is a new burden, but there is no new money. That is more spin, and more smoke and mirrors. There has been a massive reduction in capital spending. Across the board, it is reduced by a third, but the largest reduction has fallen to health, for which the budget is £171 million less in the coming year. What projects will not proceed? What happens to the critical problem of maintenance, which is an issue in our health service? In a complete about-turn, the SNP has now embraced PPP—it might call it something else, but that is exactly what it is. I remind members of what Nicola Sturgeon said about PPP: “PFI for schools and hospitals results in money being taken away from front-line services and used instead to line the pockets of people in the private sector.”—[Official Report, 31 October 2007; c 2847.] Clearly, she has changed her mind. The reality on the ground is that the NHS is creaking. The number of operations being cancelled is up, because we do not have sufficient capacity. Bed numbers are down. Readmissions are up, because people are being forced out too early. The staff do a tremendous job and I am sure that, if the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing was here, she would agree with me. However, although warm words from politicians to recognise the importance of the efforts of health service workers are always welcome, they are no substitute for decent levels of resources. What about social care? That is where the true scandal of the SNP term of office is exposed. I will set out a fact from an Audit Scotland report that SNP members will not like. When the SNP inherited the social care budget, there was £3.2 billion in it but, in short order, the SNP cut that to £2.8 billion, which is £400 million less. That is £400 million cut from some of the most vulnerable people in our community. Against that, we have the Government change fund of £70 million, which is a drop in the ocean of the overall social care budget. I understand that, some weeks earlier, the figure was £140 million, but the health secretary lost the argument with the finance secretary. When we judge a Government, we should judge it by its actions rather than its words. If we get beyond the headlines, we see the inherent dishonesty of the SNP position, with a £400 million cut from social care and a real-terms reduction in the health budget line. We are used to SNP broken promises, as we have had more than 100 of them, but for the SNP to break its key pledge on health on the very day that it makes it is astonishing. The voters of Scotland will not forgive the SNP for that.

The member’s time is up.

Is the minister saying that Audit Scotland is wrong?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will revisit plans to remove £10 million from the Scottish pandemic flu budget in light of concerns expressed regarding the potential rate of influenza A (H1N1). (S3F-2829)

I associate myself with the First Minister's comments about the NHS because it has pulled out all the stops to deal with flu. I am sure that the First Minister will also agree that we need to avoid any complacency in dealing with H1N1 flu strains in future years. He will, of course, be aware that flu viruses can mutate, that vaccines might need to be varied, and that vaccine stocks might need to be increased to deal with the situation. Will any contingency budget be available if the £10 million is removed? Is the First Minister aware of the increasing concern that was highlighted by England's chief medical officer about mortality rates among people with co-infection, particularly group A streptococcal infection and meningococcal disease? What contingency plans does the Scottish Government have in place to deal with that?

First there were 26, then there were 25. Now there is none, although that is only temporary, and the cabinet secretary believes that eight or nine would be fine. I am, of course, referring to the school closures that Argyll and Bute Council has proposed. Whatever the number, we know that those school closure proposals will re-emerge in the next two months and, given the really tight timetable for consultation and decision making, I make no apology for focusing on Argyll and Bute. Before I do so, however, I want to deal with the smoke and mirrors that the cabinet secretary is always so keen to conjure for us. The school closure proposals came from the SNP-independent administration in Argyll and Bute Council; indeed, the convener of education overseeing all this was a very well-respected member of the SNP. Although I understand absolutely why Mike Russell might not like me pointing out that fact, it is all absolutely true: the SNP was a key architect in the school closure proposals for Argyll and Bute. Let us have no  more pretending that somehow it was not involved. The people of Argyll and Bute deserve honesty from their politicians—and, indeed, their aspiring politicians. Nevertheless, I welcome all converts to the cause and the action that the new Lib Dem-independent administration has taken in removing the proposals from the table for review. I want to give the chamber a flavour of the Argyll and Bute proposals. A total of 25 school closures were proposed for consultation, including four schools in my area: Kilcreggan, Rosneath, Luss and Parklands, the last of which is a special needs school dealing with children with profound and complex disabilities who would really struggle in mainstream education. There were huge and significant flaws and errors in the process, the first of which related to pupil population projections. Those projections looked only a year ahead and, at the beginning, covered all children from four to 18, even though only primary schools were under consideration. As a result, they needed to be adjusted to cover only primary-age children. Moreover, they missed a huge population increase that will happen at Her Majesty's Naval Base Clyde at Faslane. Although we know that a significant number of new families will move into that area, those figures have not been properly factored in. The second error related to capacity calculations. In one school, for example, corridors—corridors, I ask you—were counted as teaching space. This must be a new take on reduced class sizes. Clearly I had not understood that the policy meant that teaching would take place in corridors. The third error concerned travel routes, which were not accurately timed or properly specified. There was also no idea as to what form of transport would be used. We were asking parents to send children as young as four years old to school in buses that had no seat belts or adult supervision beyond the bus driver. Frankly, I do not think that that is acceptable. The fourth error related to the financial assumptions, which were woeful. Sometimes I struggle to imitate some of my colleagues in the chamber who are accountants but I—and the families—have worked out that it will cost more to close Luss primary school than it will to keep it open. That is simply absurd. I will not go through the whole litany of errors, but I think that two in particular stand out. Argyll and Bute Council missed two of the statutory requirements in the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010: first, there was no community impact assessment; and, secondly, there was no consideration of alternative options. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that, if any local authority—not just Argyll and Bute, because I  recognise his difficulty in that respect—fails to meet the requirements of the act in the way that I have described, ministers will call in the closure proposals for consideration?

I thank the cabinet secretary for that information. Of course, both the Argyll and Scottish rural schools networks, to which my colleague Jamie McGrigor has paid tribute, have been meticulous in exposing the flaws in the proposals. In fact, they have submitted to the Public Petitions Committee a petition suggesting those very areas of improvement that I understand might be considered before Parliament rises. We know that the proposals will come back and that they might well feature the eight or nine schools that the cabinet secretary believes should close. Whether or not they do, only he knows, unless he is sufficiently brave to publish his list. When those proposals come back, they will need our attention. After all, we need to protect rural schools that are thriving, that are at the centre of their local communities and that matter to the economic vitality of their areas. I suggest that, if the cabinet secretary wants to continue his campaign to be MSP for Argyll and Bute, he lobby John Swinney to give Argyll and Bute Council some helpful flexibility over how it uses its resources. After all, it has the worst local government settlement of the 32 local authorities. If he managed to get additional funding for Argyll and Bute, even I would find it possible to welcome the announcement. I look forward to future discussions, to the meeting with Angela Constance about Argyll and Bute schools and to the cabinet secretary's lobbying of John Swinney.

Will the member give way?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement and for acknowledging my efforts to oppose the closure of local schools in Helensburgh and Lomond. I confess that the cabinet secretary has not yet been to a school in my area, but I will happily arrange for a coffee morning or a stall, should he wish to drop by. Although it is the case that the proposals were developed by an SNP-independent administration—indeed, the education convener was an SNP member—I have worked on a cross-party basis to protect schools and will continue to do so. I repeat my request to the cabinet secretary that Angela Constance, the Minister for Skills and Lifelong Learning, agree to a meeting to discuss the proposals, because we know that the proposals will come back with a short space of time for consultation.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers the Maid of the Loch to be a cultural asset and, if so, what assistance it will provide to the Loch Lomond Steamship Company to help her sail again. (S3O-12490)

The minister will be aware that her predecessor, Michael Russell, agreed to provide substantially more in-kind assistance to help the Maid of the Loch to be fully restored. It is, therefore, extremely disappointing that she has not honoured that welcome commitment. It is customary for commitments that are made by a minister to be honoured by their successors in the same Government. As an eternal optimist, I ask the minister, who views the Maid of the Loch as a cultural asset, what practical things she will do to help.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the significant flaws in the consultation on school closures in Argyll and  Bute. Across a whole range of measures, the council has failed to make a case for closure in the overwhelming majority of schools. In particular, the requirements of carrying out a community impact assessment and considering alternative options to closure were absent. The cabinet secretary will be aware that both requirements are statutory. I have written to the new minister to ask her for a cross-party meeting to discuss the substantial concerns about Argyll and Bute Council's approach. I would be grateful if I could entice the cabinet secretary to provide us all with an early Christmas present by agreeing to that request.

The cabinet secretary will of course be aware of the recent Government statistics that show that there are already 550 fewer nurses in the NHS. Before the financial year is out, a total cut of 1,500 nurses will be made. Does the cabinet secretary, who I know is fond of hearing the facts, recognise that, according to nurses themselves, the strain that is being felt is considerable—operations are being cancelled, re-admissions are up and the risk of contracting hospital-acquired infections is increasing? Does she recognise that her boast about the increase in the number of staff in the NHS is perhaps down to much higher increases in managers and not the nurses who deliver front-line care?

The minister is all smoke and mirrors.

I, too, congratulate Karen Gillon on securing the debate and thank Age Scotland and the WRVS for their helpful briefings. The debate is timely when we consider the challenges that have been posed by the severe weather and the needs of older people who might be isolated and stuck at home. It is clear to me that the WRVS has a key role to play in reaching those older people and in prevention. Without doubt, preventive care is sensible, long-term planning. It is more efficient financially and better socially. Preventive spending improves the quality of life for sick and older people and it reduces the amount that has to be spent on providing care at the point at which people need more critical or substantial care. The allocation of funding to preventive care would fix the leak so that we do not have to spend tightening budgets on bailing out the water. I will give an example that members will know about. The pilot partnerships for older people projects were a United Kingdom scheme that built a community infrastructure by collaborating in public service delivery. The scheme had a budget of £60 million. When it was evaluated recently, the savings to social care services were shown to be  £1.20 for every pound spent. That is a saving of £72 million. The scheme helped something like 246,000 people, the average age of whom was 75—those of us who are in the chamber still have a long way to go—and the achievements are fascinating. Overnight hospital stays were reduced by as much as 47 per cent. Attendance at accident and emergency departments was reduced by 29 per cent. Out-patient appointments were reduced by 11 per cent, phone calls to GPs were down by 28 per cent, visits to practice nurses decreased by 25 per cent, and GP appointments were reduced by 10 per cent. What was not captured, other than in anecdotes, was that people were much happier and had a better quality of life. Those are all substantial results from which we should learn. The work that is done by the WRVS is an essential starting point, with its 4,000 volunteers across Scotland working directly with older people to support their independent living and provide its services of home support, good neighbours scheme, meals on wheels, books on wheels, lunch clubs and community transport. All of that is critical and essential to our older people feeling connected with their community. The WRVS goes about its work by meeting the needs that older people identify themselves, which I think is important. Older people appreciate that. A recent survey suggested that, as a result of the intervention of the WRVS, 62 per cent of service users left the house and 57 per cent were able to get to medical appointments when they would not otherwise have done so. Providing such personalised care at a local level is what the WRVS does so well. We know that severe weather conditions increase the risk of ill health to older people. This is a time when they are in need of more support. When snow leaves the country gridlocked and councils find the conditions challenging—although they are doing a valiant job—it is local organisations such as the WRVS that step into the breach. A number of members have talked about the challenging demographics, such as the increase of 35 per cent by 2031 in the number of pensioners. In a shorter period of time—I am sure that the minister will tell me the exact date—75 per cent more 75-year-olds are expected. All of that will cost us more in the long run. Estimates are of a £27 billion rise in the costs of providing care over the next 15 years while spending falls by £42 billion. There will be a huge gap. We need to recognise the role of voluntary organisations such as the WRVS and the army of unpaid carers who we know contribute so much. The key question is how we go about working better. We need a deliberate shift to more care delivered in local settings, and we need a fully  integrated health and social care service. The voluntary sector has a key and important role to play if the focus is to be on local delivery. Let me finish with a quotation from 2005 that is just as relevant today: "A shift towards care in local settings is not just a shift in where care is delivered, it is a shift in how care is delivered." The WRVS has an essential role to play in that shift.

For the record, I say to Jeremy Purvis that he is incorrect. None of our proposals is about creating a new quango. The eight special boards employ 12,500 staff at a cost of £2.5 billion. Does the cabinet secretary believe that any savings could be made if functions were merged? When money is tight, I am sure that she will agree that we want resources to be directed to the front line.

Will the minister explain why funding for social care has dropped from £3.2 billion in 2007-08 to £2.8 billion in 2009-10? That is a reduction of £400 million, which has been taken from our most vulnerable citizens.

Did the voluntary sector representatives mention the decline in social care spending that it has inherited from the SNP? In 2007-08, £3.2 billion was spent on social care. In 2009-10, that was reduced to £2.8 billion. To continue the football analogy, is that not a bit of an own goal?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

England does it, Northern Ireland does it, Wales does it and even the Republic of Ireland does it. They all publish three-year if not four-year budgets. Even the Republic of Ireland, which does not have its woes to seek—[ Interruption .]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Even the Republic of Ireland, which does not have its woes to seek, yesterday published its budget for the next four years. Why not Scotland? Why are we denied the same information? We might be forgiven for thinking that the Scottish Government just does not have the financial information that we are asking for, but we would be mistaken, because it does. It knows the budget—all of it: it knows the budget for this year and the indicative budgets for next year, the year after that and the year after that. The harsh reality of the financial climate is not a reason for not  publishing the information—in fact, the opposite is the case—but, for reasons best known to the SNP, we and the people of Scotland are to be denied the information. This Parliament was established to ensure openness and transparency in the governance of Scotland. Many of us will defend those principles to the hilt, but we are faced with a Government that seems intent on doing exactly the opposite: hiding information from us and covering things by sleight of hand like some kind of magician's conjuring trick. People are not daft. They know that this is nothing more than a one-year election budget, designed to hide the true extent of the budget cuts that need to be made with minimal scrutiny by the Parliament and no understanding of the overall financial context for future years. We might as well be blindfolded, but perhaps that is something that the cabinet secretary wants. This is nothing more than crude SNP electoral politics. It deliberately ignores the interests of the country. Let me tell the cabinet secretary why I believe that forward indicative budget information is so important. It enables organisations, such as councils, health boards, universities, colleges, those in the voluntary sector and many more besides, to plan ahead. I know that because I used to work in the public sector. I understand the value of forward planning. Decisions about investment or reduction are likely to be better if people know the financial context in which they are operating. The choice between ending a project completely and simply delaying implementation can be properly taken only if the decision maker understands the budget for future years. Contrary to what the cabinet secretary claimed, without any idea of future budgets we discourage people from engaging in preventative spending. There is no incentive for them to act in the short term because they will not see results in a year. It is inherently dishonest to advocate spending on preventive measures, as the Scottish Government rightly does, and then deliver nothing to encourage that with a short-term budget. It is another disappointing example of all talk and no action. I turn to the health budget. The SNP promised to protect health spending, but what a hollow promise that was when we consider the cuts that the SNP is already making. Some 4,000 NHS staff are out the door, 1,500 of whom are nurses. Those are cuts made entirely by the SNP—and that is before the coalition cuts start to bite.

No.  The rhetoric coming from the Government benches about protecting health is not matched by the reality in hospital wards across the country. What lies ahead? More SNP spin and more smoke and mirrors. In revenue terms, there is a real-terms reduction of £33.9 million. The cabinet secretary looks confused—

I suggest that the cabinet secretary looks at table 8.02 on page 117 of the budget document. The Scottish Government claims a 3.2 per cent increase for territorial health boards, but in reality that is a cut when we consider the rate of NHS inflation. If we look at little closer, the 3.2 per cent rapidly reduces to a 1.8 per cent increase because the Government has added in new burdens. It has cynically transferred the forward projection for the cost of free prescriptions—something that sat in a separate budget line—and introduced new burdens so that the budget line for boards rises but the money is already all committed. How cynical is that?

No. There are other new burdens, such as the responsibility of running of health provision in the Scottish Prison Service.

Perhaps, if the cabinet secretary can answer this question. The responsibility of running health provision in the Scottish Prison Service has been moved to health, but the £10 million that it takes to run that service seems to have been lost in transition. Will the cabinet secretary tell us where that £10 million has gone?

Contrary to what the cabinet secretary claims, we have always said that we would pass on the Barnett formula consequentials and that we would protect health, but that we would do more than that—[ Interruption .]

The cabinet secretary asks the question but does not want to listen to the answer. Frankly, when she can explain where the £10 million has gone in the transfer from the Scottish Prison Service to health, I might be able to engage with her more sensibly.

There is a capital reduction of £69 million, and the Government has not told us where the cuts will come. Which projects will not be proceeded with? What the Government has done with social care spending underlines where it is going. It has presided over a decline in social care spending from 2008 of—

Can I finish on this point, Presiding Officer?

It's true.

I, too, congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate. I also congratulate her on lodging probably the longest members' business motion in the history of the Parliament—certainly, it must be one of the longest. More important, there appears to be consensus in the chamber on its substance. I have no doubt about the value of self-management of long-term conditions. People with long-term conditions want information and support so that they can take control and, when appropriate, be responsible for part of their own care. As Nanette Milne has said, a million patients in the UK receive anticoagulation therapy, and it is interesting to note that there are an estimated 10 to 15 per cent more year on year. That, in itself, puts pressure on the system. We have had described to us the visit to the hospital-based clinic, the taking of the blood sample, the analysis in the lab, the results coming back, the interpretation by the physician and, finally, at the end of that process, the dose being adjusted if necessary. It seems a long and complicated process, particularly considering that the portable devices that are now available to enable people to self-monitor do away with the need to visit hospital and then wait for results. The use of such devices therefore strikes me as eminently sensible. The clinching argument for me is that using the portable devices makes financial sense, too, considering the cost of each hospital visit—between £60 and £100—and the number of times per year that people need to go to hospital, never mind the loss of salary for those who need to take time off work. The cumulative total is well in excess of £1,000, whereas the cost of a portable meter is just below £300 plus the cost of the strips each year. It makes financial sense. I realise that self-monitoring is not for everybody and that some patients will not be comfortable doing that, but we should enable those patients who want to do that to do it. As someone who represents a constituency that is served by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, I am pleased that it supports self-management of anticoagulation therapy at Yorkhill hospital. However, like Nanette Milne, I regret the fact that that stops when the patient turns 18 and becomes an adult. It would have been sensible to roll the initiative out so that adults could access self-management, too. I hope that that is considered. As the numbers are increasing, the pressure on the system will increase, so self-management makes financial sense for the NHS and, probably more important, for the patient. It means no travelling and no waiting. Empowering and  enabling patients to participate in the management of their own care is quite a powerful thing to do, and it is the direction of travel that we should take with all long-term conditions. I again congratulate Nanette Milne and, in doing so, indicate my support for her motion.

The cabinet secretary is right to point to the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, which enabled action to be taken on overprovision and to restrict the availability of licences. However, he will be aware that not all licensing boards are adopting such measures fully. Will he commit himself to monitoring implementation of those and other measures for which the 2005 act provides and to publishing a report setting out the progress that has been made on the act's use?

Where was Nanette Milne in January, when we debated prescription charges on a motion from Mary Scanlon? Our position then was clear and it remains consistent today.

Rather than suggesting that what somebody planned did not come into effect, will the member address the fact that we have the lowest budget settlement ever since the creation of the NHS?

I welcome the opportunity to debate prescription charges again. We last debated the issue in January, on the basis of a Tory motion. Not content with the response then, the Tories are back again today. They are nothing if not persistent. I have to say that Derek Brownlee is at best confused and at worst deluded. Of course we recognise that there is a tough financial settlement. It is so tough that we have the smallest increase in the health budget since the creation of the health service way back in 1948, and it has been done by a Tory Government. We therefore need to ask what our priorities are and what can be afforded. However, I am flattered that Derek Brownlee listened so intently to all my conference speeches, and I look forward to his learning from them. In January, we supported the introduction of free prescriptions, and today Labour members will support the ending of prescription charges. We previously favoured an incremental approach that would have meant extending free prescriptions to those with long-term chronic conditions and those on a range of top-up benefits as a result of low incomes. At present, 92 per cent of all prescriptions in Scotland are issued free. Wide categories of people are already eligible, including under-18s, the unemployed and pregnant women. However, there is an issue, because a substantial proportion of the remaining 8 per cent have chronic conditions and they might require substantial amounts of medication that some might struggle to afford. It is therefore not accurate to say that only people who can afford to pay for prescriptions are paying for them. I repeat something that the cabinet secretary said, because it is valid: something like 600,000 adults in families in Scotland earn less than £16,000 a year, but that puts them slightly over the exemption level, so there are low-income families who are not exempt from paying prescription charges.

David McLetchie's attempt to rewrite history is inaccurate. We did bring forward proposals to reduce prescriptions. If he had been listening—which is something that the Tories would do well to do—he would know that I described that incremental approach. We could spend a lot of time today—as would suit David McLetchie—rehearsing old arguments, but that would not be valid. The cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government have reached a judgment about the value and affordability of prescription charges, and it is appropriate to question that policy robustly to ensure that it has been thought through. When we last debated the issue, the total recurring cost was set at £57 million from April 2011. I ask the cabinet secretary whether that figure remains accurate and whether it is in the budget.

That is helpful. Given that we witnessed a one-year election budget yesterday, can she provide assurances that the policy is sustainable? She knows the figures for the next three years. Will she tell us what has been set aside for 2012-13 and 2013-14 and whether percentage growth has been allowed for? There is a possibility of a general increase in demand, which needs to be factored in. That would assure not just the Parliament but the country that the policy is properly costed and sustainable beyond the current year.

I do not have time.

Do I? Fine. I am always delighted.

I do not know where Derek Brownlee was yesterday, but the problem is that the Parliament does not know the budgets for future years, in terms of the allocation of funds. On the basis of his question, he will not be voting for anything at all. We need to question the Government and ask it to come forward with those figures, so that the Parliament and the country can be reassured about the sustainability of the policy. I think that it is appropriate to ask for those figures. Members will know that we encouraged the Scottish Government to introduce free prescriptions for cancer patients in Scotland, in line with the policy in England and Wales. Let us  be clear: we are not asking for that to be done instead of addressing prescription charges for other chronic conditions, and it is wrong to suggest so. The SNP's manifesto pledge way back in 2007 was to "immediately abolish prescription charges for people with chronic health conditions, people with cancer, and people in full time education or training." We agreed with the approach of prioritising people with long-term illnesses by widening the conditions that are eligible for free prescriptions. However, while I welcome the ending of all charges and have sympathy with the cabinet secretary's reasoning, it remains the case that while charges for cancer patients were scrapped by the Labour UK Government in April 2009, cancer patients in Scotland were denied that benefit. It was absolutely right to abolish charges for cancer patients. It has transformed the lives of about 150,000 people, who have each benefited by saving up to £100 a year. We would have liked that to apply to Scotland, and it is a matter of regret that it does not. Voting for the Tory motion will put in jeopardy free prescriptions not just for people with chronic illnesses but for all. We on this side of the chamber will not do that, because we support the abolition of prescription charges in Scotland. I move amendment S3M-7423.1.1, to insert at end: ", but regrets that free prescriptions for cancer patients in Scotland were not implemented by April 2009 in line with England."

I, too, welcome the opportunity to debate the provision of care. Mary Scanlon has focused her motion on care home costs, and I will deal with that issue first. I share her view, however, that the debate should be wider and should consider the rich and diverse continuum of care that is provided in communities throughout Scotland. Mary Scanlon's central point—and indeed that of the minister—is that the cost of public sector care homes can be much higher than the cost of provision by the private sector. All else being equal in terms of quality, why is there a disparity? I know from experience that Argyll and Bute Council, which covers part of my constituency, can charge up to three times as much for its care home provision than the private sector does, so the question is a valid one. The situation is not quite as simple as many people would have us believe, however. As Mary Scanlon rightly suggested, there will be variations in staff terms and conditions, in whether pensions are provided for staff and in how much an employer will contribute to those pensions. Providing for older people in remote and rural areas can be less attractive for the private sector. Whatever is the case, I have no doubt that local authorities will be considering how they secure best value for their limited resources. I welcome the development of the national contract to ensure that a partnership approach to the care of the elderly is taken between local authorities and the private sector. I am disappointed that the motion does not mention the voluntary sector, with its rich history of providing social care, including in care homes. I accept, however, that Mary Scanlon covered that in her speech. That brings me to the point about the diversity of care provision. There are a variety of care providers, including local authorities, voluntary organisations and the private sector, and they are engaged in delivering a variety of different levels of care. Increasingly, providers are developing models of care that sustain people in their own communities and in their own homes. That is what older people say they want, and that is borne out by the trend that is emerging across local authorities of an increasing emphasis on home care. We face the challenge of changing demographics and I understand that, 20 years from now, there will be about 75 per cent more 75- year-olds. As I look around the chamber, I see that to be true.

It is indeed the case on the Tory benches, Karen Gillon says. We need to rethink how we do things. Doing more of the same in the face of those statistics will just not do. We should not view older people as a burden, who require to be cared for. The overwhelming majority of people—more than 80 per cent—do not come into contact with the care system at all. We should be encouraging a healthy and active old age. Let us value the lunch club or the older persons' club that is delivered in the local village hall. Let us value the yoga class taken by an 87-year-old pensioner—and in case members think I mean a participant, I am referring to my constituent Lily Kennedy, who leads a yoga class of people half her age. Care at home is one possibility—it is a matter of ensuring that the right level of support is provided by home helps and specialist staff. There is also sheltered housing and very sheltered housing, much of which is provided by specialist housing associations such as Bield. Sheltered housing enables older people to maintain their independence, balanced with the appropriate support. We must value and support our carers—the army of relatives and friends who provide care for loved ones every day. They need access to respite care, not just in emergency situations—although some councils are restricting eligibility to that. We should encourage diversity in provision and we must not lose sight of the value of prevention. That means funding the lunch club, the yoga class and the befriending project, because we know that they sustain people in their communities. To meet the challenge of the future we need the creation of a national care service, bringing together primary health and social care in one organisation, with one budget and one focus—on the person being cared for. In too many areas of Scotland, agencies are not working together. They are guarding their own budgets or, worse, cutting budgets in the expectation that somebody else will pick up the work, and it is the person who needs the care who suffers. It is often said that a society is judged by how well it treats its older and vulnerable people. Let us ensure that our society is well judged.

I welcome the stage 1 debate on the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill. I thank the Scottish Government for introducing the bill, the Health and Sport Committee for scrutinising it and all those who contributed to the consultation. Although I am pleased to indicate that Labour supports the general principles of the bill, we acknowledge many of the committee's concerns and intend to lodge a number of amendments at stage 2 to improve the bill's provisions. First, there is the fundamental question of whether legislation is required to achieve the outcome that all of us desire. I am glad that the cabinet secretary addressed that point. I know that the Scottish National Party had a manifesto pledge to give every patient a legally binding waiting time guarantee and I recognise that the bill falls short of that commitment; indeed, many of those who gave  evidence to the committee suggested that the lack of sanctions and of a means of enforcement are a potential weakness. I note that section 18 restricts the potential for legal action. I agree with that, because we do not want to foster a compensation culture or to create a bonanza for lawyers. Therefore, one must question why a legislative approach is needed. Rather than have legislation that simply declares or asserts something, we need legislation that sensibly advances patients' rights within a framework that recognises the mutuality of the NHS and the balance between rights and responsibilities of patients and of staff. The bill as drafted does not reflect that balance; as I understand it, it does not even reflect all of patients' existing rights. We favour an approach that enables the cabinet secretary to introduce a comprehensive charter of rights and that begins to get the balance right by reflecting responsibilities, too. However, she is right to say that we need to ensure that provisions are properly implemented. Any action of Government requires monitoring, reporting and assessment of whether it is working. There are many things in the health service that are not conditioned by legislation, but health boards are in no doubt about the importance of those issues. Secondly, the treatment time guarantee covers only in-patient procedures. I understand why it excludes people who require mental health treatment, for example, but it may have the effect of skewing clinical priorities. I note the cabinet secretary's comments, but I wonder whether the treatment time guarantee is not too blunt an instrument. Surely it would be better to have a more encompassing patient guarantee—a more sophisticated approach that covers different aspects of the patient journey, but with sufficient flexibility to allow for clinical priorities to be considered. That is not necessarily for legislation; rather, we want to enable ministers to take forward the matter in dialogue with patients and clinicians. Thirdly, and as Christine Grahame has mentioned, the role of patient rights officers lacks clarity and seems only to signpost, so it is not as wide in scope as the existing provision for the independent advice and support service. Surely it would be more cost effective to work with that model and to develop a national contract. We do not need legislation to secure best value. We agree with establishing the legal right to complain, which we think is important. We agree that we need to improve the NHS complaints system—and I am sure that many members who have worked with the system will testify to that. Again, one wonders whether that should be set out in legislation, but we are willing to consider that point further.  Most people who come to us to describe an unhelpful experience in the NHS do not really want to complain. In many cases, they want the NHS to apologise, and we should never underestimate the power of just saying sorry. Importantly, they also want the NHS to learn from the mistake, so that no one else goes through their experience. I have been told about the complaints system at the State Hospitals Board for Scotland, which is described as being based on the four Cs. The first of those is complimenting people. That does not happen often enough. We should be telling people that they have got something right—positive endorsement. Secondly, comments are taken on board. That is often enough to resolve a situation and to stop it escalating further. Thirdly, concerns are addressed. Thereafter, and only when necessary, are complaints considered. That system is very much about early resolution and it is important that we learn from that example. I agree with the suggestions that have been made about an alternative dispute resolution system. We have discussed no-fault compensation and mediation, and I am hopeful that the cabinet secretary will lodge amendments in that regard. We welcome the bill for the opportunity that it provides to raise patient rights up the agenda. I share the cabinet secretary's passion for the NHS, its staff and all the hard work that is done in treating our constituents, our families and our friends. We believe in a mutual NHS that is absolutely patient centred. On that basis, we will support the general principles of the bill.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sure that it is not the First Minister's intention to mislead Parliament, so I wonder whether he will correct two factual errors that he has made. First, it is not the case that consultant salaries have been frozen, as he said earlier. Secondly, the rise in the salary of the medical director by £50,000 to a staggering £235,000 was under the ministerial direction of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. She sanctioned that increase.

rose—

rose—

I thank the Health and Sport Committee and its clerks for all the work that they have undertaken to scrutinise the bill. I also thank the cabinet secretary, the Minister for Public Health and the bill team. They have raised the level of debate on alcohol, which has contributed substantially to people's awareness of alcohol and the harm that it can cause when it is taken to excess. Despite what some commentators have said, there is much on which we have agreed: the ban on quantity discounts, the restrictions on promotions, the age verification measures and, helpfully, at the end, the social responsibility levy. I will touch on two of those measures. The ban on quantity discounts changes fundamentally how alcohol is sold. According to the University of Sheffield study, it is likely to have an impact that is almost equally significant to the impact of minimum unit pricing. Almost half the benefits that are set out in the Sheffield study in relation to the number of deaths and reducing violent crime are attributable to the quantity discount ban. However, the approach that has been taken to the bill has been unfortunate. I recognise that the proposals were not included in the Scottish National Party's manifesto, but it is about two years since the Scottish Government signalled its intention to bring forward measures on alcohol, including minimum unit pricing, in "Changing Scotland's Relationship with Alcohol: A Framework for Action". The proposals went from being part of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, where they experienced some difficulty, to being part of a health bill, which was published in autumn last year. We have been debating alcohol for 21 months. That is ample time to get the measures right, to win support for them and to arrive at a consensus. It is therefore disappointing that little detailed work has been done on substantial areas of the bill. From the start, we have supported the Government in principle on the social responsibility levy, but we have called consistently for more detail. The Health and Sport Committee echoed that call. How will the levy operate, to whom will it apply, how much will it be, and how will the Government ensure that the revenue that is raised goes to health or policing to deal with the consequences of alcohol abuse? We were told that the Government was in dialogue with the industry and that they would work out matters collectively. How disappointing it was to be told  that the working group had met but a handful of times and that the previous meeting before we raised the issue was in August 2009, some 14 months ago. That is not the way in which to proceed. The Government must take a more collaborative approach to the matter in future.

I can indeed give the cabinet secretary an explanation, as I will now turn to the subject of minimum unit pricing. There was a lot of common ground that we could have exploited. We all agreed about the scale of the problem; we all agreed about the need for action; and we all absolutely agreed that price is part of the solution. I have previously set out our reasons for not supporting minimum unit pricing. It is not effective, it is potentially illegal and it puts £140 million into the pockets of supermarkets. The cabinet secretary has spoken about consensus, but she has behaved very differently. She knows the content of the discussions that she had with me and with Cathy Jamieson. They were not about achieving consensus. I have to tell the cabinet secretary that I do not think that Cathy Jamieson or I are the problem.

No. From the start—and for 21 months—no attempts were made to negotiate or genuinely to build consensus.

I have thought very carefully about what I am saying to the Parliament, and there is no attempt to mislead.  There was no attempt to negotiate or genuinely to build consensus. Over the summer, Labour, the Tories and the Lib Dems convened a meeting with the cabinet secretary to try and achieve a consensus. We set out the initial basis of a proposal that sought to put in place a different pricing mechanism: a floor price plus duty and VAT, with the cost of production added in. In France, a method involving the cost of invoicing is used, so a pricing mechanism is already out there, and it is not dissimilar to the approach that was set out by the cabinet secretary in the Scottish Government's response to the United Kingdom coalition Government's consultation on alcohol pricing. However, the cabinet secretary did not wish to work in consensus with us. Consensus is not about waiting until we all agree with the cabinet secretary; it is about how we come together to work out solutions in the Parliament. Our actions are not motivated by crude politics. The people who have been braying in the chamber this afternoon have not been on our benches, but on the Government's benches. The failure to arrive at a consensus has not been on our part. It is not every day that Ross Finnie, Murdo Fraser and I agree, but we did so in order to propose an alternative approach that could have merit. We did not take our decision to oppose minimum unit pricing lightly. In fact, we were the last of the major political parties to express a view on the matter. The Tories said no to minimum unit pricing right at the start, in February 2009. In March 2009, Mike Rumbles said that the Liberals would not support minimum unit pricing. We waited. Cathy Jamieson considered representations. I sought out opinion from Alcohol Focus Scotland, the British Medical Association and other organisations. We also considered the University of Sheffield report very carefully. We came to our decision nine months later, after the initial framework had been published and after all the evidence was out in the public domain. I assure the Parliament that, in all that time, there were no genuine attempts by the cabinet secretary to arrive at any compromise or any consensus. I regret the view that the Parliament has arrived at today regarding caffeinated alcohol. I respect that view but, needless to say I will continue to pursue the matter. I hope, eventually, to convince all members of our proposed approach, as the evidence for it is there—in our prisons, in our communities, on our streets and on the faces of the many young people who have been scarred by Buckfast bottles. Labour has a proud record on public health. We introduced the smoking ban, with the support of the Parliament, and the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005. We will work with all those who want to take  action on alcohol, because the people of Scotland expect nothing less. However, they also expect that such action should be effective. Today, we continue to make progress, and I congratulate the cabinet secretary on that. We are building on the 2005 act, and the bill will help to make a difference in tackling the overconsumption of alcohol in Scotland. I urge support for the bill.

I support Ross Finnie's amendment 39 and Jamie Stone's amendment 40, which I understand reflects the view of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. Starting with the latter, I am pleased that the committee took the view that a super-affirmative procedure is required to introduce the levy, because the debate on the levy has been characterised by a lack of detail from the Government. Initially, the levy was to be based on the principle of polluter pays, then it was to be a blanket levy on all in the on and off-trades, but we do not know whether it is to be based on floor space, volume of alcohol sales, rateable value or something else. The storm of protest has been considerable because we do not know how the levy will operate, how much it will cost or anything about it. We are largely operating in the dark. The cabinet secretary will be pleased to hear that I agree with the principle of a social responsibility levy, but it is disappointing that so little effort has been put into establishing the detail. I recall the Government saying on numerous occasions that meetings had been undertaken with the industry, but the industry says different. The last meeting, until we raised the issue, was way back in August 2009. There has been little engagement on the substance of the matter. It is disappointing that, so late in the day, we are considering such substantive matters. Jamie Stone's amendment 40 is helpful and will ensure maximum scrutiny. I am pleased to learn that the Government will support it. Ross Finnie's amendment 39, which would include in any consultation voluntary organisations that are involved in health and alcohol policy, seems eminently sensible and should be supported. For the first time, I agree with Murdo Fraser, in that I prefer Jamie Stone's amendment 40 to his amendment 41. On Mary Scanlon's amendment 42, I agree with the principle that she sets out, but I believe that an economic impact assessment is a matter of good practice that  should be undertaken by Government in the normal course of events and therefore does not have to be spelt out in the bill.

We support amendments 10 to 12 in the cabinet secretary's name but are opposed to the amendments from Murdo Fraser and Ross Finnie. I acknowledge that Ross Finnie's and Murdo Fraser's amendments are well intentioned and that they want to reward retailers who engage in good practice. I do not disagree with that approach, but I genuinely feel that we have not thought through how that would be achieved in practice. What would we do in a circumstance in which a retailer had undertaken really positive education work with local youth groups but, nevertheless, was responsible for the majority of alcohol sales in a particular area that was the focus of antisocial behaviour? I suspect that much of what Murdo Fraser and Ross Finnie propose is born out of frustration at the lack of detail about how the social responsibility levy would operate. That is clearly an unsatisfactory state of affairs. It is not helpful at all to bring forward drafts at the 59th minute of the 11th hour. The social responsibility levy would benefit from further work and discussion, but it cannot be resolved at stage 3, so I suggest that the best approach would be for the Government to engage in dialogue with the industry, local authorities and public health interests as part of a package of regulations that set out the detail of the levy.

For the avoidance of doubt, I point out that we presented evidence to the Health and Sport Committee and to every MSP and we placed that evidence in the Scottish Parliament information centre. This is the second time Michael Matheson has had the evidence; he clearly did not read it the first time. I also point out to him that if he had listened carefully at the start, he would have heard me quote Dr Mary Claire O'Brien's studies over time on caffeinated alcohol—not energy drinks—use among a substantial cohort of students in America. It really depresses me that the SNP dismisses evidence  because it comes from America and because something has not been done in Scotland. I say to the SNP, with all due respect, that I know that the volume of consumption of caffeinated alcohol is less than 1 per cent of the total volume of alcohol consumption. We have lodged a very focused amendment to tackle a problem that has a disproportionate impact on our community. If consumption of caffeinated alcohol is less than 1 per cent of total alcohol consumption, why is it causing the scale of problem that it is clearly causing in communities right across Scotland? I hesitate to say this to the cabinet secretary because she is, of course, a lawyer, but the measure that we propose is legal. I refer her to the other EU countries that have taken similar steps. Frankly, she is wrong on this occasion. She told us earlier that sometimes we need guts and leadership to do the right thing. I am so disappointed that on this issue she demonstrates neither.

It is time for this Parliament to take action on caffeinated alcohol. There is evidence and expert opinion to back that up, and we can learn from a variety of actions that have been taken by other countries. [ Interruption .]

This week, Michigan banned caffeinated alcohol. So, too, did Oklahoma, and Pennsylvania has followed suit. It is widely expected that, in a few short weeks, the Food and Drug Administration will announce a ban across America. Those decisions have been taken by serious legislative bodies acting on evidence, not on a whim.  Amendment 28 seeks to impose a limit of 150mg per litre of caffeine in alcoholic drinks. It proposes a legal limit, not a ban, as some have reported. We propose that limit because we believe that we have a problem. Two caffeinated alcohol products that are currently on the market exceed that limit. One is Buckfast; the other is Red Square Reloaded. Buckfast has 375mg of caffeine per litre, and it is 15 per cent alcohol by volume. To put that another way, the effect of drinking one bottle of it is equivalent to the effect of drinking six cans of lager and eight cans of Coca-Cola simultaneously. That is a powerful combination, which creates a wired, wide-awake drunk. Let me explain how that happens. When a person drinks an excessive amount of alcohol, they normally become sleepy—they might even be physically sick. That is the effect of a depressant. However, caffeine is a stimulant that works on the neurotransmitters in people's brains in an entirely different way. It hides and masks the effects of the alcohol, causes people to feel less drunk, and consequently causes them to drink more. It has also been found that it leads to increased risk-taking behaviour. That it leads to twice the number of sexual assaults and twice the number of drink-driving incidents—those are just a couple of examples—was established in studies of American college students that have been carried out every year for the past five years. An average of 4,000 students have been involved in each of those studies. That sample, which is being considered over time, is hardly small. Members may say that that is all very well because that is in America and we do not have a problem here, but we do. Strathclyde Police reported that 5,600 crime reports in a three-year period mentioned consumption of Buckfast. That is three crimes a day. It is noted in the McKinlay report that 42 per cent of young offenders who admitted to drinking before their offences had been drinking Buckfast wine. We also know that the market in America is better developed than the market here. In six months, what we have witnessed happening in America will happen here. I have been told that it is impossible to change the recipe of particular caffeinated alcohol products and that we are talking about something that effectively amounts to a ban. That is quite simply nonsense. Let me illustrate that with Buckfast. A green bottle of Buckfast in Scotland has 375mg of caffeine per litre and 15 per cent alcohol by volume. A brown bottle of Buckfast in Ireland has a staggering 550mg of caffeine per litre. That is a clear demonstration that any recipe can be changed.  If the Government is prepared to consider the evidence objectively and does not believe me, let me quote Dr Laurence Gruer. He said: "There is little published evidence that combining alcohol with caffeine increases the risk of aggressive or violent behaviour." [ Interruption .]

He said: "This may simply be because the research has not been done rather than because there is no link. Nevertheless, we think there is sufficient information to support regulation to restrict the amount of caffeine in combination products." Who is Laurence Gruer? He is none other than the respected director of public health science in NHS Health Scotland. I urge members to support my amendment. I move amendment 28.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether you can provide some clarification, because I think that the Parliament has just agreed to a sunset clause for something that has just vanished into the sunset.

Considerable concern has been expressed about the effect of these amendments, and I am sure that, like me, other members will have been inundated by e-mails and briefings about them. That said, they are much improved from the versions that were lodged at stage 2, which caught up credit cards with loyalty cards and impacted on the Co-op's dividend scheme. I am grateful to Ian McKee for the effort that he has put into these amendments, which have provoked a thoughtful debate. Nevertheless, concerns remain and I will be interested in hearing the cabinet secretary's comments and Ian McKee's summing up. First of all, amendment 23 would perhaps have the effect of restricting people from redeeming the fee that they have paid for a distillery tour against the purchase of a bottle of whisky.  Amendment 26 would prohibit sampling of alcohol in on-sales premises such as pubs but not in off-sales such as supermarkets. That does not entirely make sense, and it would not provide for a level playing field. In addition, it has been suggested that restricting a sample size to no more than 25ml would have a perverse incentive, given that a sample of that size of, say, whisky would deliver 10 times as much alcohol as a sample of beer of the same size. It seems strange to discriminate against beer, which has a considerably lower level of alcohol than drinks such as whisky. It has also been suggested that introductory money-off vouchers are about marketing new brands rather than incentivising customers to buy large quantities of alcohol. I would be grateful if the cabinet secretary clarified whether money-off vouchers could be used to purchase a large volume of alcohol or whether that is already prevented by the quantity discount ban measures. Equally, I would be grateful for her view on whether the awarding of bonus points on loyalty cards in such circumstances is already prohibited by those measures. In my view it is, but we need to ensure that we avoid having a loophole. The cabinet secretary should send a strong signal that  we do not believe that bonus points on loyalty cards should be used to incentivise the purchase of alcohol by agreeing to introduce regulations should any retailer behave in such an irresponsible fashion.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Taxes.

It is disappointing that the debate has been dominated by one issue—minimum unit pricing—which the Scottish Government did, indeed, seek to portray as a magic bullet. I therefore regard this as an opportunity lost. There is lots of common ground that could have been exploited: we all agree on the scale of the problem, the need for action and that price has a key part to play in tackling the overconsumption of alcohol. The only point of disagreement has been about how it should be done. We oppose minimum unit pricing not on political grounds, as some would have you believe, Presiding Officer, but because we do not believe that it works. That view is shared by the main Opposition parties in this chamber. There are three main concerns: minimum unit pricing is untried and untested; it is possibly illegal; and it will put £140 million a year into the pockets of  supermarkets. At a time when the Scottish Government is facing a tight budget settlement, every penny of that £140 million should go into tackling the consequences of alcohol abuse. We would spend the money on education, enforcement and treatment. Indeed, the Institute for Fiscal Studies published a report backing the use of tax rather than minimum unit pricing for that very reason. The only place where minimum unit pricing has been tried is in a small aboriginal community in Cook Island and I tell the chamber that they did not proceed with it. It is perfectly valid to test certain assumptions about the effect of pricing, as the Sheffield study did. Econometric studies are useful and they have their place, but I note that Dr Petra Meier compared modelling to weather forecasting when she presented information to the Health and Sport Committee. We all know that weather forecasting is notoriously difficult to do. The Scottish Government made a number of claims about minimum unit pricing that have proven to be false. The heaviest drinkers are not the most price sensitive; the policy will do little to change their behaviour. Young people in the 18 to 24 age group are the least likely to be affected. Indeed the fastest-growing alcohol consumption by cohort is among middle-class women with higher-than-average incomes. The impact of minimum unit pricing on them is not significant. On the question of legality, we have asked time and again for the Government to share the effect of its legal advice. We believe that minimum unit pricing would be open to challenge under EU law, not on the ground of competition, because public health will override that consideration, but because the measure could be considered disproportionate. We cannot have a situation where the Government and the Parliament knowingly pass a law that is not competent, yet little assurance on that point has been provided. In addition, calls from the committee to name the price went largely unheeded until late in the day. If a proposal is fundamentally flawed there is little point in having a sunset clause that does not address those concerns. Over the summer, we reached out to the cabinet secretary on a cross-party basis and convened a meeting to try to achieve consensus. At every turn we have sought that opportunity. I am proud of Labour's record on public health. I am proud of our actions in introducing the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, which created the basis for much of this action. It takes guts and leadership to do the right thing, but it also takes guts and leadership to reject something that we strongly believe will not be effective.

The minister is aware of discussions about the provision of salaried dentists in areas that have shortages of dental practices, but progress on that seems to be delayed. Will she ensure that any barriers to employing salaried dentists are dealt with quickly?

The First Minister will be aware that, in highlighting the problem of alcohol abuse, the study said that action on pricing needed to be taken across the UK. I invite him to consider the very credible proposals that the three main Opposition parties in the chamber have put forward on how to tackle the issue with alcohol. Given that there is no price differential north and south of the border, we need to look at other factors to explain drinking behaviour in Scotland. I invite the First Minister to join the growing consensus in the chamber that we should take action on pricing across the UK. [ Interruption .]

I very much regret the proposal to close RAF Kinloss and the wider defence cuts, which will have an impact on Faslane, with job losses expected. Will the cabinet secretary extend the assistance provided to Moray to include Faslane, should that be required, and does he recognise that the Nimrod planes based at RAF Kinloss provide air support for Trident submarines? Will he therefore join me, in order to help secure the future of RAF Kinloss, in making the argument that the operation and safety of Trident could be compromised?

The minister will not be surprised if I refer to correspondence and reports from local authorities and COSLA that suggest that they would oppose the bill, based on the likely costs that would arise from it. Will she confirm that, whether or not she publishes the bill, there will not be legislation on self-directed support in this session, as previously promised?

Like the minister, I welcome this debate on carers and the publication of the carers and young carers strategy. As the minister pointed out, some 657,000 people are carers, and 100,000 are young carers. That is a significant part of the population. They make a huge contribution to their families and to society as a whole. As the minister said, the value that they give is around £7.68 billion each year. That is a truly staggering figure. The Government and COSLA are to be commended for producing the strategy, and Labour members agree with the main actions that have been outlined. It is essential that we improve information and advice, properly establish the number of carers that there are so that we can  identify and assess their needs, and, of course, ensure that the assistance that they need to support their caring is in place. The strategy is right, but we need clarity about how it will be implemented. I am delighted that the minister will cover that in her closing speech. The strategy will be deemed a success only if it actually makes a difference to people's experiences on the ground in their communities. Therefore, will the minister tell us how local authorities and health boards will be held to account, how the implementation of the strategy will be monitored, and whether she intends that there will be annual reports to the Parliament on progress? That would strengthen the importance that we attach to the strategy and its implementation. The funding that has been put in place for carers information strategies has, of course, been welcomed on the ground, but it will come to an end in March 2011. It would be helpful to know whether the minister is confident that that funding will continue at the same level that it has been at previously. Labour members will certainly support all her efforts in Government to secure that funding for the future. Such funding has undoubtedly helped carers with training on how to manage their caring role, deal with the stress and take care of their own health and wellbeing, and it has had substantial local benefits. Carers have been identified, new partnerships have been forged with primary and acute care services, and advice and information has been provided. For that to be sustained, certainty over future funding of carer information strategies is desirable. Secondly, I welcome the funding that has been provided for carer training—national carer organisations have been awarded some £281,000. Although that is helpful, the way forward is undoubtedly a national consortium to develop carer training across the board, and there is concern about what will happen to that money in the future. I note, too, that NHS Education for Scotland has an annual budget of some £389 million for training for health professionals. I invite the minister to try to squeeze out a little bit more money for carer training, which I think would have great value. I turn to short breaks and respite care. Despite the welcome progress on increasing the number of respite weeks that are provided for adults, the figures on respite breaks for children are going in the wrong direction. More worryingly, cuts are beginning to be made at a local level. Local authorities are reducing the budget for respite care, some are changing their eligibility criteria and others are providing respite only when there is a crisis.  I know that Shared Care Scotland has been funded by the Scottish Government to undertake research on current respite planning and delivery, which will help to inform future action. I suspect that it will show the problems that I have described: the tightening of eligibility criteria to save resources and a lack of recognition that providing respite is a positive preventive measure that enables a carer to carry on caring for their loved ones. The real progress that has been made on that is being put at risk. Respite provision is beginning to be seen as a measure that should be deployed only in a crisis, rather than as a preventive measure. What action can the minister take to prevent the welcome progress that has been made on the number of respite weeks that are provided from unravelling and going backwards? As well as promising an increase in the number of respite weeks, the Scottish National Party promised to ensure that "By 2011 carers in greatest need will have a guaranteed annual entitlement to breaks from caring." I have searched, but I have not found evidence of that commitment being taken forward. I can see no progress on meeting that guarantee, which would be welcomed by carers and Labour members alike.

I thank the minister for her honesty. In the context of the economic climate, perhaps we could discuss self-directed support. A commitment was made to extend direct payments to carers and to provide additional funding for young carers. That has been done, but the fact that the Government did not proceed with its legislation on self-directed support, which the Labour Party would have fully supported because we think that it is the right direction of travel, represents a real lost opportunity. I understand that there was an argument—or a discussion—between COSLA and the Government about funding. My difficulty is that given that we know that there might be insufficient funding next year, as the financial circumstances will be extremely tight in 2011-12, an opportunity existed to bring forward such legislation this year, but that opportunity has been lost. I would like the  minister to comment on that, too, because self-directed support has been cried out for at local level but, unfortunately, it has not been delivered. I want to mention older carers, particularly older carers of people with learning disabilities. I very much welcome the fact that the carers strategy acknowledges that, for the first time, there is a generation of people with learning disabilities who will outlive their parents. When those babies were born, the parents were told to take them home and love them or to put them into hospitals. Many of those who chose to take them home have had the joy and the privilege of caring for their son or daughter for the past 40, 50 or even 60 years; they never expected to be able to do so. However, they are worried about the future. Older family carers in particular are worried about peace of mind. They want to know what will happen to their son or daughter when they are no longer able to care for them, because of either infirmity or death. Will the minister give us information on emergency planning that can be put in place; long-term planning for carers who are worried that there will no one to advocate for their son or daughter when they are gone; and transition planning, which needs to be done sensitively and put in place well in advance? Carers make the point that respite breaks from care are often too inflexible and not available at short notice. Their fear is that the definition used by the Scottish Government and COSLA means that some forms of day services can also be seen as short breaks, which has led to a substitution that I do not think the minister desires, and which we certainly do not. By creating a definition of respite breaks we would get a true figure, rather than one that has been inflated by some forms of day services. The key point is that we all want to see successful implementation of the carers and young carers strategy. We fear that it might be at risk, and that momentum could be lost, partly because we are moving into an unsettling financial period. We are asking that funding for carer support, which we all acknowledge is critical, be protected because more and more is being asked of unpaid carers and our society relies heavily on them. As part of that, we ask that carer centres, which are a critical part of that infrastructure, and which enable unpaid carers and young carers to continue, enjoy our support. We support the Scottish Government in implementing the strategy. The minister will enjoy our complete support in arguing to secure the funds to ensure the continuation of carer strategies, and to implement them across Scotland.

The First Minister will have our support when he suggests action that is effective and legal. Minimum unit pricing is not the key issue. Does he agree that the biggest problem is that, contrary to what he outlined, very little has been done since the publication by the previous Scottish Executive of "Hidden Harm" to identify children living with parents who are addicted to drugs or alcohol? Does he also agree that instead of simply estimating the numbers he needs to take action to  find out where those children are and what intervention is required with a degree more urgency that he has displayed?

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government will take to improve the cleanliness of hospitals in view of the findings of NHS Quality Improvement Scotland's health care environment inspectorate. (S3F-2608)

The First Minister will be aware that the report highlighted specific problems with cleanliness, overcrowding of wards and insufficient staffing levels, all of which risk the development of infection. What action will he take to tackle the problem? Does he believe that the SNP's current approach, cutting 1,500 nurses from the NHS and cutting cleaning hours in some health boards, puts patient care at risk and will do nothing to improve the situation?

I am grateful for the opportunity to raise awareness of the see me campaign, which is Scotland's national programme aimed at ending the stigma and discrimination attached to mental illness. In doing so, I hope to build on the cross-party consensus that has characterised consideration of the issue in previous years. I recognise that all members take seriously our responsibility to improve awareness of mental health. One in four Scots experience some kind of mental health problem in their lifetime, and more than half of that number have experienced some form of discrimination or stigma relating to their mental health. Despite affecting many of us, mental illness is commonly misunderstood, sidelined and stigmatised. It is important to make clear and normalise the idea that people who suffer from a mental illness should be treated with the same dignity and respect with which those who suffer from physical problems are treated. The Parliament must do its utmost to support initiatives such as the see me campaign that seek to redress the balance and challenge attitudes to mental illness. Since the see me campaign was launched in 2002 by my esteemed colleague Malcolm Chisholm, it has worked effectively to challenge attitudes to mental illness. A recent Scottish Government survey revealed a 10 per cent drop in people saying that they would not want anybody to know if they developed a mental health problem. Some 61 per cent of people with experience of mental health problems have said that they feel more able to be open about their illness than they did five years ago, and 63 per cent of the same  sample thought that the see me campaign had improved media reporting of people with mental health problems. I genuinely think that the campaign has much to be proud of, although it is clear that more needs to be done. It is not in question that mental illness in Scotland is associated with stigma and discrimination, but members need not take it from me—let me share the experience of Paul from Arbroath. He says: "I found it difficult to apply for jobs and I only got one or two interviews. I think it was because I was open about my mental health problems on applications. I was just 20 years old when my consultant psychiatrist told me I would never work again. It is soul destroying to be told by a professional, someone I looked up to and who was there to help, that you won't work or achieve anything in life." It is clear from that sobering quote that it is crucial to the self-worth and self-perception of people who are suffering from mental illness that those around them, including those who are in direct support roles, understand and adopt helpful and well-informed attitudes in relation to their condition. Mental illness has become an unacceptable and unnecessary barrier to social interaction and employment in Scotland. I commend to members the forthcoming dismissed? campaign that the Scottish Association for Mental Health will undertake during mental health awareness week, which will highlight issues surrounding fairness and employability for those who suffer from mental illness. The see me campaign believes that it will take a generation to effect lasting change in our society, as I am sure do others. However, I recognise that, in a period of economic difficulty and recovery from recession, we can expect that people's mental wellbeing will be under further strain. We must therefore be clear about ensuring that there are sufficient resources for support services. Last week, I had the pleasure of visiting the breathing space helpline, which is based in NHS 24 and is for those who are coping with mental health problems. I was hugely impressed by the calibre of the staff and the quality of the work that they undertake. In the past few years, the helpline has experienced a steadily increasing volume of calls. Between 2009-10 and 2010-11, the number of calls that it handles has already increased by a third, and it is getting higher. Although the response rate is good, the helpline is clearly experiencing demand that is increasing at a faster rate than its funding and resources can match. A few calls go unanswered, but the performance overall is very good. I regard that as a success story. Local authorities also face challenges, and some face difficult decisions about services. I, and I am sure other members, have heard of changes  such as zero hours contracts for mental health workers, which lead to a lack of continuity of care and support for their clients. We are also beginning to see a reduction in some services in one or two areas at a time when increasing numbers of people are experiencing mental health problems. I am sure that the desire to ensure that there is an adequate level of support for people with mental illness is shared by the Government and by everybody in the Parliament. In Scotland, the costs associated with mental health problems are high. According to see me, we spend about £1,520 million on health and social care each year, and £2,378 million is the cost to the Scottish economy of mental health problems. According to studies in New Zealand, every dollar that is spent on reducing the stigma and discrimination associated with mental illness saves the country $13. It therefore makes sense for us to continue to invest. I am conscious that the Government has a health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—HEAT—target on reducing the use of antidepressants. We support that target. Frankly, antidepressants need to be the last resort for anybody who is prescribing. However, despite that commitment, there was a 7 per cent increase in prescribing last year, and a 4 per cent increase the year before. We need to understand why that happened and whether it is down to increased numbers or whether general practitioners are prescribing more than they used to. Equally, we need to ensure that alternative treatments and therapies are available. When I visited NHS 24, I saw a new project that is designed to provide support by telephone to people in, I think, at least five health board areas. I commend that to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for roll-out across the country. It is certainly an essential service, and people are accessing it. I am delighted to support the see me campaign in its continuing efforts to fight the stigma and discrimination that are associated with mental illness. I hope that this debate provides one opportunity to raise awareness of those important issues and to renew our support for the continuing challenges to that stigma and discrimination.

I did, however, offer the society advice. Given the debate that has taken place, I invite the minister to send the society the views of the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government and to offer advice.

In two days' time, the Multiple Sclerosis Society meets in London for its annual general meeting. As one would expect at an AGM, there are a number of motions on the agenda, but two in particular deal with the society's decision to close all its respite provision, including Leuchie house. It is not for me to make any recommendations to the society, but I will offer it some advice. It should listen to the people who use Leuchie house, listen to its ordinary members and keep Leuchie house open.  I am genuinely concerned about the basis for the decision and the damage that the MS Society is causing to its reputation. Members may recall the society's loss of J K Rowling as a patron. Now, it has decided to close Leuchie house, which is the only specialist MS facility in Scotland, together with three other respite facilities in England. I also understand that the society is the subject of three substantive complaints to the Charity Commission. That is not a happy record.  I am grateful to the Presiding Officer for chairing the debate; I know that he has constituents who wish Leuchie house to be retained. I also know that my colleagues lain Gray and Fiona O'Donnell, the elected representatives for East Lothian, have fought hard alongside people with MS, their families and staff to keep Leuchie house.  Scotland has the highest incidence of MS in the world, which is why Leuchie is so important. Members will be aware that it provides residential short breaks and day respite care—500 breaks in a year—for 350 people who suffer from MS and,  uniquely, for their carers and families too. It specialises in providing care for high-dependency MS sufferers who have hugely complex care needs. It does all that extremely well, and achieves consistently high inspection grades from the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. More important, this quote gives a flavour of what the people who use Leuchie house think about it:  "It's absolutely amazing because I don't feel disabled".  That is high testimony indeed.  Leuchie reduces isolation, and families enjoy learning from, sharing and supporting each other. Many of the people with MS require very specialised care: many require percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy—PEG—feeding, tracking hoists, catheters and ileostomies, and have communication and cognition issues.  What alternatives exist for people who will no longer have Leuchie as an option for their short break? The MS Society tells us that it will accredit, signpost, campaign and influence—it just will not provide. That is very aspirational, but is it real, or is it an empty gesture? Who will provide the same specialist service that Leuchie delivers? Aside from one specialist bed on the west coast and two in the north-east, it will be hospital or non-specialist provision in care of the elderly homes. That means no family and no friends—it will be isolated care, which frankly is inadequate and unacceptable.  What about the needs and wants of the people who are affected? I understand that it was some four months after the decision was made before any thought was given to risk assessments or contacting people to signpost them to alternative provision. Have any of those people been provided with advocates or had alternatives secured for them? I can tell members that with perhaps only 10 weeks to go, a substantial number may not yet even have been fully assessed. That lack of planning is in itself of considerable concern, but when we consider that these are vulnerable people with complex needs, it is appalling.  The decision to close Leuchie has been taken on the basis of a flawed survey. If members need to be convinced of that, I point to the 11,000 signatures on a petition from Scotland alone. I ask members to listen not only to me, but to the people who value Leuchie; I will quote what they said about the MS Society's decision. One said, "It's devastating," while another said that it is  "Leaving the most vulnerable people on their own".  One even said:  "It's like closing the intensive care ward and replacing it with a helpline."  What about the carers themselves? Only yesterday, a survey that was carried out by the Princess Royal Trust for Carers highlighted the problems with poverty and depression that our carers experience. The Government has made valuable commitments to carers, but what about the carers who deal with the MS sufferers who use Leuchie house? What provision will there be for them? Perhaps the decision is not about choice, as the MS Society would have us believe, but about money. I understand that the chief executive of the MS Society has said that Leuchie house was an "appalling waste of money". Let us stop and examine the facts for a moment. The annual subsidy for Leuchie house from the MS Society is £600,000, not the £1 million that the society has claimed. I confess to not being an expert mathematician, but as a percentage of the overall budget of £30 million, that amounts to 2 per cent. That is value for money by anybody's standards.  Incidentally, Leuchie is leased from Sir Hew Hamilton-Dalrymple, who does not charge a single penny in rent but instead expects the society to maintain the land and buildings. What I did not know before is that the lease still has three years to run. The society will still be liable for the maintenance and upkeep of the building and land, so let us have it full, not empty.  I could not put it any better than a carer who wrote to the society:  "it is the unique combination of excellent respite care and holiday atmosphere which makes Leuchie the only choice for people in our position ... we have no viable alternative ... if this closure goes ahead my husband and I will never be able to go away again ... At home my husband spends 355 days each year in our room where he sleeps, eats and lives. I am his sole carer for 21 out of 24 hours. For 12 days at Leuchie he enjoys life in a different setting and caring, congenial company with all his needs addressed. Here at Leuchie for these 11 nights I can go to bed knowing that I will not have to get up in the night and I'm able to eat at the same time as my husband."  I will finish by saying what I believe is required. First, I urge the MS Society to keep Leuchie house open. It has the building and the staff and, overwhelmingly, people want to retain the specialist provision. At the very least, it should give Leuchie until November 2011 in line with the end date for the other three respite centres. Secondly, I ask the Scottish Government to intervene, to echo the call to keep Leuchie open and to write as a matter of urgency to the MS Society in time for its AGM.  If we do nothing, Leuchie will close in 10 weeks' time. For the sake of people with MS and their families, we must do everything in our power to prevent that from happening.

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the planned provision at Gartnavel royal hospital has yet to happen. Does she agree, therefore, that the closure of ward B was precipitate, because a gap has been left in the service for women suffering from breast cancer?

As the First Minister will be aware, the Vale of Leven public inquiry has already delayed taking further evidence about the C diff outbreak from September till the end of October, but we discovered today that it will now be delayed until early 2011. Although I believe that it is important that the inquiry does a thorough job, can he confirm that the timescale for the publication of the inquiry's report will now be put well beyond the Scottish Parliament elections?

I thank the cabinet secretary for her statement and join her in thanking the Northern Ireland Ambulance Service and the North West Ambulance Service for their assistance on 21 July. The cabinet secretary will agree that it is unprecedented for Scotland's three ambulance centres to go down simultaneously. At the time,  she said that there was no impact on patient care. As she admits in her statement, though, there clearly was an impact—as I will illustrate with the experience of two of my constituents. The first constituent is Mandy Sweeney, whose father called 999 for an ambulance because she was in excruciating pain. He had to call back 50 minutes later and, in total, it took an hour and 15 minutes for an ambulance to finally arrive. The second constituent was an elderly lady who fell and hit her head on the pavement. It is unclear whether she lost consciousness, which surely made the call a category A one. She waited 45 minutes; the ambulance had to be called again and, in total, it took a total of an hour and a half to arrive. It is clear that the cabinet secretary has not described the total delay experience. Instead, she has noted only the delay in passing information from Northern Ireland to Scotland, although there was evidently a further delay in the arrival of ambulances at their destinations. Will she provide that fuller information? The cabinet secretary also mentioned that there were no adverse outcomes, other than those that we would normally expect, for the 125 patients who were affected by use of the buddy system. However, can she say whether there were any adverse outcomes at all for those 125 patients? My final questions are on transparency. The cabinet secretary has made a 10-minute statement with not one mention of why she did not tell us about the matter. The Scottish Government is not normally known to be reticent when it comes to press releases, so why did I need to go to Belfast to find out what is happening in Scotland? Why did I need to rely on the Northern Ireland Ambulance Service for information and not the Scottish Ambulance Service? Who took the decision not to tell the public? Was it the cabinet secretary, the Scottish Ambulance Service or both? Cabinet secretary—why the big secret?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member now give way?

Will the member give way?

Unlike the previous speaker, I welcome the report of the independent budget review panel. We would probably acknowledge that many of the proposals in the report have been mooted before, but it helpfully brings together all the different suggestions and points to the scale of the task ahead. It is right to reflect on that challenge: a 12.5 per cent reduction, which is £4.3 billion in real terms, and 16 years up to 2025-26 for the budget to return to 2009-10 levels. As Tom McCabe said, this is probably about as serious as it gets. What followed the publication of the report was fascinating, with back-benchers, cabinet secretaries and the First Minister himself all commenting. Within hours of the publication of the "Independent Budget Review", we had John Swinney ruling out most of the recommendations. Thereafter, a source from the First Minister said that the SNP would consider reducing funding for eye tests and not proceeding with the next phase of free prescriptions. Then, we had Nicola Sturgeon saying that the NHS budget would be ring fenced before John Swinney again clarified what she actually meant to say. I will share with the chamber some of the comments that were made. Anne McLaughlin—who, I am pleased to see, is in the chamber today—said in an SNP press release: "We are phasing out prescription charges and we have ring fenced the NHS budget". Nicola Sturgeon said in The Scotsman : "I want to give you an absolute assurance [that] the government, just as we have done this year, will in future years seek to continue to protect the NHS budget". Well—this year 4,000 staff are being cut and 1,500 nurses are being cut. That is the kind of protection that we can expect from Nicola Sturgeon.

I am just coming to John Swinney. Pressed on "Newsnight Scotland" about the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing's comments about ring fencing, John Swinney said: "What I have said throughout this process is that the Scottish Government is committed to pass on the Barnett consequentials." He went on to say that "There is a fundamental difference between that commitment and ring-fencing." Another day, another version of the truth.

We have consistently argued that it is about priorities, as has the Health and Sport Committee. [ Interruption .] Mr Swinney can laugh, but I think that it is the wrong priority for the Government to spend £30 million on distinction awards for a small number of senior consultants when it spends only £20 million on tackling hospital-acquired infections. That is an example of exactly what I am talking about.

No. I have heard enough from Mr Swinney. Labour's position is clear. We will allocate all the Barnett consequentials arising from the UK Government's health decisions to the health budget in Scotland, which is exactly the same position that has been adopted by the Scottish Government. It is dishonest of some SNP members to present what the Government is proposing as ring fencing the entire health budget because, as John Swinney pointed out, it is not. The independent budget review points to the scale of the reduction that will be required in other portfolios if the health budget is ring fenced—not a cut of 12.5 per cent, but a cut of 20.2 per cent. Health is not about what is in a single budget line; it is much wider than that. Early intervention programmes for children contribute to long-term health and wellbeing. Employment contributes to a person's long-term health and wellbeing. Provision of care services to enable people to remain in their own homes is also better for the individual and it saves the NHS money because, if we do not do that, we accelerate older people ending up in hospital. Let us look at health in that wider context and recognise that it is about much more than one narrow budget line.  I turn now to budget information. This morning, John Swinney said that we need to work together in Scotland for Scotland's long-term interests. I agree; however, it is difficult to do so when we are working blindfolded. To deny Parliament the opportunity to consider budget information now is to deny us the opportunity to work together. I trust Andrew Goudie's analysis of the budget and I urge the cabinet secretary to publish now. To leave it to the last minute is irresponsible. The SNP can provide best-case and worst-case scenarios and can remove a little of the uncertainty. In town halls and health boards across Scotland, finance staff are trying to crunch the numbers and would welcome guidance, and the cabinet secretary can deliver 99 per cent certainty. They are now engaged in talking to people about estimates, so why cannot he? John Swinney also said that he will wait until he publishes the budget to outline the Scottish Government's pay policy. I question why there should be that delay. He cannot blame the UK coalition, because its information on pay policy has been out in the public domain for some time. He cannot use the same excuse that he has used for not publishing the budget. Why cannot he give us the pay policy earlier than November? John Swinney also told us this morning about his efforts to engage with people in the public, private and voluntary sectors. That is laudable, but I understand that the town hall meetings are invitation only. It would appear that Jeremy Purvis did not know about the meeting in his area and that David Whitton does not know about the meeting that is taking place in Kirkintilloch. Has John Swinney told the trade unions? Are the general public allowed in? Finally, I ask the cabinet secretary why we need to wait until November to hear about his plans for efficiency savings. Efficiency savings in health have exceeded the 2 per cent target in the last few years, but the majority of public bodies say that the obvious efficiencies have now been realised. Will he put up the percentage of efficiencies to be realised and insist that they are not recycled but brought back to the centre? The Finance Committee asked the cabinet secretary that question in June and he has still not responded. The SNP cannot talk about partnership or co-operation if it does not share the budget information about the budget, pay policy and plans for efficiencies. We stand ready to work with the Scottish Government, as do other Opposition parties in the chamber, but instead the Government postures about having more powers and independence which, frankly, is fantasy. There is less money around and we need to address that.

Unless I am much mistaken, it was the Scottish Government that commissioned the independent budget review that the member is now rubbishing.

The member quoted me earlier. For the record, I shall repeat what I said: we are supportive of free personal care. It is as clear as that.

Will the member take another intervention?

It's me!

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am sure that the member will agree that duty and VAT are transparent. Does he accept that there is a system in France, whereby the cost of invoicing is added on, which would increase the price?

He is.

Given that prices north and south of the border are broadly similar, why is the SNP fixated with price when it is clear that other issues contribute to why people in Scotland drink more?

It is safe to say that the response to the proposed legislative programme is mixed. The previous speech was more to do with what is not in the programme than what is in it. The Government has announced 10 bills, but the figure is substantially less than has been the case previously in the SNP's period in office. However, the key is to consider what is proposed and whether it is necessary, whether it moves us forward, and whether it addresses the pressing concerns of the people of Scotland. I will focus first on what is in the legislative programme that relates to health. It is disappointing that there is only one health bill, but I  welcome the health (certification of death) bill and look forward to scrutinising its provisions in due course. I want to focus on one issue that has been highlighted by the Sunday Herald and which I raised with the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing on behalf of one of my constituents—the so-called ash cash scandal. I recognise that the cabinet secretary, like me, was surprised that there is a charge of £142 for two general practitioners or hospital doctors to fill in a form that allows the body of a deceased person to be released for cremation. In most cases, the charge is made to the funeral director and then passed on. Indeed, most families are not aware that the charge even exists. I accept that the process is not just about one simple signature and that it is more involved than that, but the doctors' position is not helped by the comments of one junior doctor who blogs under the name The Daily Rhino and who described the payments as "the house officer's privilege" and "the fund for Thursday night drinks all over the country." Frankly, that is simply unacceptable. At a time when families are grieving, it is extremely distressing for relatives to pay fees of that nature, and even more so if they are on low incomes. The cost every year is estimated to be in the order of £1.2 million to £1.5 million. It is time to end that practice, and the Scottish Government will have the Labour Party's support in doing so. Bills that have already been introduced also deserve some attention. The Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill, which several members have mentioned, continues to make its way through the Parliament. There is much in it that we can support, but we do not believe that putting £140 million each year in the pocket of supermarkets without one penny going to the national health service, education or enforcement is the right thing to do. We will engage positively and lodge amendments on caffeinated alcohol, alcohol treatment and testing orders, ending price advertising and other issues. I hope that those amendments will enjoy support from the Scottish Government and other Opposition parties in the Parliament. The Health and Sport Committee just commenced its scrutiny of the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill this week. The label on the tin is good—who can object to patients' rights?—but it is disappointing that the tin is empty. Last year, Nicola Sturgeon talked in the chamber about a no-fault compensation scheme. That has gone. The criticism from some quarters, such as Consumer Focus Scotland, the Royal College of Nursing and the British Medical Association, all of which are substantial bodies that we should listen to, is that  there is no need for legislation to enact the provisions of the bill, as it merely reflects what is already there. What about patients' rights officers, at a cost of an estimated £1 million for 50 officers? If that was something new, I could probably welcome it, but we already have officers for complaints in every health board area as well as the independent advice and support service, which is funded jointly by Citizens Advice Scotland and the NHS and which does a tremendous job. We should seek to support and grow that service. The Government does not need to legislate; it needs to get on with sorting out the complaints system in the NHS. As I am sure we all realise, the majority of people to whom we speak do not actually want to complain—they value the NHS and appreciate the hard job that staff do—but, when they make complaints, they want them to be treated seriously, and they want the NHS to learn from its mistakes. The Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill, to be frank, does not achieve that outcome. I turn to what is missing from the programme. Where is the bill on self-directed support? We have had many working groups, involvement by key stakeholders and a consultation over the summer. We also have a common view across the parties that acknowledges the value of the personalisation of care, putting those cared for in charge, enabling them to get more flexibility and to benefit more from their care packages and recognising that their needs are much wider than formal care. As I understand it, such a bill would seek to consolidate the existing statute that relates to direct payments; to amend the duties on councils so that, when they offer a direct payment, the provision of self-directed support or a direct payment is the default position; and to widen eligibility and remove current exclusions on direct payments for carers. I understand that the bill is to be delayed until 2011-12. Let us consider why. I think that it is simple: the Scottish Government has bowed to pressure from SNP-controlled COSLA, which has complained vigorously about a lack of resources. It was set to campaign and complain. It was beating a path to ministers' doors and the Scottish Government backed off. The Government was more worried about its relationship with local government and keen to preserve the concordat at all costs, so there is nothing in its programme for people who are in care. Where is Angela Constance's conviction now?

Given all that, where is the legislation that people expected now and the Government promised now? If the problem is money now—and it is—why wait until 2011, when money is absolutely at its tightest? That is disappointingly cynical. By doing that, the SNP demonstrates that it is firmly on the side of producer interest, not the side of the people. I turn to the final measure that is missing: the referendum bill, which characterised the Government's obsession with the constitution. Out of touch with what the people of Scotland want, the Government has spent valuable time and money pursuing something that enjoys little support. It is criminal to spend £2 million on a national conversation that can only be described as navel gazing for SNP activists and then not even bring the referendum bill before the Parliament. Some people might call it cowardly. The Government has a problem explaining that to the Parliament and to the people of Scotland. Indeed, perhaps its biggest problem is explaining it to its back-bench members and activists. They were surprisingly muted in their speeches today and are muttering in the corridors that their leader has lost his bottle. That, of course, is the SNP's internal strife and bickering; let us think about the opportunity cost. I ask Nicola Sturgeon what £2 million would buy. How about 76 nurses? That would be much more worth while in tight financial times. The SNP is already stripping out 4,000 NHS staff, of whom 1,500 are nurses and midwives. That is happening now, not next year but under the SNP's watch. It is time—time to bring an end to the SNP Scottish Government.

As the cabinet secretary will be aware, workforce projections suggest that the NHS will have 4,000 fewer staff, including 1,500 fewer nurses. The Royal College of Nursing and others do not believe that that number of nurses can be taken out of the NHS without there being an impact on patient care. Therefore, will the cabinet secretary have a final say on those service changes? If so, will she mirror the current practice by ensuring that local communities are engaged in those decisions, too?

Will she sign off on those?

That is not what I said.

Like others, I welcome the opportunity to debate free personal care, and I welcome the unanimity of opinion that has broken out in the chamber, particularly between Murdo Fraser and Ross Finnie—I am sure that we will see more of that in the future. I start from the premise that a society is judged by how it treats its young people, its older people and its most vulnerable. I spent some of my early years in Hong Kong, where I witnessed a culture where the old were revered and valued for their knowledge and experience. That has shaped my view of older people and my belief that we should treat them with dignity and respect. Regrettably, all too often we think of older people in terms of challenges—for example, the challenge of an ageing population and all that that means for public policy, and the challenge of providing the care that older people require. In some areas, older people are treated almost as the passive recipients of care and are given little choice or control. We need to stand all of that on its head because, after all, only one in 10 older people need on-going care and, in the 65 to 74 age group, the figure is only three in 100. We are living longer, thanks to advances in medicine, and it is incumbent on us to think through how we can  best and most effectively provide care for the growing numbers of older people in the future. I am proud that it was the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Scottish Executive that introduced the policy of free personal care. It was Henry McLeish, as First Minister, who drove that policy forward and made it one of the defining features of his Administration and, some would say, of devolution. There is no doubt that free personal care is greatly valued by those who receive it. We on this side of the chamber are clear in our view that free personal care should remain. That said, we would all acknowledge that free personal care is but one part of a much wider system of health and social care that is provided for our older people. I welcome the work that the Scottish Government has started with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the NHS to reshape the care of older people. That work is at an early stage and elements of the different workstreams are out for consultation. However, one workstream, on the future funding of care, is not yet in the public domain although, in the context of tightening financial budgets, it is, perhaps, the most significant piece of work that we need to engage in. I invite the minister to state, when she sums up, that she will give us an opportunity to debate the options around that issue. I specifically ask her to allow us to do so in the context of our budget deliberations, which will start in the autumn. There is a postcode lottery of care across Scotland, with local authorities having different levels of charging for the same service, different criteria on which to assess eligibility for a service and even different thresholds for income disregard. It is simply not fair for someone in one local authority area to pay 10 times more than someone pays in the same circumstances in a neighbouring local authority for exactly the same service. I believe that there are a number of key principles on which we should base any future system of social care for older people. First, there should be fairness and equity. Wherever someone lives in Scotland, they should have the best possible quality of service, and people whose circumstances are the same should pay the same. That would deal with the situation of people who live in neighbouring authorities paying different charges, as is the case in relation to Argyll and Bute Council and West Dunbartonshire Council and Moray Council and Aberdeenshire Council. Labour is absolutely committed to ending the postcode lottery that currently exists in relation to the care of our older people.  Secondly, we should acknowledge that prevention is better than cure. It is much better to provide the support that enables older people to remain in their own homes than it is to fund admissions to hospital, which are costly not only to the NHS but to the individuals and families involved. I have seen older people being admitted to hospital after a fall at home that was caused because they have had to wait months for a necessary aid or adaptation to their home that would have prevented the fall in the first place. We need to get better at ensuring that we get the balance right and move, where possible, towards prevention.

I am not sure whether I have time. Do I, Presiding Officer?

I have no problem with ensuring that prevention is properly resourced and that we shift the balance of care. However, I will not sign up to the Scottish National Party's programme of cuts to the NHS, which is going on as we speak. Thirdly, we need to start thinking differently about our older people and begin to regard them as a resource, not a burden. Their experience should be harnessed for the benefit of local communities, and we need to help them to help themselves to keep fit and healthy, so that the need for formal care is delayed. Further, we need to support those who care for them on an informal basis. It is a matter of much regret that carers assessments, for example, have not been taken up across Scotland. I welcome the opportunity to send a strong signal about Labour's continuing commitment to free personal care for older people, one of our flagship policies, which we share with the Liberal Democrats. The policy has been a welcome addition to the system of social care provision, but the debate needs to widen. The Parliament needs to consider how we provide for the growing number of older people, how we fund their care and how we can deliver a policy that is sustainable.

Will the member give way?

Does the minister agree that we should seek to have the money that is accrued from discount bans invested in treatment, enforcement and education? Does she acknowledge that the University of Sheffield's modelling shows that the impact of discount bans is far greater than the impact of minimum unit pricing?

Like other members, I thank the committee for its efforts in  scrutinising the bill and the Government for bringing the bill to the Parliament, because it has raised the level of debate, which I am sure will continue. This debate was always going to be interesting. We all agree about the scale of the challenge that Scotland faces on its relationship with alcohol and we all agree about the need to take action. I agree with the cabinet secretary when she says that the mood of the country is for change; where we differ is over the effectiveness of the measures proposed. I will deal with the less contentious parts of the bill first. We support the ban on quantity discounts, the restrictions on promotions and the age verification measures proposed. However, we oppose the power to vary the minimum purchase age, although we acknowledge that that is a compromise on the Government's previous position of raising the purchase age to 21 across the board. I have concerns that the results from Stenhousemuir and Armadale do not conclusively show that the purchase age was the significant factor; the outcomes were perhaps more the result of intensive policing and additional youth work input, so we are not convinced on that measure. We support the social responsibility levy in principle, but there is a lack of clarity about how it will operate and who it applies to. I believe that the committee was told not to worry about that because the Scottish Government was in dialogue with the industry and they would collectively work it out and bring the proposals back. Robert Brown is right to point out that, unfortunately, the working group on that very matter has not met since August 2009, which does not fill me—or, perhaps, members of the committee—with confidence that a solution is being worked through. I turn to the subject that gave off the most heat, if not the most light in the debate. I say at the outset that I agree with the cabinet secretary that there is a clear link between price and consumption—we have said that for some time. I also agree with her comments about the WHO—it is clear and it says that price and availability are key in reducing consumption. We need to be mindful of that. I also agree with her when she says that we need real and effective action on price. That desire is genuine and it is shared across the chamber. I do not, however—and I believe that we should not—conflate price with minimum pricing. We do not believe that minimum pricing is the answer.

Let me develop the point; then I will be happy to give way.  We are not convinced that there is sufficient evidence, which is not to rubbish the University of Sheffield modelling report. I recognise the value of that approach, but I also recognise that one practical study of an aboriginal community in Cook Island resulted in the policy not proceeding. There have been concerns about the legality of the proposal, which I leave to others much more qualified than I am to judge. Those concerns hinge on whether the measure is proportionate and that is in part determined by price. Ross Finnie is right that we need to know the price to scrutinise the bill effectively. More seriously, there are concerns that minimum pricing does not have the impact that the Government claims, with little effect on young drinkers, harmful drinkers and those on reasonable incomes. Indeed, I am told that the greatest increase in consumption is among professional middle-aged women—the policy will have little impact on them. I am concerned that minimum pricing puts more money into retailers' pockets—£113 million a year—which could be spent on education, enforcement and treatment.

I look forward to receiving the commission's report over the summer. It has been told that there is no area that it cannot examine and I will take on board its conclusions as it reports them. I hope to engage the Parliament in a further debate about that. Richard Baker rightly outlined the range of amendments that we intend to lodge on alcohol treatment and testing orders and on caffeinated alcohol. The alcohol commission that Labour set up, to which Dr McKee referred, will report in the summer and I hope that its conclusions will encourage further debate. I turn to the Tory amendment and to Murdo Fraser. Like a very keen and overanxious puppy, Murdo, but three weeks into his new job, is eager to make a good first impression. Labour members will support his amendment because we agree with the principle, but it might more usefully have been left to stage 2 and the deliberations of the committee, which has clearly spent a lot of time on the issue. That said, the passing of the reasoned amendment will be significant: it will confirm that the majority of members in the chamber are opposed to minimum unit pricing and will, in effect, hole the policy below the waterline.

If Christine Grahame lets me develop the point. We have said for some time that we do not believe that minimum unit pricing is the silver bullet and we do not believe that it is the most effective pricing mechanism that could be deployed. There can have been no doubt in the cabinet secretary's mind about that view, which has been shared across the chamber. I regret that it is only now that she talks about building a consensus for alternative measures and I regret that Hugh Henry is right in his analysis. On the one hand, she says that she is open to new ideas, but on the other she rubbishes any alternative suggestions. I could not help but recall her reaction to the interim report from Labour's alcohol commission. We are up for working together, but I fear that this is a case of more talk than action coming from the SNP. [ Interruption .] The muttering coming from Shona Robison suggests that she is not yet on message with the new approach.

Absolutely not. [ Laughter .] If members will listen, which is something that they would always do well to do, I will repeat what we have always said, which is that the issue about minimum pricing is its effectiveness, legality and impact on those who genuinely have a problem with alcohol consumption. The cabinet secretary can shout all that she likes from a sedentary position, but we are genuinely serious about wanting to tackle Scotland's problem with alcohol. What we will not do is take the lazy approach that conflates price with minimum pricing, because that, frankly, does not work. Last night, I was told that the SNP's defence against the reasoned amendment was that the Parliament could not call for such a move when it had not even been told the price yet. Well, we have only been asking for the best part of a year for the cabinet secretary to name the price. First, we were told that we would be told the price when subordinate legislation came forward, at some point after May 2011. Then we were told, by no less a personage than the First Minister, that it would be at stage 3. The committee has  demanded, rightly in my view, that it should be told the price before stage 2, to enable it to do its job.

I am glad that the cabinet secretary says that she will change her mind—she said earlier that she would "endeavour" to comply. The cabinet secretary has had a year in which to name the price; there should be no further delay.

I am happy to give way, if she wishes to name the price now.

I gave the cabinet secretary an opportunity to name the price, but she denied the Parliament the opportunity of hearing it. We have always said that minimum pricing is not effective. Knowing the price that the Government will set will enable us to determine, first, its effectiveness and, secondly, whether the measure is legal. It is in the cabinet secretary's gift to allow the Parliament to scrutinise the proposal, but she is denying the Parliament that opportunity.

I am sorry, but I am in my final minute. All parties acknowledge the serious challenge that we face in properly tackling the overconsumption of alcohol. We are sincere in our desire to find the range of measures that will be required to tackle what is undoubtedly a complex problem, and we will work with others to do so. It is incumbent on the Parliament and the Government to take effective action. We are serious about that, and I detect that other parties are too. I genuinely hope that the Government can rise to the challenge. We will support it if it does.

I will give three places for starters: homecoming, referendum and national conversation. Labour has not underfunded the Scottish budget. The SNP has been solely responsible for a 0.4 per cent decrease in the health budget when the health budget in England has risen by 4 per cent. Where is the missing money?

It came from SPICe.

Coming from you, that is outrageous.

Will the member give way?

Does Angela Constance acknowledge that the SNP is presiding over and is responsible for the lowest allocation of funds to the NHS in decades? In fact, there has been a 0.4 per cent decrease at the same time as a 4 per cent increase in England. I think that that demonstrates Labour's record in Government.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Kenneth Gibson take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

No?

Will the member give way?

Every penny of the consequentials from the UK Government's health budget to the Scottish Government has not been applied to the health budget. How else can the Scottish Government explain the funding increase of 4 per cent for the NHS in England but a 0.4 per cent decrease here? That is a consequence not of the overall budget but of decisions that the SNP Government made to give health less.

Does the member acknowledge that the 3 per cent included both cash and time-releasing efficiency savings, whereas all of the SNP's 2 per cent savings are cash savings?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I repeat my question. Does the responsibility for signing off workforce plans fall ultimately to the cabinet secretary or is it a matter for health boards?

Three weeks ago, we came to the Parliament to debate the NHS quality strategy against an emerging backdrop of cuts being made to front-line services in the NHS. This week, the Labour Party seems to be the only main Opposition party that wants to hold the Scottish Government to account for its cuts to the NHS—cuts that are made in Scotland by the Scottish National Party. I am sure that we all recall with a degree of fondness the SNP's election slogan: "More Nats, less cuts." It did not really work for the SNP then and it sounds pretty hollow now. It is perhaps more a case of more nats, fewer nurses. The hypocrisy of their claiming to protect front-line services on the one hand while, on the other, presiding over the worst cuts since the advent of devolution is breathtaking and hugely disappointing. Cuts to the numbers of doctors, nurses, midwives and physiotherapists—all involved in providing front-line services—are only some of the cuts proposed.

No, that is not the case at all. As I develop some of the arguments on finance, perhaps Nicola Sturgeon will realise that she has less of a share of the Scottish budget than she deserves and requires. I will take members through the arguments about how the finance stacks up, but I will first rehearse some of the emerging numbers on doctors, nurses and midwives. I am not, as the Tories would claim, fixated by numbers, but we need to understand the scale and likely impact of sweeping job reductions. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde intends to cut 1,252 posts from its  workforce. More than half of them are nurses. NHS Lothian reports that more than 700 jobs are to go this year alone and that the total will be 2,000 next year. More than half of them will be nurses. In NHS Tayside, 588 jobs are to go. In NHS Grampian, it is almost 600 and in NHS Highland just over 100. NHS Lanarkshire, NHS Ayrshire and Arran, NHS Forth Valley, NHS Fife and NHS Borders all plan reductions. As many as 5,000 jobs may go in this year alone. At least the comment in NHS Grampian's workforce plan is refreshingly honest: "It is recognised that there is a risk that such changes to the workforce will bring with them a significant impact to the continued provision of services at current levels. It is unclear how the organisation will be able to maintain the achievement of certain standards and, in some situations, this could lead to a reduced service." Let me put that more simply: it will have an impact on front-line services. The standards that NHS Grampian may not achieve relate to cancer, cleanliness and the care of newborn children. It is, therefore, critical that all the NHS workforce plans be published. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing spent much of yesterday phoning the trade unions and offering them a new partnership forum in which to examine the details of the workforce plans. She was, apparently, not happy with some of those plans, and I understand why. I also understand from a Scottish Government response to the Scottish Parliament information centre that it is up to NHS boards to publish their workforce plans and that that could take up to October. Therefore, I am delighted that the cabinet secretary appears to have agreed to publish in the next day or so—let me get this right—the data relating to the plans, which effectively amounts to the same thing as the plans. I called for that three weeks ago and have called for it on various occasions since. Nothing short of full publication of workforce plans for this year and indicative plans for next year will do. Some boards even have three-year plans. However, I am disappointed that the cabinet secretary decided to act only yesterday when faced with the Labour motion on NHS cuts. Leaving aside the timing, I also welcome the opportunity for the trade unions to have a direct influence on the workforce planning, sitting round the table with the cabinet secretary. That is as it should be, and I commend her for that. However, I regret that it appears that one of the SNP press team went on to spin the message to the media that the trade unions had signed up and were comfortable, the implication being that they accepted that the job cuts were inevitable. That, of course, is simply not true: the trade unions were  clear yesterday that they are opposed to job cuts and remain opposed to them. Although I am pleased that the cabinet secretary is responding to Labour's call for transparency, she must be aware that her response cannot be a short-term political fix to get her out of a tricky debate. We now expect to see results and real, substantive changes to health board plans. Does the cabinet secretary have the final sign-off of the plans or are they ultimately for boards to determine? She has never shirked her responsibility and I respect her for that. She regularly tells us that the buck stops with her. I applaud that approach, but do the health boards understand it? For Murdo Fraser, I will turn to money—it is never far from our minds. There is no doubt that we face real economic challenges and a tightening of future budgets. That should exercise us all, but the SNP must stop indulging in its usual fantasy economics and be honest with members for a change. Let us talk facts about finance. Fact 1 is that the Scottish budget has an extra almost £1 billion on top of last year's money. That is an increase, not a cut, but let us not allow the facts to stand in the way of a good story. Fact 2 concerns the budget allocation to health. The cabinet secretary tells us that there is £264 million extra on the health budget line, but does not tell us that that is the lowest settlement made to the NHS in Scotland since the days of the Tories. On fact 3, I must apologise to members because I said three weeks ago that the £264 million extra represented a real-terms increase of only 0.1 per cent. I got that wrong. It appears that I was being overgenerous. According to figures from SPICe—who will explain the matter to members far better than I can—there is a rounding effect in the overall budget figures, which means that the increase in the health budget is less and the real-terms figure is a decrease of 0.4 per cent. Is that complicated? Absolutely. However, to put it simply, the £264 million represents not a 0.1 per cent increase in the health budget but a 0.4 per cent decrease. I am grateful to SPICe for putting me right. Imagine thinking that there had been an increase—albeit one of tiny proportions—when the reverse was the case. That happened at a time when the budget for the NHS in England was rising by 4 per cent. Labour's record is much better than the SNP's. The savings that were outlined to the Health and Sport Committee were described as efficiencies. Health boards have to achieve those so-called efficiency savings, which are already assumed in the budget allocation. Perhaps the cabinet secretary would listen instead of shouting at Duncan McNeil, because those efficiencies are  actually cuts. There must be no more pretending; let us call a spade a spade. The SNP promised that there would be more staff in the NHS at the end of this parliamentary session than when Labour left office in 2007. To be frank, that promise does not amount to much. Let us look at the facts again. Fact 1: the SNP's claim of 10,000 extra staff is taken from the public sector employment survey; it is perhaps interesting to note that, according to information from SPICe, that figure was not provided in briefings from civil servants to ministers. Fact 2: the whole-time equivalent figure—that is, the actual number of full-time posts—is 8,200. Fact 3: if we take out the year for which the previous Labour-Liberal Administration budgeted, the actual number of extra whole-time equivalent posts under the SNP is 5,100. The maths ability of members is not so strained that we do not realise that subtracting 5,000 cuts from 5,100 posts gives us precisely 100 more posts. Surely the SNP promise is not achieved by this appalling sleight of hand. However, that rather misses the point. One has to assume that the extra staff were necessary to cope with rising demand. Indeed, the NHS is treating more patients than ever before. One wonders whether, if we remove that additional capacity, it will inevitably have a detrimental impact on patient care. Is the cabinet secretary suggesting that those posts are all unnecessary? Can she tell the chamber how many she will cut, and will she guarantee that none of them will be from front-line services? We have another SNP promise, but we do not need to wait for the SNP Government to break it, as it does not amount to very much to start with. I am disappointed, as this appears to take Government cynicism to a new level. There is more. It is not just the number of posts that will go through redundancy; there are proposals to review the skills mix, freeze vacant posts and reduce hours. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde plans to replace almost 400 registered nurses and midwives with half the number of nursing assistants. Let me be clear that having an appropriate skills mix in any team is always welcome, but that is not the issue. This is substitution—nothing more, nothing less. Glasgow is not alone: Highland, Grampian, Fife, Forth Valley—the list goes on. What is the impact on front-line services? In the previous debate I gave examples of some of the services that will be cut or altered. In NHS Lanarkshire we have seen the cancellation the 130-bed acute mental health facility, the removal of podiatry services and smoking cessation staff numbers cut in half. That is a matter of much regret, but emerging in Glasgow is another reduction, this time in the number of beds.  Members know that there have been changes in how patients are treated and that services are consequently redesigned, but that is not what is going on there. It is a straight reduction to save money. I will share with the chamber details of e-mails that were sent to me both last week and this. I have been told by a group of consultants in Greater Glasgow and Clyde Health Board, who are unanimous in their view, that the impact on patient services will be "drastic"—their word, not mine. There was also a matter of fact statement that beds across NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde are being reduced by 20 per cent, and a senior surgeon is reported to have said: "I'll be very surprised if patients' operations aren't cancelled just before surgery". I understand that the figure of 20 per cent has been denied, but that the health board has admitted that it will be 5 per cent. That is about 350 beds.

No, I am running out of time. I am concerned that the consultants, who are operating on the front line, are saying that the reduction in beds is a lot more. Who are we to believe—the health board or the consultants? As I said, last week the consultants said that surgery would be cancelled; this week I have been contacted by two constituents, one of whom had their surgery cancelled with less than four hours to go. The constituent was told that it was human error and that there were too many admissions, and she was told that the surgery might be postponed to July or August. It was not about the availability of the surgeon; it was about beds. Today she got a call with a date for next week—she is mightily relieved because she is actually quite ill. However, it is not as simple as that, as she needs to phone the hospital at 5.30 am to check that there is still a bed available; otherwise she need not come in. It is a problem with getting a bed. That is only one recent illustration of the situation, but I am conscious of time. These are the consequences of the real cuts that the SNP is making to the NHS. It will seek to transfer the blame to others, as is ever its way, but it is responsible. The SNP promised to protect front-line services, but on the evidence so far I regret to say that it has failed. We cannot have the kind of hypocrisy that allows the SNP on the one hand to promise to protect front-line services but on the other to preside over cutting nurses. This really is a case of more nats and fewer nurses, and I suspect that the people of Scotland would  prefer fewer nats and more nurses. That is a view that I share. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern emerging details of workforce projections submitted by NHS boards at the request of the Scottish Government; notes that thousands of posts are proposed to be cut across the NHS in Scotland and that these include frontline staff such as nurses, midwives and allied health professionals; further notes that job and service cuts are taking place in this financial year when the overall Scottish budget has increased by almost £1 billion; believes that such a loss of frontline posts will inevitably have a detrimental impact on patient care, and therefore calls on the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to publish the workforce projections immediately and intervene urgently to prevent cuts to frontline NHS services.

In that spirit of consensus, will the member consider backing our proposed amendments at stage 2 of the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill on alcohol treatment and testing orders and caffeinated alcohol?

I am sure that members will indulge me if I start by paying tribute to Mary Scanlon. I will not embarrass her with a long and glowing testimony, given that such  a testimony from the Labour benches would undoubtedly not go down too well among her colleagues. Suffice it to say that her contribution to health was always well informed and, although there were many occasions on which we did not necessarily agree, I always found that she cared passionately about the NHS. I am pleased that she will continue to contribute, as part of the Tories' health team, and I look forward to debating with her—robustly, of course—in the months to come. I welcome Murdo Fraser to the health brief. He can be in no doubt that we face a challenging agenda, with tightening budgets and increasing numbers of people who require NHS treatment. I look forward to the insights that he will bring to our debates. Given his previous form, I am sure that those insights will be sharp, to the point and sometimes painful. I recommend that he continues to monitor my website, as he did in relation to minimum unit pricing, because he might then agree with me on a wider range of issues—who knows? Today's debate is about the success that has been achieved by our hard-working staff in the NHS—doctors, nurses and administrators. It is right that we should recognise their efforts and applaud their commitment to driving down waiting times. Much has been said in recent times and during the election campaign about protecting front-line services and having fewer pen-pushers and administrators—we have all been guilty of making such comments, to varying degrees. Although we need to review and prioritise what we do, I praise the administrators and managers who have worked hard alongside clinicians to give effect to the policy of driving down waiting times. What they have achieved is phenomenal. The scale of the task was enormous. In the years of the previous Conservative Administration, there was an 18-month waiting time target. I say that not to make a political point but in recognition of the distance that the NHS has travelled since then. The Labour-Liberal Democrat Scottish Executive set out a new approach to waiting times in "Fair to All, Personal to Each: The next steps for NHSScotland", in which waiting times were considered in terms of the overall patient journey. The approach was welcomed, as was the achievement a year ahead of schedule of the target to treat in-patients within 18 weeks. I acknowledge and welcome the manifesto commitments from Labour and the Scottish National Party to move to an 18-week whole-journey treatment time and I welcome the progress that has been made. I support the cabinet secretary's approach, which is to bear down further on waiting times and set new and more challenging standards.  I have a little sympathy for Ross Finnie's argument. However, targets have been essential in driving down waiting times. We would not have made the genuine year-on-year progress on reducing waiting times that has been achieved if we had not set out our clear expectations of the NHS and if the cabinet secretary had not backed up those expectations with resources. It is about not political targets, but targets that are agreed in partnership with the NHS, so that they are realistic and achievable. I acknowledge the desire for flexibility, but it would not be right to take our foot off the pedal at this time. I pay tribute to Malcolm Chisholm, who when he was Minister for Health and Community Care had the foresight to take the Golden Jubilee national hospital, formerly the HCI hospital, into NHS control. The hospital has worked successfully as a national waiting times centre, and the additional capacity that was created directly contributed to health boards' ability to manage their waiting lists and achieve the targets that were set. We started with a waiting time guarantee of 18 weeks from GP appointment to being seen by a consultant. That was reduced to 15 weeks from 31 March last year and to 12 weeks from 31 March 2010. Of course, the overwhelming majority of patients are seen within nine weeks for in-patient and day-case treatment, and the gap is narrowing for out-patients. I have no hesitation in commending the cabinet secretary for that reduction in waiting time. There is no doubt that someone who is ill, perhaps seriously, will be extremely worried while they wait for a diagnosis and treatment. There is an impact on the health and wellbeing of not just the individual but their family and friends. We are fearful of the unknown and we often imagine the worst, so it is critical that we get the best treatment as quickly as possible. We have all heard heartbreaking stories about people who waited months if not years for treatment and about the impact of that wait on their lives. It is right that such stories are consigned to the dustbin of history. In that context, I ask the cabinet secretary to consider whether it is possible to go further. As members know, there are different waiting time guarantees for cancer, which the cabinet secretary set out. The national waiting time target for cancer treatment that Labour first set in 2005 was 62 days. The SNP then halved that in setting a target of 31 days, which is to be achieved by December 2011. Given that cancer continues to cast a dark shadow over Scotland, the Scottish Labour Party manifesto for the recent general election committed to a new target that would have reduced the waiting time from one month to two weeks for seeing a cancer specialist and getting  results. We all know—and experts confirm—that early detection and treatment of cancer means better rates of survival. Therefore, I urge the cabinet secretary to look again at the waiting time for cancer treatment. If she can reduce that time further, that would receive unanimous support from members not just on the Labour benches, but across the chamber.

I am happy to agree that any target that we set should be sustainable, should be backed up by resources and should be capable of delivery. I ask the cabinet secretary to consider waiting time targets in further areas, which I know other colleagues will expand on. In particular, I ask her to consider waiting time targets in the following three areas: in vitro fertilisation treatment; bariatric surgery; and adult mental health treatment. With regard to the third of those, I particularly welcome the new waiting time guarantee on child and adolescent mental health services, which followed a Health and Sport Committee inquiry into the issue. I remember fondly my brief sojourn on the committee in the course of that inquiry. I know that considerable challenges arise in the provision of adult mental health services, but no one could fail to be moved by the recent plight of the young woman who lived in a car park outside a Lanarkshire hospital, desperate for help and struggling to cope with her mental health. Access to services when they are needed is of course desirable, but we all understand that ensuring that supply matches demand takes time. Therefore, access to services after a reasonable waiting time is widely understood. Will the cabinet secretary look again at including a waiting time target for adult mental health services? Secondly, my colleague Richard Simpson has previously highlighted issues about the availability of bariatric services. The cabinet secretary's recent announcement on new provision at the Golden Jubilee hospital is particularly welcome. When that service has bedded in, will she consider whether it would be appropriate to provide a waiting time for that?

If I was not about to run out of time, I would happily give way. Thirdly, will the Minister for Public Health and Sport, who I think has responsibility for this, do more to tackle the postcode lottery for IVF treatment? I recognise, as I think does the ministerial team, that the picture across the country is inconsistent. In the west, one health board has a waiting time of six months for treatment while another health board that operates from the same treatment centre has a waiting time of two years. In the east, the waiting time is three years. There are also inconsistent criteria. I had a constituent who would have had to wait two years, but when she was invited by the consultant to be treated privately was suddenly treated in a matter of months. We need to look at doing things differently. Many of the couples who seek such provision cannot wait any longer. I know that work is being undertaken, but its pace is quite slow so I wonder whether it could be hurried up. Our health debates are usually robust, but often we join together to praise the work of the NHS. On this occasion, I think that the Parliament is most definitely proud of what the staff have achieved and will congratulate the Government on progress. I move amendment S3M-6393.3, to insert at end: "; welcomes the progress made by the previous Labour/ Liberal Democrat administration in setting a new approach in Fair to All Personal to Each whereby waiting is considered in terms of the overall patient journey and further welcomes the commitment to treat inpatients within 18 weeks being achieved a year ahead of schedule, paving the way for Labour and SNP 2007 manifesto commitments of an 18-week referral to treatment target, and notes that this compares with a waiting time target of 18 months set by the last Conservative administration."

Although the cabinet secretary may indeed want to proceed on a UK basis, will she confirm that she can, in fact, do it alone? Will she also confirm that she recently signed off a review of the very scheme that we are discussing? She appears to be suggesting that we are going to have another one. Does she further agree that spending £30 million on consultant bonuses in a year is the wrong priority when we spend only £20 million on tackling hospital-acquired infections?

Is it not the case that not one penny would require to be taken from the NHS budget? Far be it from me to defend the Conservatives, but none of the £6 billion of cuts was taken from the NHS.

Perhaps before the evening is over, I can share with the member the EDGE evaluation that was undertaken by Ecos Ltd, which sets out exactly the basis of the figures that are quoted in the motion.

I genuinely regret the tone of the member's speech. Will he reflect on the fact that the EDGE programme is about encouraging entrepreneurship and business development and growth? That is absolutely where the country needs to be. In addition, I proffered the suggestion not just that funding might be taken from Europe but that consideration might be given to paying for the programme by reducing some of the bonuses.

I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak about the pioneering EDGE project, which has been running with great success since 2005. The project brings together students from leading Scottish and international universities and fifth-year school pupils to form consultancy teams that work with small and medium-sized businesses throughout the west of Scotland on market research and business improvement plans that are then implemented. Since its inception, some 600 students have participated in the programme, which has received widespread acclaim from teachers, students and business leaders alike. Simply put, EDGE has given Scotland's pupils and students a unique insight into the needs and working environment of businesses, it has helped businesses to grow and to develop, it has increased turnover by £24.6 million, it has saved £1.1 million—I am sure that that will be of interest to the Government—and, in its very short history, it has created £3 million in profit and 264 new jobs. Regrettably, this crucial asset to enterprise and education is now under threat; this year's EDGE programme has been cancelled. It is the first time in EDGE's short history that a programme has been cancelled. Before I address the problem, I wish to reflect on and reinforce the value of the project. As I have  indicated, its benefits are self-evident—but members should not take it from me. We set up a "Save the EDGE" Facebook site, which I am quite proud of. It has almost 300 members, who comprise alumni and businesses alike. They have given overwhelming support for the programme. I would like to read two of the responses that we have received in support of EDGE. Nigel Chadwick of Stream Communications, one of the many businesses that has participated in EDGE, said: "Internationalism and the positive business and cultural impact of such programmes should be high on the Scottish Government's agenda. Programmes such as this should be valued for the part they play in effecting international attitude and integrated working from an early age." Irene Cullen, who is a schoolteacher at Hermitage academy in Helensburgh, said of the programme: "All the pupils who took part in the EDGE programme gained a huge amount of experience, maturity, an understanding of business, confidence, leadership skills, great examples of working in a team, meeting deadlines, friends and contacts for life, new job aspirations, and no doubt encouraged some young people who will go into business that would not have considered it before." Surely members agree that those are the very qualities and skills that we wish to be utilised and instilled in Scotland's school leavers today. Indeed, higher education institutions and employers consistently stress that among the most vital skills for successful job seekers are the experience of business and work, and the life experience, that projects such as EDGE offer. A simple crisis of funding puts all that in jeopardy. In previous years, EDGE has been built on a partnership between Scottish Enterprise, universities, Careers Scotland—which, of course, is now Skills Development Scotland—local authorities and Scottish businesses. It has been part funded by Scottish Enterprise; European funding has made up about 55 per cent of the balance. Scottish universities have made in-kind contributions in the form of staff time and facilities. This year, Scottish Enterprise has announced that, given its funding restrictions, it does not believe that projects such as EDGE form part of its core business. It has attempted to transfer responsibility to Skills Development Scotland, but no transfer has actually taken place and this year's programme has been cancelled. The future of EDGE has been left hanging in the balance. There are no guarantees or commitments for funding in the future. That is unacceptable. That we should let a valuable and dynamic education and enterprise project be cancelled, taking crucial opportunities away from students and businesses alike, is deeply regrettable. Given that it is the stated aim of Scottish Enterprise to improve the environment in which Scottish businesses operate, I question the judgment that programmes such as  EDGE no longer form a core part of Scottish Enterprise's work. It is a question of money. As I understand it, Scottish Enterprise's budget has fallen by something like 21 per cent in real terms and the organisation has undergone a 40 per cent reduction in size—yet the chief executive receives the same £200,000 salary as her predecessor. That is more than the Prime Minister is paid. There is more, however. Information I have obtained from SPICe indicates that in an average year one in five staff in Scottish Enterprise receive a bonus on top of their salary. In the financial year 2008-09, bonus payments amounted to £214,000 across the organisation. The cost of the EDGE project in 2009 totalled £360,000, of which more than half can come from European funding. All that is needed is about £170,000. That is not a huge amount of money when set against some of the salaries and bonuses that I have been talking about. Ultimately, it is a question of priorities. Whether such lucrative salaries and substantial bonuses are justifiable in the face of losing valuable projects such as EDGE is deeply questionable. EDGE is a valuable and profitable asset for business, education and opportunity in Scotland. Such projects equip young people with crucial skills for the future and bring tangible benefits to business. I will conclude by quoting an EDGE participant. "EDGE was the most worthwhile experience I had during the course of my university career. The business experience I received was second to none and has impacted massively on my future career direction. It is such a worthwhile cause to have a business programme open to students of all disciplines, proving that good business sense and creativity can come from all subject areas. In the current economic climate, programmes such as EDGE are more vital than ever." I could not agree more. I hope that the minister will guarantee the future of the EDGE programme. Anything less would be a complete travesty.

Will the minister give way?

Speaking of facts, is the minister denying NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde's workforce projections, in which 1,252 staff are cut? Is she denying that NHS Lothian said that 700 jobs would be lost? Is she denying NHS Tayside's reduction of £30 million? Is she guaranteeing that that will have no impact on front-line services? She cannot have it both ways.

Will the member give way?

The member's own cabinet secretary maintains that the health budget has grown by £264 million and that, as a result of that, front-line services are being protected. How does cutting staff—1,252 of them in Glasgow alone—equate with protecting front-line services?

I welcome the opportunity to discuss the NHS quality strategy and I congratulate the Scottish Government on introducing it. I find little to disagree with in the document and I am sure that that view will be shared among members across the chamber. We all want safe, clinically effective and person-centred treatment, which is at the heart of the quality strategy. We all want Scotland to become a world leader in the delivery of health care. It is right that we should continually strive to improve our delivery of services and the outcomes that we achieve for people throughout the country. The ambition is right, and I am sure that the cabinet secretary will acknowledge that achieving that ambition will be dependent on leadership at all levels of the NHS, shared ownership of the objectives and, of course, partnership with staff, patients and carers. All that will be critical if we are to achieve change on the scale that is required and to begin to meet the objectives and take the direction of travel that the strategy sets out.  If any of the sentiments in the document is to become real, measuring progress matters. I am therefore interested in the quality framework, underpinned by HEAT targets, that will serve to monitor and drive progress. I have no disagreement with the 12 overarching outcome measures that are proposed and I am pleased that there is an outcome on hospital-acquired infections. However, there is a suggestion that there will be a reduction in HEAT targets. I ask the cabinet secretary which ones will be dropped and whether new ones will be developed.

I am sure that we all look forward to scrutinising that work as it is produced. As the cabinet secretary did, I pay tribute to all staff in the NHS. Their contribution is simply beyond measure. So whether somebody is a consultant, a doctor, a nurse, a member of catering staff or a porter, we appreciate their commitment and service to the NHS and we thank them for it. I am worried about the cuts that are being implemented now in various parts of the NHS. The cabinet secretary will say that the amount of money that the Scottish National Party Government has provided to the NHS has gone up by £264 million, but she will not tell us that that is the lowest settlement in real terms made to the NHS in Scotland since the days of Michael Scissorhands Forsyth—it is a mere 0.1 per cent increase in real terms. That is why, when representatives of health boards appeared before the Health and Sport Committee yesterday, their evidence revealed £270 million of cuts in the present financial year. For example, NHS Lanarkshire acknowledges its increase of £16.7 million for this year, but its increased costs are £40 million. The board says that it needs to make £17 million of savings. What about NHS Lothian? It has had a £31 million uplift, but it has increased costs of £60 million, with savings of £29 million to be found. NHS Tayside has had a £12 million uplift, but it has increased costs of £42 million and savings of £30 million have to be found. I ask the cabinet secretary please not to tell me that those are efficiency savings. The so-called efficiency savings that health boards are having to find have to be achieved because, frankly, she has assumed them in their budget allocation and they  are now affecting front-line services. They are cuts, so let us call them that. The cabinet secretary is quick to call for consensus and honesty. Have you noticed, Presiding Officer, that she usually does so when she is in trouble? Now is her chance to be honest with the Parliament. Can she explain how cuts of the kind that I am about to describe, which are just a flavour, have no impact on front-line services and will contribute to achieving the NHS quality strategy? In my area, the replacement for the Alexandria medical centre, which was promised by the cabinet secretary and which is in the vision for the Vale of Leven, is on hold and under review. The community maternity unit has now moved from a 24/7 service to a daytime service, with women having to locate an on-call midwife before the doors are unlocked and the light is switched on in the unit. But guess what? The majority of babies are born at night. Is that efficient, or even sensible? I do not think so. What about the 500 cleaning hours that are to be cut from Glasgow royal infirmary? Have we learned nothing about hospital-acquired infections? What about NHS Lothian, which has been forced to reduce its workforce by 700? How many are front-line staff? NHS Lanarkshire does not seem to understand the importance that the cabinet secretary ascribes to prevention. Smoking cessation staff numbers are being cut in half. The Braveheart programme is being reduced, if not cancelled. We heard earlier today from Cathie Craigie about the removal of podiatry services from an 80-year-old constituent. Sticking with NHS Lanarkshire, what about the cancellation of the 130-bed acute mental health unit and the likely reduction in community psychiatric services? I know that the cabinet secretary will tell us that she has kept open Monklands accident and emergency unit, but she has not invested one single penny in the fabric of the rest of the hospital building, which is falling down. On her watch, she has allowed 16 surgical beds to be mothballed and there is no new mental health facility and no new cancer centre, which was promised. How will we achieve the NHS quality strategy if those front-line services are being cut? In NHS Ayrshire and Arran, the new kidney unit is being cancelled. In NHS Borders, there is a review of £180,000 of spending on medical staff. In NHS Tayside, there have been £3 million savings from not filling vacancies. Our already hard-pressed front-line staff are being asked to do even more as their colleagues face a future on the dole queue. NHS Dumfries and Galloway has taken almost £3 million off its acute services. NHS Forth Valley  has taken off £2.5 million. No part of the country is immune to the SNP cuts. Make no mistake—those cuts are made in Scotland. The SNP is guilty of fantasy economics. The Scottish budget rose by £917 million in 2010-11. That is a fact. The SNP got £917 million more this year than last year. Those figures—which I know that the SNP would not trust me with—are confirmed by the Scottish Parliament information centre.

No. Indeed I will not. It is not often that I agree with Annabel Goldie, but she is right that the style of the SNP Government is based on grudge and grievance. However, the Government cannot blame somebody else, as it will inevitably try to do; it must take the responsibility. If it does not, it will be engaging in the politics of the school playground. The promise that the SNP made to the Scottish people was that it would protect front-line services. The litany of cuts that I have outlined today expose that as being a hollow promise indeed. The First Minister talked about the Tory cuts to come. We have not even got there yet. I am sure that we will watch the budget, which is due in 50 days, with considerable interest, but the cuts that I am describing are SNP cuts—the SNP's alone. The SNP cannot say that it is putting £264 million extra into the budget to protect front-line services when we discover today that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is cutting 1,252 jobs in its area this year alone. It is clear—to me, at least—that if 1,252 members of staff are removed, there will be a direct impact on patient care and quality. Let us look at who those 1,252 members of staff are. They include: 21 doctors in training at the Queen Mother's hospital; 669 nursing and midwifery staff; reductions in elderly mental health services at Parkhead hospital; reductions in occupational health services; a redesign of Clyde mental health services with 45 fewer nursing staff; 60 fewer allied health professionals in podiatry, physiotherapy and speech and language therapy; and—get this—41 fewer pharmacists, who are being replaced by three automated dispensing machines. Did the cabinet secretary know? Did she agree to any of that? NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has commented that towards the end of 2009, the Scottish Government health department announced a review of NHS workforce planning processes and advised that it would not require workforce projections by the end of April, as with previous years. However, on 9 April 2010, the Scottish Government health department wrote again to the human resources directors to request a workforce narrative for 2010-11 from all health  boards by 30 April 2010. Was the cabinet secretary aware that health boards were told in late 2009 that no more workforce projections were required? Was she aware that the health department then changed its mind on 9 April, when it wrote to boards?

Is she aware of the projections for all health boards, given that they were submitted by 30 April? Is Glasgow just the tip of the iceberg? In the interests of transparency, will the cabinet secretary release the projections today to SPICe, or does she have something to hide? I fear that the cabinet secretary is not just letting the cuts happen but demanding them.

I am conscious of time. I fear that the NHS quality strategy will be strangled at birth. Quality is about people—staff and patients—working together to improve our service. The strategy is essential and I share the cabinet secretary's view about its importance. I will take an intervention from her if she will tell me how the cuts will have no impact on quality.

Absolutely not. However, my question was about whether the cabinet secretary was aware of what has happened. If she is, she stands accused of not protecting the health service from cuts and of demanding that such cuts happen throughout the health service. In the interests of transparency, I invite her to place the information with SPICe. The First Minister and his deputy, the cabinet secretary, stand accused of the worst kind of hypocrisy. They say one thing but do something entirely different. They show no compassion, no sympathy and not one iota of concern for the staff who will lose their jobs and their hard-working families. What about patients? Will the cabinet  secretary give a cast-iron guarantee that patient safety will not be compromised in any way? SNP members promised to protect front-line services. On the evidence so far, they have failed. What is even worse is that they do not even appear to have tried. I move amendment S3M-6295.3, to insert at end: "; therefore notes with concern submissions by NHS boards to the Health and Sport Committee identifying cuts to frontline services, and believes that these risk undermining the NHS Quality Strategy."

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take to better protect medical records. (S3F-2401)

The action that was taken 18 months ago has obviously proved to be insufficient. The most recent incident of which the First Minister will be aware is the discovery in a supermarket car park of a memory stick containing intimate details of patients and staff from part of NHS Forth Valley. The First Minister will be aware that that follows other incidents of boxes of medical records lying unattended in public corridors in the Southern general hospital, patient information, including X-rays, being scattered around Law hospital and documents being left lying around Strathmartine hospital, in the constituency of the Minister for Public Health and Sport in Dundee. Does the First Minister agree that effective action has not yet been taken by all parts of the NHS in Scotland? What will he do now to ensure the security of confidential patient records?

Is the First Minister aware that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is planning to substitute almost 400 registered nurses with half the number of nursing assistants? The plan appears to be to cut numbers in half and then diminish the skill mix, showing complete disregard for nationally agreed workforce planning tools and, more serious, potentially compromising patient safety. Does the First Minister agree with that?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it plans to name its proposed minimum unit price for alcohol. (S3O-10367)

I note that the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill has been a long time in development. Fundamental to consideration of the principle of minimum unit pricing has to be whether it is effective. The European Commission has stated that it is important to consider a range of alternative measures that might have the same, if not a greater, public health impact, and that effectiveness is a key test. Will the cabinet secretary therefore give the Parliament an indication of whether the price will be 40p, as has been modelled by the Government, or 60p, as preferred by the majority of public health professionals, so that the Health and Sport Committee can determine effectiveness before the stage 1 debate?

I, too, congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate. I join her in congratulating Grampian Cardiac Rehabilitation Association on all its valuable work. I also pay tribute to all those in the NHS who provide care and treatment for people with coronary heart disease. The Government has confirmed that tackling coronary heart disease continues to be a national clinical priority for the NHS in Scotland. That is right and welcome. Almost a fifth of deaths in Scotland are related to heart disease. That is preventable. Every year, about 10,000 people in Scotland survive a heart attack and 13,000 angina patients require admission to hospital. I absolutely agree with Mary Scanlon on the cost of that to the  NHS, never mind to the individual. All of those people, plus a further 6,000 patients with chronic heart failure, would undoubtedly benefit from cardiac rehabilitation. The number of people who are affected by coronary heart disease is greater still. There is a clear need for provision in this area in local communities. Comprehensive cardiac rehabilitation can be delivered by multidisciplinary professional teams and by trained volunteers, who are all engaged in maintaining people's physical health. That involves not just exercise but behavioural change, education and psychological support, all of which are geared towards facilitating a return to normal living. In most cases, as in Grampian, patients are the catalyst for setting up rehabilitation associations. I pay tribute to those in Grampian who took the time and trouble to get involved in establishing their group. That support is much valued, and not just by increasing numbers of people in Grampian; I also know that it is valued from my own constituency experience. It is fortunate that a number of local groups provide cardiac rehabilitation in Dumbarton, the Vale of Leven and Helensburgh. One such group is the healthy heart lifestyle club, which runs two classes a week at the Concord community centre in Dumbarton. I have been out and about with its members on a couple of occasions, and they put me to shame. The club was established 15 years ago, by staff working alongside patients at the Vale of Leven hospital. Those patients had been admitted following heart incidents. They underwent an initial rehabilitation programme at the hospital, and following discharge were referred to the club to continue their treatment by developing and maintaining a longer-term exercise plan. Brian Adam was right when he said that classes become social occasions. The club has become quite a social group, with a number of things going on. It has grown in size and currently has approximately 40 attendees. Instructors are trained to certified standards of the British association for cardiac rehabilitation. Since the first group was established 15 years ago, a further three heart and lifestyle classes have been formed in the constituency. Two are run by the local authority, at the Vale of Leven swimming pool and at the Meadow centre in Dumbarton; the other, which is in Helensburgh, is run by a private instructor—that is unusual. Like the Grampian group, they all do exceptional work. Nanette Milne was right to say that there is a patchwork of provision, which does not cover the whole of Scotland. We know that cardiac rehabilitation can improve the prognosis and quality of life of people who live with heart disease. There is no doubt that it is an effective preventive  measure. I agree with Brian Adam that we should consider broadening coverage to include people with other heart conditions, as a preventive measure. I hope that the minister and all members will support and encourage the development of community-based cardiac rehabilitation services. It does not matter whether services are run by communities, local authorities or in partnership; what we need is a network of services that are accessible to every community. As Mary Scanlon said, cardiac rehabilitation works. It cuts readmissions and it can help to save lives. Anything that we can do to encourage the development of a network of services would be thoroughly positive.

The cabinet secretary is always very persuasive. There is no difference among the parties in recognising the scale of the problem and task that we face, but the key question is whether minimum pricing is the right measure and will have the maximum impact. The First Minister failed to answer any of my questions earlier, so I hope that the cabinet secretary will answer our concerns about the legality of the policy. Does the cabinet secretary believe that the European Union should be notified now about any aspect of the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill, under the technical standards directive? If not, at what point will the EU be notified about the minimum pricing proposals? If that will happen only when the price is set, in the interests of transparency and  parliamentary scrutiny—and, indeed, if she wishes to gain support for the measure—will she tell us prior to the stage 1 debate what the minimum price will be?

The First Minister will be aware of the growing concerns about the legality of the proposed measure. Does he believe that the European Union should be notified now about any aspect of the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill, under the technical standards directive? If not, at what point does the European Union get notified about the minimum pricing proposals? Is it when the price is set? If that is the case, will the First Minister, in the interests of transparency and parliamentary scrutiny—he believes that he has nothing to fear—tell us when he will name the minimum price?

I am delighted that I got here in time to ask it. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it has taken following the Audit Scotland report on the performance of West Dunbartonshire Council. (S3O-10060)

The cabinet secretary is right to point out that it has been four years since Audit Scotland first reported its concerns about the leadership in the council, staff morale and demonstrating best value. It must be of concern to the Government, therefore, that four years on, the capacity of West Dunbartonshire Council to change the situation must surely be in question. I invite the cabinet secretary to consider providing practical support from the Government to help council officials and councillors to make the changes that are clearly required to West Dunbartonshire.

rose—

I speak in support of amendments 1 to 5, in the name of Patrick Harvie, which seek to reverse the amendments made by the cabinet secretary at stage 2 and keep Waterwatch Scotland intact. It is worth recalling the context of our discussion on Waterwatch. Members will be aware of the work of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee, which was ably led by the Deputy Presiding Officer Trish Godman. The committee reported in May 2009 after spending some time considering a range of bodies and their value and governance arrangements. Of course, Waterwatch was included in that. The committee concluded that "Waterwatch should not be transferred as proposed."

No, I do not have time. Mr Swinney's plan to split Waterwatch Scotland's functions between the SPSO and Consumer Focus Scotland was therefore denied, after due consideration, by the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee. His decision to fly in the face of that considered position by introducing amendments at stage 2 was disappointing and perhaps had a touch of "the cabinet secretary knows best". Of course, the cabinet secretary knows his own mind, because did he not say that he was happy for the future of Waterwatch Scotland to be considered and decided by the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body? We now realise that he meant that only if the SPCB agreed with his view. So, out went the dummy from the pram and in came a raft of stage 2 amendments. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will tell members—he has done so—that the abolition of Waterwatch will have no impact on services and will save money. Well, that is not entirely accurate, because savings will be generated not by the proposed merger but by dismantling the statutory regional panel and national committee structure. The Parliament amended the Water Services etc (Scotland) Bill at stage 2 in 2005 to set up Waterwatch, including its consumer consultation panels. I observe that Waterwatch has stated that the saving would be greater if it was required only to investigate complaints. However, the cabinet secretary has ignored that view, because it is a case of his way or no way.

Finally, Presiding Officer—

Okay. I simply add that when the then Environment and Rural Development Committee considered the issue, Rob Gibson, Richard Lochhead and, indeed, Alex Johnstone actively supported the measure. We believed in an holistic approach in 2005 and we believe in it now. I urge support for Patrick Harvie's amendments.

I am sure that the minister shares my concern at the drop in the amount of respite care provided for children. I accept and welcome the discussions with COSLA on the general target for respite care, but will she outline what specific action she will take to reverse the decline in respite care for children?

No, there has not for children.

Like others, I start by paying tribute to my colleague Des McNulty for securing this debate on St Margaret's hospice. I know that he has campaigned hard alongside many other members, irrespective of their politics, to secure a positive result for the hospice. As Gil Paterson did, I acknowledge the continuing support of West Dunbartonshire Council and East Dunbartonshire Council. However, it is the support of ordinary people from all walks of life that gives me a sense of just how much the hospice is valued and loved: we have heard about the petition of well over 100,000 signatures, which shows us that. Spending just a little time in the hospice with the "formidable" Sister Rita—I use Jackson Carlaw's word—and her team lets us begin to understand what a special place it is. I know that some might regard  that as just an emotional response, but no such charge can be laid at the door of the care commission. As others have said, a recent report on the care that is provided at the hospice rated it as excellent across every indicator, so there can be absolutely no argument whatever about the quality of the provision or the scale of support for the hospice. Others have explained the history of how we got here, so I need not rehearse it. Suffice it to say that at the heart of the issue is the funding for 30 continuing care beds for the elderly. I think that my colleagues around the chamber would agree that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has not covered itself in glory—indeed, some members may choose to use stronger language. It has been less than transparent with the press—I commend Scottish Review for its investigative journalism, which has helped to expose this sorry tale—and it has actively obstructed its own board members, such as John Bannon, who sought only to understand what lay behind the board's decision not to fund continuing care beds at St Margaret's. Now, John Bannon has been threatened under the code of conduct by the health board on which he serves. Is that the behaviour that we should expect from a health board—the pursuit of a non-executive member, appointed by the minister, who is merely after answers to perfectly legitimate questions? I trust that it is not. The cabinet secretary has asked for an urgent report, and I am grateful to her for intervening in the matter. I hope that she can tell the chamber in her summing up what action she is able to take. I have made it clear, on behalf of my party, that Scottish Labour is committed to funding the 30 continuing care beds at St Margaret's if we are successful in the Scottish Parliament elections. That is a clear and unequivocal commitment. For the benefit of Jackson Carlaw, I will explain the basis of that decision. I was deeply disappointed with his press statement today, which was entirely at odds with his very considered speech this evening, the terms of which I entirely support and agree with. Members will be aware that the decision on provision of continuing care beds at Blawarthill hospital was made by Greater Glasgow Health Board in 2000. At that time, the modelling of future needs was based on the territory that was served by the board as it was constituted then. The health board expanded in 2006 to include the Clyde part of the former Argyll and Clyde Health Board area. Consequently, the likely demand for continuing care beds should reflect the additional population of the whole of West Dunbartonshire and parts of Argyll and Bute, as well as the population south of the river, many of whom already make use of the  hospice. There is, therefore, a need for the additional capacity that could be provided at St Margaret's alongside that which is provided at Blawarthill. We are all, unfortunately, getting older although, helpfully, we are living longer. This would not be profligate use of taxpayers' money, as Jackson Carlaw might contend. Rather, it is a considered position that seeks the retention of a much-valued facility. I hope that he would genuinely welcome that. I will support any measure that makes progress for St Margaret's and secures the funding of continuing care beds, wherever that suggestion comes from. Two things are abundantly clear to me. First, we must shine a light on the lack of transparency and the obstruction that has taken place by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. Secondly, and above all, we must end the uncertainty for the hospice. The Parliament is at its best when we work together; let us do that tonight for St Margaret's.

To ask the First Minister whether the European Court of Justice ruling on minimum pricing for tobacco products raises questions regarding the legality of minimum unit pricing of alcohol. (S3F-2265)

The First Minister will be aware that the language and decisions of the European Court of Justice on minimum pricing in general, whether on tobacco or alcohol, have been wholly consistent over the past 30 years. On 29 October 2009, I asked the First Minister whether he would share the substance of the Government's legal advice on minimum pricing with all party leaders. Despite his positive response then, I regret that that has not yet happened. Will the First Minister now rise to the occasion, in the light of the increasing concerns about the legality of the proposed measure? If he is confident about the legal position, will he agree today to notify the provisions of the bill, and the associated subordinate legislation, to the European Commission so that we know, before stage 3, whether minimum pricing is legal?

The First Minister will recognise that increasing public demand on primary medical services may have an impact on funding. Does he agree with the Deputy First Minister, who said yesterday that there is record funding for the NHS in the coming year, or does he agree with another member of the health and wellbeing ministerial team, one Alex Neil, who on the same day expressed in the Wishaw press his fury at cuts to health services? Who is right?

It gives me great pleasure to contribute to the debate on behalf of the Labour Party. I join others in paying tribute to the clerks, the bill team, the Health and Sport Committee, which scrutinised every aspect of the bill, and the Minister for Public Health and Sport and the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for introducing the bill, which clearly and rightly commands substantial support in the chamber—albeit with the exception of the Tories. Labour has a proud record in government of tackling the problem of tobacco. In 2005, the Parliament passed the Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Act 2005, which introduced the historic ban on smoking in public places. There is no doubt that that has brought benefits to smokers who have succeeded in giving up and to customers and employees in restaurants, bars and elsewhere who are no longer subjected to other people's smoke. The year 2005 also saw the passing of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 with, for the first time in legislation, a clear public health objective. We have supported raising the legal age for smoking to 16 to 18, which has since been implemented. I have no doubt that the United Kingdom Government's ban on tobacco advertising, which has existed for a number of years, is helpful, but we are persuaded that further restrictions on point-of-sale displays of tobacco products are much needed. The decision about whether to ban vending machines was always going to be finely balanced. Although we have come down on the side of public health, we recognise the concerns of the vending machine operators, and I am grateful for the minister's commitment to consider what practical support can continue to be provided. Although I am deeply disappointed that Richard Simpson's amendments were not agreed to, I believe that the bill will move things forward. I urge the Government to be vigilant, given the experience in Ireland of the creative ways in which the industry has tried to circumvent display bans. On part 2, I do not share the British Medical Association's disappointment that the GMS contract is now extended to other health professionals, such as nurses. The Royal College of Nursing argued for it in detail at the committee, and we believe that it is right that, as nurses become increasingly skilled and responsible in areas of primary care, we should enable them to  hold contracts in the future. We are grateful to the Government for taking that point on board. I return to part 1 in closing. The scale of the problem that is caused by smoking has been well documented, and I do not believe that it is contested by anybody in this chamber. We therefore have a responsibility to try to ensure that not just this generation but future generations do not become addicted to tobacco. The bill will help in that process, and I commend it to the chamber.

I am content with the clarification from the cabinet secretary. It was important to have that placed on the record. As that has been done, I seek leave to withdraw the amendment.

I lodged amendment 46 in response to the cabinet secretary's letter to all members indicating that a challenge to part 2 has been lodged with the European Commission. Whether or not members agree with part 2—we know the Tories' position on it—the challenge is to be regretted, as it will have the effect of preventing the immediate implementation of the bill. In fairness, the cabinet secretary said in her letter that she would reflect on the outcome of the Commission's process before considering how to proceed. The purpose of amendment 46—which I contend is tightly written in relation to part 2—is to ensure that that part of the act is not introduced until the Commission's process is finished. I understand that the cabinet secretary may have considered lodging a similar amendment. I am sure that she will tell me that there are unintended consequences to amendment 46. Perhaps, after that, I can respectfully invite the cabinet secretary to set out clearly how she  intends to deal with the referral to the Commission. I move amendment 46.

The Scottish Government has previously indicated its commitment to co-operatives. We believe that community co-operatives with the appropriate health professionals can provide a suitable model for a PMS contract that would be entirely in keeping with the bill. If the cabinet secretary is not minded to support Helen Eadie's amendments 36 to 45, will she confirm that, if a community co-operative is also a charitable body, it will be eligible to hold a contract under the bill?

Rhoda Grant has argued the case for radio-controlled vending machines and I, like other members in the chamber, have had the opportunity to view them in operation. However, we need to balance the impact on businesses of a total ban on vending machines with the wider benefit to public health. The United Kingdom will implement its ban by October 2011, and it is right that we should keep in step with that. Some have argued that an extension of time would help vending machine operators. I do not believe that because the use of existing vending machines would continue without the safeguards that Rhoda Grant's amendments propose, and that would not be desirable.  That all needs to be weighed against the obvious advantages of a total ban. We know that test purchasing, albeit in a rural area, showed that the operators failed in 23 out 25 cases. We need to be mindful of that, and of the Parliament's clear desire to remove the possibility of young people purchasing tobacco inappropriately. It would be helpful for the minister to address two specific areas. I know that she and her officials have had preliminary discussions with vending machine operators, which is welcome. Will she commit to continuing to facilitate discussions about, in particular, two issues that have been raised: putting dispensing machines behind the bar, and the opportunities in the industry for diversification? Such practical support would start to help and it would further address the sustainability of those businesses, while acknowledging the importance of the Parliament's move towards a total ban. For those reasons, Labour will support the Government in putting public health interests first.

Labour, too, opposes all of Mary Scanlon's amendments. We do so because we are persuaded that point-of-sale displays are becoming increasingly important to manufacturers as a means of marketing tobacco products to young people. That is backed up by a substantial body of research, which links such displays to smoking behaviour. However, I recognise Mary Scanlon's concerns about cost. Is the £20 for a gantry or a single shelf? I would be grateful if the minister provided clarity on that important point. Richard Simpson's amendments seek to close loopholes that we know, from the experience of Ireland, can be exploited by some in the tobacco industry. Alternative advertising displays, with the branding and colouring of well-known cigarettes, are used to circumvent the ban on point-of-sale displays. We need to close that loophole. I know that the principle underlying Richard Simpson's amendments is supported by others, such as the cross-party group on tobacco control, the Scottish coalition on tobacco and ASH Scotland. The whole point is to stop advertising tobacco to children at point-of-sale displays in all possible forms. There will be no additional impact on retailers, no extra costs and no extra burden on enforcement officers. The amendments are clear, simple and easily understood. The Government has suggested that the issue is a matter for guidance, but I am not convinced that that is strong enough. There would be no direct sanctions if the guidance were not followed. We have an opportunity properly to ban displays, and we should take it.

David McLetchie's point of order and my point of order relate to comments that were made by the First Minister, not the cabinet secretary. It is important that the First Minister, who appears to have inadvertently misled the chamber, answers for that. We have already heard that the Nuffield trust has been absolutely clear that the figures were compiled using data that was provided by the Government of Scotland to the Office of National Statistics. The implication is—

I will be very quick. The First Minister implied that the statistics are inaccurate. Is the figure of there being double the number of hospital managers per capita in Scotland that there are in England, which is a rise of 4.2 per cent to a record level on this Government's watch, equally inaccurate? The First Minister needs to answer to the chamber.

The First Minister will be aware of the new £20 million package that has been announced by the UK Government to assist thalidomide survivors in England, which was followed swiftly by an announcement that the Northern Ireland Assembly would make a contribution. However, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has yet to respond. I know from a constituent the physical hardship and severe challenges that thalidomide survivors face on a daily basis and the need for housing adaptations, wheelchairs and other services—needs that are currently not being met. Given that the First Minister signed an early-day motion in Westminster in November to support financial assistance for thalidomide survivors, will he today commit his Government in Scotland to doing just that?

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the opportunity to debate prescription charges and consider the NHS's spending priorities. Given the short time that is available to me, I will focus on prescription charges. I hope that there will be further opportunities in the months to come for us to debate priorities for the NHS at greater length.  It is no secret that, in the previous session, Labour members did not favour the complete abolition of prescription charges; rather, we preferred an incremental approach that would have meant extending free prescriptions to those with long-term chronic conditions and those on a range of top-up benefits as a result of low incomes. Some have questioned—it has happened again today—why MSPs should be given free prescriptions, given that we can afford to pay for them. Currently, 92 per cent of all prescriptions in Scotland are issued free, but there is an issue: a proportion of the remaining 8 per cent of people have chronic conditions and may require substantial levels of medication, which some might struggle to afford—I agree with the cabinet secretary on that. We could spend a lot of time rehearsing old arguments today, but I do not want to do that. The cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government have reached a judgment about the value and affordability of prescription charges. I confess that that flies in the face of John Swinney's speech on the budget yesterday, but they have reached a judgment, and we will not stand in the way of the policy. Some £32 million has been provided in the budget for the policy for the coming financial year, £45 million has been provided for the next financial year, and the total recurring cost has been set at £57 million from April 2011. As I said, we will not stand in the way of the policy, but that does not mean that we will suspend our critical capacity to consider how it is developed. I want to focus on three issues. The first is how sustainable the policy is. We know that it is likely that demand for medicines will grow, and I understand that the cabinet secretary has factored that in, but I cannot tell at what level. What percentage growth has been allowed for? What will the costs be as we move forward to 2012, 2013 and 2014 and the financial belt begins to tighten? We need to know how sustainable the policy is so that we can base our views on that. Secondly, can the cabinet secretary guarantee that the policy will not compromise patient care? I am sure that members understand the concern that already exists that the so-called efficiency savings that health boards are making are having an impact on front-line services. If the cost of funding free prescriptions continually rises, that will have an impact on money for other priorities. I am sure that no member would want that, and am therefore interested in the cabinet secretary's view on the matter.

The member will recognise that health spending in Scotland is at an historic, all-time high and that it is above the per capita level in the rest of the United Kingdom. The Tories and Labour have maintained that over our history. As I explained earlier, we were moving to extend the coverage of free prescriptions. The third issue that I want to consider is the impact of free prescriptions on the minor ailments service. That issue has been raised several times with ministers, but I regret that no clear response has been given.

I will develop my point, after which I will be happy to let in the cabinet secretary. The minor ailments service applies to people who do not pay for prescriptions. People can go to their local pharmacist for advice or to get medicine for a minor illness without needing to make an appointment with their GP. That service is tremendous: it is convenient and it frees up GP appointments. Of course, we will all have free prescriptions soon. Does that mean that we will be able to get free medicines for minor ailments directly from pharmacists? I will give members an idea of some of the minor ailments that I am talking about: they include backache, earache, hay fever, headache, indigestion, mouth ulcers, pain—that is a general term—and sore throat. The list goes on and on. On 5 December 2007, the cabinet secretary told members that the Government was considering the implications of abolishing prescription charges and that announcements would be made. I am not clear that those announcements have been made, but perhaps I missed them; I would welcome clarification on that. I do not think that any member wants the unintended consequence to be that, rather than using pharmacists, people revert to cluttering up GP surgeries, because the prescriptions that GPs issue will be free. I am happy to give way to the cabinet secretary if she can clarify that point.

I just looked at Mary Scanlon and Richard Simpson, who have held the health brief for much longer than I have, and they do not recall that clarification being given either. Is it the case, as the cabinet secretary has just said, that everybody who is in the minor ailments scheme will be eligible for free prescriptions for all the services that are offered?

I take that as a yes from a sedentary position. I am conscious of the time, so I turn finally to the consequences of the Tory motion. Members will know that we have encouraged the Scottish Government to bring prescriptions for cancer patients in Scotland into line with those in England and Wales. We are not asking for that to be done instead of addressing prescription charges for other chronic conditions, and it is wrong of the cabinet secretary to suggest that. Ours is not an either/or amendment. Charges for cancer patients were scrapped by the UK Government last April, yet cancer patients in Scotland are still waiting for that. It was absolutely right to abolish charges for cancer patients, and it has transformed the lives of around 150,000 people who have benefited by saving up to £100 a year. Voting for the Tory motion would put that in jeopardy, never mind the benefits to the other categories of people who would qualify in the roll-out of free prescriptions. We, on this side of the chamber, will not do that. The challenge for the Government is to include cancer patients now and to ensure that concerns about the sustainability of the extension of free prescriptions are addressed. I move amendment S3M-5572.1, to leave out from "withdraw" to end and insert: "immediately implement free prescriptions for cancer patients as has been the case in England since April 2009."

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate Jim Hume for securing this important debate. We have heard from local members about NHS Dumfries and Galloway's consultation on three options for service change, which would lead to varying degrees of change on the ground. I will concentrate on the board's preferred option—option C—not least because it is the most radical and involves the closure of five community hospitals. Option C also involves the creation of four community rehabilitation units, but the proposal is not gaining widespread support in communities in Dumfries and Galloway. I appreciate that the decision is ultimately for the cabinet secretary and the minister and that, therefore, the minister's ability to comment is severely constrained. However, the Government has stated its intention to keep service delivery as local as possible, so I have no doubt that members will seek to test that commitment against the proposals that emerge from Dumfries and Galloway. It is important for us to take a step back and to consider the context in which the cabinet secretary will operate. We have a current strategy for development, not closure, of community hospitals—"Developing Community Hospitals: A Strategy for Scotland", which the previous Scottish Executive published in 2006. It envisaged a new model for community hospitals, which were to fit into the vision of much more community-focused health services, as laid out in "Delivering for Health". That vision of "Delivering for Health" was based on the Kerr report, which talked about reconfiguration of services and helpfully tried to provide a sensible framework for service change that—if my memory is correct—the whole Parliament accepted. In addition to that, the current Scottish Government produced a valuable report called "Delivering for Remote and Rural Healthcare: The Final Report of the Remote and Rural Workstream". It was published in May 2008 and specifically built on the agenda and model for community hospitals, but recognised the challenges of delivering health care in a rural setting. We need to set what NHS Dumfries and Galloway proposes within that robust framework in considering how we move forward. Does its proposal sit comfortably in the policy context that we created? The jury is certainly out on that and local communities are possibly arriving at  decisions about people's intentions in Dumfries and Galloway. I value the work that the independent scrutiny panel did. I will raise three issues that it highlighted. It was sad that the panel had to remind the health board that it needed to set out a compelling vision for the changes that it wished to make. I would have thought that the first thing that the health board would do would be to set that vision out—to understand what it was trying to achieve and then follow through on it. The other issues were transport in the context of geography and the financial assumptions. I will focus on them. I understand absolutely that the area is rural and that transport connections are challenging; the independent scrutiny panel also recognised that. From my experience at the Vale of Leven, I understand that sometimes—as Derek Brownlee said—a hospital's appearing to be geographically close takes no account of transport connections. Not everybody these days has a car, so some people rely on public transport. I am clear about the need to resolve such issues well in advance, otherwise we will find that people will not travel for hospital appointments, which is not what members would want. I am also genuinely concerned about the financial assumptions.

Indeed. I will be quick. There are significant challenges in the NHS capital budgets. My understanding is—I would appreciate the minister's response on this—that funding for projects is being approved only when the business case has been finalised and there are no commitments to anything else, so I am curious as to how NHS Dumfries and Galloway intends to fund its proposal. I am sure that there will be a very good turn-out in the health board election pilots in Dumfries and Galloway and I will be happy to visit the area to hear first hand from the board and, particularly, the local community how they want health services to be provided in their area.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I think that that is truly wonderful, Presiding Officer, but I am not sure whether the rest of the Parliament necessarily agrees—[ Interruption .] I hear Alex Neil from a sedentary position performing as the pantomime dame, which he does so well in the chamber. I will start with something that Alex Neil said. In all the heat of the debate, we need to remind ourselves of the scale of the challenge that we face. Scotland's 65-plus population is projected to rise by 21 per cent by 2016 and 62 per cent by 2031. For those who are 85 and over, the projected rise is 38 per cent by 2016 and 134 per cent by 2031. I look forward to seeing many of my colleagues in that age group. Not only are those statistics staggering in nature, but they represent a huge challenge for us as policy makers here in Scotland and across the  UK. Just as the debate has been initiated in Scotland so it has also, rightly, been initiated across the UK, hence the green paper, "Shaping the Future of Care Together". We need to work together to meet the challenges and to maximise the opportunities that arise from a growing elderly population. The challenge is no different in Scotland than it is in the rest of the United Kingdom. The SNP Government contends that somehow it has not been consulted, but I know that there has been regular dialogue between both Governments. These things go on, ordinarily, behind the scenes. They are about the smooth running of Government; it is essential that they occur. The Scottish Government should consider its answer to a question from Johann Lamont on the very issue of the consultation. The answer was made by Shona Robison who said: "A high level, policy-based response to the UK green paper, Shaping the Future of Care Together , is being drafted by the Health and Community Care Delivery Group. The membership of this group includes the following organisations: COSLA, Association of Directors of Social Work, City of Edinburgh Council, Perth and Kinross Council, NHS Dumfries and Galloway, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, NHS Lanarkshire, NHS Lothian, NHS Health Scotland and the Care Commission. The draft response will be signed off jointly by Scottish ministers and COSLA. The UK Department of Health has an extensive interactive consultation running on a dedicated website. Any individual or interest group in the UK can post comments and responses to the consultation up until it closes on the 13 November. I understand that Scottish voluntary organisations are fully aware of the paper and that some of them may be responding to the consultation."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 29 October 2009; S3W-27948.]  The response is helpful. It shows on-going dialogue not only between officials but at ministerial level and between organisations across Scotland. Guess what? The Scottish Government appears to have made a submission. I say "appears" because I had some difficulty finding it—more of that in a minute. I say to Sandra White that I would take a dim view if the UK Government were to consult on the future of care services. The last time that I looked, care services were devolved. They are a matter for this Parliament and for us to consult on.

No, I will not.

Hold on a second. I welcome the fact that Shona Robison is consulting on the matter. That is absolutely the right thing to do. It will ensure that we have the right approach in Scotland and that we feed into  the process. Before collective amnesia sets in, I am sure that the minister will have the good grace to accept that there has been, and continues to be, substantive consultation on the matter, including on a range of issues. The point is an important one. I am disappointed that the Scottish Government appears not to have published its response. I hope that Alex Neil will give a commitment to do that. I managed to obtain a copy of the letter that the minister sent to the UK Government, although I am not sure that it is the accurate, final version. Not surprisingly, in the letter, the minister is considerably more measured in tone. He says: "We fully recognise and respect the need for a long-term review of social care and support ... there is a need to explore options for potentially radical changes to the long-term funding of care and support in the UK to ensure that it is 'fair, sustainable and unambiguous'". That is right, but it is important that members know about, debate and contribute to Scottish Government proposals. In his contribution, Alex Neil outlined the scale of the challenge that we face, just as I did at the outset of my speech. However, he did not say how we will meet the challenge, what services people can expect and how we will pay for them. I would have much more respect for the minister—as I would for many members in the debate—if he had come to the chamber to outline what he will do about the postcode lottery of services for older and disabled people in Scotland. He should also have said how we will deal with the challenges that we face in all our communities across Scotland. Will he tell the chamber why, for the same service of equal quality, someone in one local authority area is paying £30 a week while someone in a neighbouring area is paying £300 a week? Why are people who are desperate for a direct payment languishing on waiting lists, which are growing? Those are the real challenges for which I accept responsibility; the Scottish Government, too, should do so. I say to Jackson Carlaw that the Labour Government has led the debate on the implementation of the personalisation of care. We recognise, as the member did in his contribution, that services do not define people: personalisation is much wider and is about how people live their lives. That remains at the heart of our proposals for care of older people and those with disabilities. It is incumbent on all of us, irrespective of party, to come up with proposals to meet such future challenges. As ever, Alex Neil mounted a robust and loud defence of attendance allowance. Many of us come to this debate recognising absolutely the value of the attendance allowance and the disability living allowance to those who are older  and have disabilities. Members are right to note, as David McLetchie did, the difference between a green paper and a white paper. It is early days, and a range of options are being considered. I believe that the UK Government has made its position clear. However, I am astonished at the level of quite disgraceful scaremongering that is coming out of both the Tories and the SNP. I pay tribute to Jamie Stone for his measured speech, in which he made the point that we should not scaremonger on this issue because we are affecting directly the real fears of people who are in receipt of benefits. The Secretary of State for Health has ruled out categorically using DLA for under-65s and has made it absolutely clear that those who are currently receiving attendance allowance and those over 65 who are receiving DLA will continue to receive an equivalent level of support and protection in any reformed system.

Not on this point, as I want to deal with a comment by Bill Kidd. I am sorry that he is not here, because I want to acknowledge that he has a real commitment to the issue and to say to him respectfully that no decisions have been made. I expect the UK Government to reflect on people's concerns—concerns that have been expressed in many different ways, not just in the chamber but outwith it. The SNP position is inherently dishonest. I would like the minister to address the issue of why, quite explicitly, councils across Scotland are increasing charges for care services. Helen Eadie highlighted the situation in Fife. I offer West Dunbartonshire as another example. Some people in receipt of care services there may now pay as much as £30 per week more—each and every week. Those are people on low incomes. The target is, quite explicitly, people's additional incomes, such as attendance allowance and disability living allowance. Councils are looking to levy charges on those in receipt of benefits to pay for services. Will Alex Neil stop that practice? He argues that it should not happen at UK level, but it is happening right now, on his watch, in local government in Scotland. Then we had Bob Doris. I always listen to him with interest, because he never disappoints—he has a single transferable demand for independence. If we have independence, everything will be rosy, but there was not one word about how the SNP will deliver for Scotland's older people. I have spoken at length and am grateful for the time that I have been given. Finally, I would like to comment on the tenor of the debate from some members on the Scottish Government benches,  which has been extremely disappointing. Elaine Smith made an informed contribution when she said that scaremongering from whatever quarter must stop. She is absolutely right. Conducting the debate in the way in which we have seen it conducted by some members this afternoon diminishes the MSPs concerned and the Parliament, and ends up generating an awful lot of heat and very little light. It might have been a better use our time today to debate how we can meet the challenge and opportunities that are presented by the significant increase in the number of older people in Scotland. Scotland would have thanked us for that.

My understanding is that there is currently a double assessment—people are assessed separately for attendance allowance and for their services. Even if the member does not support the specific proposal, does he not agree that merging assessments is the direction in which we want to go?

Is the member aware that dialogue has been going on between the Scottish Government and the UK Government on the issue?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many people have attended national health service emergency services due to falls during the recent cold weather conditions. (S3O-9094)

I hope that the cabinet secretary finds her voice soon. Like her, I pay tribute to all NHS workers for their significant efforts when the number of attendances at emergency services has been at a record high. What additional capacity, over and above the existing planning for winter pressures, has been provided to support the considerable effort that has been made by NHS emergency and ambulance staff?

This is all just nonsense. Outrageous! [ Laughter. ]

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable  Growth has had with national health service boards and local authorities about protecting front-line services. (S3O-8864)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that response and simply note that his budget has risen by £943 million this year. The cabinet secretary will be aware that, in order to save £12 million a year, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde intends to replace qualified nurses with nursing assistants, which is simply substitution rather than enhancement of the capacity of the ward team. Does he agree with the Royal College of Nursing that such action would be crude, short-sighted and would effectively downgrade skills, resulting in a direct impact on front-line services? Given his evident commitment to protecting front-line services, will he publish how he intends to measure how those services have been affected by the spending decisions of health boards and local councils?

Does the First Minister agree that the figures that he quoted mask a reduction in the number of clinical staff moving from full-time to part-time employment? Given that the NHS is labour intensive, does he agree with the BMA that, last year, he presided over a reduction of 2.1 per cent in nurses and of 13 per cent in accident and emergency specialists, and that that has a direct impact on front-line services?

Unless the cabinet secretary has evidence to back up that remark, will he now withdraw it?

I support Ian McKee's general thrust, although I believed that he wanted to remove distinction awards completely. Does he believe that spending £30 million on bonuses for consultants is the right priority for the NHS in Scotland, when only £21 million is being spent on tackling HAIs?

It will come as no surprise to members that this morning I will concentrate on health spending; however, I do so as a former member of the Finance Committee,  where, I am pleased to note, consensus appears to have broken out in my absence. First, though, I must correct certain scurrilous remarks that Derek Brownlee made. My contribution to the Labour group's night out was indeed very minor when compared with the guest appearances of John Swinney and Nicola Sturgeon and, of course, our very own James Kelly, who—with physical enhancements—appeared as Big Eck. Let me be serious for a minute. Before I turn to the 2010-11 budget, I will briefly consider the budget for this financial year. Many members will be familiar with Audit Scotland's report "Overview of the NHS in Scotland's performance 2008/09", which makes it clear that NHS boards are having to make more than £175 million in recurring savings and £25 million in non-recurring savings. In other words, they will have to make £200 million of savings simply to break even this year. By any stretch of the imagination, that is a substantial amount of money. The report goes on to say: "This presents a significant challenge for many NHS bodies, and their auditors have stated that it will be difficult for some to achieve the required level of savings without any negative impact on the services they provide." So front-line services will be affected. Although I welcome the Scottish Government's commitment to protect front-line services next year, any such commitment needs to be real. Frankly, if it is unable to protect such services this financial year, one is left to question whether its prospects of doing so next year are realistic. The Government also has to spell out what it means by "front-line services". Do they include clinical staff such as nurses and doctors? What about cleaners and porters, who also do vital jobs? Does the Government accept that reducing staff has a direct impact on services? The Finance Committee concluded worryingly that there is little evidence that front-line services are being protected and said that the budget document contains no analysis of the definition that was provided by Mr Swinney, and no indication of how it had been applied and services prioritised. That view was supported by other subject committees, which emphasised the difficulty of ensuring that—and tracking whether—this prioritisation of front-line services happens at all. Let me illustrate that with what we know is going on in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, which has still to produce its cost savings plan for 2010-11. However, its 2009-10 plan describes the cost savings challenge that it faces in order to secure a balanced financial outturn and identifies £55 million of savings that it will have to make simply to break even. Its list of cost savings includes  several service redesigns that have no supporting data that demonstrate that they are real efficiency gains. It includes traditional mechanisms such as vacancy management, which is short term and not a recurring efficiency, and cuts in discretionary spending. Again, none of those provides analysis of the impact on front-line services. When we take a closer look, no less than 15 of the 20 proposed savings are identified as having staffing implications. In a labour-intensive service, it is difficult to see how such savings will not impact on front-line services. We in the Labour Party highlighted the lack of transparency over NHS savings last year. It is disturbing to see that that lack of rigour continues. Little output information has been provided to validate efficiency gains. Service reductions are referred to as "efficiency savings", and savings are being used to balance the books, not for reinvestment. I have to say that 2010-11 looks like being a very tough year for health boards, too. I have listened to some of the contributions and, despite best wishes for Christmas and the new year, the SNP still has its single transferable excuse, which is to blame someone else—in this case, it is Westminster. Unfortunately, the facts in respect of health services do not bear that out. The SNP is responsible for giving health its worst budget since devolution, as is clear whether we look at it in cash terms or in real terms. We need to go back to the days of Michael Forsyth to match how bad the current allocation is. This year, the real-terms increase has been 0.9 per cent in the health line alone, if capital acceleration is included. However, if that is taken out of the health line, the increase reaches an all-time low of 0.1 per cent. Last year, the NHS got 2.5 per cent, and we can see evidence that it struggled. We need to compare that with the NHS in England receiving a 6.7 per cent increase year on year for the same period.

It is true that the per capita spend in Scotland continues to be higher, although the gap is narrowing, but we have not delivered the outcomes that we would expect from that increased health spending, and there is a lack of the transparency that would enable us to understand why that is the case. Of course, Mr Swinney might seek to contradict me, but he might be less willing to contradict the British Medical Association, the Royal College of Nursing or Unison. The BMA said recently that  there has been a reduction in front-line staff. The head-count increase that has been so lauded by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing actually masks a cut in the number of medical posts. Figures show that the number of nurses dropped by 2.1 per cent and the number of consultants by 0.2 per cent, and that there was a staggering 13 per cent drop in accident and emergency specialists.

That is not a record to be proud of. I ask the cabinet secretary to reflect further on the needs of the NHS.

I, too, congratulate George Foulkes on securing the debate and, more important, I congratulate Mark Cooper on his determination and perseverance. The barred campaign is all about improving accessibility for all patrons of Scotland's pubs. Disabled access to pubs affects pubs in Edinburgh and all parts of Scotland. Mark Cooper's success has been widespread. I am always impressed by people who have Facebook group memberships of more than 700, and I understand that Mark's group has 1,000 members worldwide. The need for disabled access is universal. In the chamber last year, during the debate on the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill, which is now an act, I related a story about a constituent of mine. I will do so again, because his story is also about access. My constituent is a disabled driver who, due to the nature of his disability, required to park in the marked disabled bay right outside his front door so that he could access his home. Now I pause, and introduce members to his neighbour. He was a man who, for reasons best known to himself, decided that he should regularly park in that disabled bay. He caused untold misery for my constituent, who became afraid to leave his home in case his bay had been taken by the time he got back. Naturally, I asked the council for help, but it could do nothing. Equally, the police could do nothing because the bay was advisory, and they were unable to enforce it. Not one to be deterred, I put the neighbour on the front page of the local newspaper for two weeks running, but still he would not move. My illustration might be about disabled parking, but this is a wider issue about access to shops, facilities, and the other things that we all take for granted.

Johann Lamont is absolutely right. We need to challenge the underlying discrimination and the attitude that does not recognise us all as equal. The story about my constituent demonstrates the hardship that can be faced by members of society who have a disability. Many daily actions that those of us who do not live with disabilities take for granted can create an incredible challenge in the daily lives of  those who have disabilities. Even going out at night with friends can be a challenge when one is bound to a wheelchair. Some pubs have disabled access to their premises, but do not have a disabled toilet. We heard that Mark Cooper encountered such a situation last February. By all means, people can pop in and have a drink or two—I suggest to George Foulkes that it should be only that—but when it comes to using the toilet, they are out in the cold. If a pub has disabled access but no disabled toilets, disabled patrons are forced to abandon the pub where they started their drink, perhaps in favour of another pub with a disabled toilet although, if we are honest, in most cases they will not find anything suitable. That is embarrassing and it can ruin an otherwise enjoyable night out with friends. That was Mark Cooper's experience, but rather than sit back and accept it, he decided to campaign for change, for which he should be applauded. I am conscious that one in five people in Scotland lives with a disability. There is absolutely no reason why that substantial number of the Scottish population should be limited in the pubs that they can visit because of a lack of disabled entrances, disabled toilets or both. The campaign, working alongside the licensed trade and local authority licensing forums, seeks to improve the situation and I am sure that they will make the necessary changes. The proposed amendment to the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill that George Foulkes mentioned would introduce a requirement for access statements. That is worth considering, as it just might encourage new pubs to make adjustments to their premises to make them more accessible for all. I hope that the Scottish Government will support such an amendment, as it would eventually make it easier for disabled people and their friends to go out to socialise in a pub. It would certainly take some of the guesswork out of a fun night out, although, as we would always say in the chamber, with drinking only in moderation.

I refer the minister and the member to the minister's written answer of 29 October, which sets out in full the very detailed consultation in which the Scottish Government is engaged. That response is particularly welcome. Given that the Secretary of State for Health has made it clear that the UK Government has categorically ruled out the use of disability living allowance and attendance allowance in proposals  for the reform of care, does the minister agree that any suggestion otherwise serves only to deliberately confuse the most vulnerable people in our society? However, on a positive note, will she consider what we could learn from the UK Government's proposal for a simple, fair and affordable care system that will allow us to end Scotland's postcode lottery of care?

I thank the First Minister for accepting that minimum unit pricing is not a silver bullet. The Labour Party accepts the link between price and consumption. However, does the First Minister accept that he could do something now, with which the whole chamber would agree, to improve the mortality rate of those with oesophageal cancer? Does he agree with Ochre, a national charity based in Scotland, that early and accurate diagnosis of that rapidly developing cancer is needed? Will he therefore ensure both that clear guidance is issued to general practitioners on diagnosis of the cancer, so that patients are sent for testing more quickly, and that there is better access to testing facilities, with endoscopy clinics in primary care facilities? I am sure that he will agree that that would have the effect of saving lives now.

I thank the cabinet secretary for providing me with an advance copy of her statement. It may come as a surprise to her, but I regret the fact that we are considering the inspectorate's report on Aberdeen royal infirmary, because it demonstrates graphically that lessons have not been learned. There is no doubt about the seriousness of the inspectorate's findings. Equally, I am sure that the cabinet secretary will acknowledge that the Vale of Leven families affected by C diff pressed her to establish the inspectorate. I know that they welcome the rigour that was applied to the inspection. The cabinet secretary may recall her written response to me that identified Aberdeen royal infirmary as having the highest incidence of C diff of any hospital in Scotland—438 cases in one year. I have no doubt that the failings identified in the inspection contributed to that figure. Does the cabinet secretary agree that no fault lies at the door of the hard-working domestic and nursing staff and that, rather, they need to have adequate time, resources and equipment to do their jobs? The cabinet secretary may be aware that there was a lack of clarity, which was never resolved, about whether senior charge nurses had authority over domestic staff in NHS Grampian. She may also be aware that senior charge nurses asked for more sinks to be installed but that that was not done until after the inspection; I am sure that she shares my disappointment at that. Finally, will she put senior charge nurses in Scotland in the driving seat and give them direct responsibility for the management of cleaning on their wards and a small budget to enable the changes at ward level, such as the installation of sinks, that we know can make a difference?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will now vaccinate all children against the influenza A(H1N1) virus as a priority. (S3O-8566)

I very much welcome the announcement that vaccinations will now be available to children between the ages of six months and five years. I would be grateful if the cabinet secretary could indicate when that programme will start and if she would explain why the vaccine will not be made available to siblings in the family.

I, too, congratulate Jack McConnell on securing the debate. I also commend his sartorial elegance this evening. The debate provides us with a welcome opportunity to discuss HIV/AIDS, which we all know affects the entire globe. As Linda Fabiani said, a staggering 33.2 million people across the world are infected with HIV/AIDS. An estimated 2.5 million were newly infected as recently as 2007, and 2.1 million died from AIDS in that same year. While the problem is spread all over the world, it is not spread evenly; eight countries in sub-Saharan Africa account for almost a third of the world's population who live with AIDS. In Scotland, more than 6,000 people were HIV-infected as of 30 September this year, more than 300 of whom were newly reported cases. I am surprised at those figures. The higher number of cases of HIV/AIDS in Scotland represents not only an increase in testing for HIV but a true rise in the transmission of the disease. There are treatments for the disease but there is no cure. Further, treatment courses are often expensive and, in many areas of the world, difficult to obtain. Action on HIV/AIDS needs to be taken not only at home but abroad in an effort to lessen the spread and burden of this terrible disease. I was interested to read in information from Health Protection Scotland that, from 2002 to date, 57 per cent of people here who were reported as having HIV/AIDS acquired the infection outside Scotland. Increasing education and awareness programmes in Scotland is essential, but I am sure that we all agree that more must be done at a global level as well. I applaud the efforts of groups such as Sing, which promotes awareness and  action for women and children who are HIV positive all over the world, but predominantly in South Africa. I hope that their efforts to increase awareness and raise money for the global fight against HIV/AIDS will continue to be successful. Like many in the chamber, I am of a generation to be a fan of Annie Lennox, dating back to her days with the Eurythmics. Linda Fabiani is right: the Parliament should support Annie Lennox in her campaign. We know that the United Nations global fund pledged in 2003 to give more than $4.6 billion to the fight against HIV/AIDS, but shortfalls and funding that was lower than anticipated have made that goal difficult to achieve—and the global crisis continues. Another statistic alarmed me: Health Protection Scotland stated that it expects HIV cases and the number of people who require specialist care to increase by 5 to 13 per cent by 2012. That range allows for increases in testing and in early detection and treatment, but it also signals an increase in the transmission of the disease. The challenge for us all is to do more to educate the population, particularly the younger generation, on the dangers of the disease, how it is spread and what can be done to prevent that. There also needs to be more action in treatment and screening for HIV/AIDS, as well as more co-operation across the community to tackle the spread of the disease. I applaud the Government's HIV action plan, which I believe was published today. It highlights many of the key issues and gives direction for a course of action to increase knowledge and awareness and to begin to crack down on the spread of HIV/AIDS: action in the co-ordination of prevention and treatment; action to reduce the levels of transmission and undiagnosed cases; and action on increased accountability and reporting so that we can see what is happening on the ground. Those actions are essential in the fight against the spread of HIV/AIDS in Scotland and I hope that the Government can achieve progress on them. If it does, that will lead to better control over the HIV/AIDS problem in Scotland. I echo Jack McConnell's comments about the scale of the challenge and join him in congratulating Annie Lennox on campaigning on the issue. We should take up her offer of support. In that spirit, I ask the Government to consider how we in Scotland can help and, indeed, learn from those in sub-Saharan Africa who live with HIV/AIDS.

Were the circumstances similar in the outbreaks at the Victoria hospital in Glasgow and in the NHS Orkney, NHS Grampian and NHS Tayside areas?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

rose—

I am clear about the impression that I gave. Given that we know that, aside from hospitals and wider settings, care homes are a significant problem in the incidence of C diff, does the member support the inspection of care homes?

I think that all members struggle to understand the high mortality rate at Ninewells hospital. When the board briefed members, was that explained?

That is outrageous. If Mary Scanlon had been around the Vale of Leven hospital and had paid attention to the C diff outbreak there, she would understand that there was a lack of surveillance. It was not a question of whether the hospital was being changed or altered  in any way. The member does the families a disservice if she does not acknowledge that.

The member might recall that Labour's 15-point action plan specified the need for a tough inspection regime, which was followed up by the establishment of the health care environment inspectorate. All that we seek is for that regime—the existing regime—to move in much earlier.

Does the cabinet secretary acknowledge that I stated in my speech that I had been given explicit permission by that lady to raise the substance of her case?

I need no further invitation to speak at length, Presiding Officer. I believe that hospital-acquired infections are the greatest challenge that faces our health service. We in this chamber have a duty to meet that challenge head-on so that the people whom we represent in all parts of Scotland can feel confident that, when they enter their local hospital for treatment, they will be treated in safe and clean conditions. Our natural expectation is that we go into hospital to get better, not to be made more ill. I recognise that some progress has been made and that the overall number of cases is reducing, but that improvement is not reflected equally across Scotland. Persistent problems remain in some hospitals in various parts of the country. I pay tribute to the staff for all their efforts in trying to drive down infection rates. Often, they are working in difficult conditions, without the right resources to do their jobs. Many places are understaffed and ill-equipped. Staff are faced with a plethora of initiatives, different sets of guidance and no clarity about priorities. They clearly need our support and our help in the fight against C diff, but they also need clear leadership. I recognise that C diff will always be with us. Experts tell me that it cannot be eradicated but, more importantly, they also tell me that deaths are preventable. That is the nub of the matter. The real challenge for us all is how we can minimise the number of people who die as a result of C diff and, ultimately, prevent anyone from dying from it. I pay tribute, too, to the C Diff Justice Group. From a small number of families who were affected by the outbreak at the Vale of Leven hospital and came together to share their grief, the group has grown in numbers and in determination. Its members have pursued the Government relentlessly, demanding action and fighting hard to secure a public inquiry. Their purpose is simple and clear: no other family should have to go through what they have been through. Since the outbreak at the Vale of Leven, however, we have witnessed outbreaks in Balfour  hospital in Kirkwall; Caithness general hospital in Wick; Dr Gray's hospital in Elgin; Woodend hospital; Aberdeen royal infirmary, which had the highest number of cases, with around 438 people infected in a year; and Ninewells in Dundee. Our thoughts are, of course, with the families who have suffered the loss of a loved one to C diff. However, I suspect that, like the families from the Vale of Leven, they would much rather have action than warm words.

I agree that there is a problem in the community as well, but it is regrettable that one action that we have previously talked about in this chamber and which would do something about that problem—monitoring what goes on in care homes—has yet to be properly taken. I hope that Brian Adam will support the extension of rigorous inspection to care homes. Last week, we learned that five of the eight patients who contracted C diff in ward 31 at Ninewells hospital had died. On 14, 17 and 18 October, three patients were confirmed as having C diff. On 19 October, an outbreak was declared, and the cabinet secretary was told on 21 October. It emerged that Health Protection Scotland visited the hospital on 29 October—15 days after the first case was identified. On 11 November—a full 28 days after the first case—the new health care environment inspectorate went in. That is, frankly, extraordinary. I do not think that the scale of the problem has quite been grasped. Last week, the cabinet secretary told us that we should not make comparisons with the Vale of Leven. The outbreak there affected 55 people, 18 people died, and it occurred over a six-month period across six wards. The mortality rate—the worst in the United Kingdom at the time—was 33 per cent. At Ninewells, the mortality rate is 62 per cent and the infection appears to be concentrated in one ward, yet it is 15 days before Health Protection Scotland shows up and 28 days before the new inspectorate pitches up. Did it not occur to anyone that the staff at Ninewells could have done with some support, advice and guidance on what needed to be done? It is shocking to discover that our procedures for dealing with food poisoning outbreaks are more robust than those for tackling C diff, which we know is more deadly and has claimed more lives.  Professor Hugh Pennington said: "current policy leaves the failing hospital to investigate itself at the most important time in an outbreak—its early stages, when prompt action is most likely to nip it in the bud. In regulatory terms, the contrast with the action that is taken in response to a food-poisoning outbreak is stark. Such outbreaks are caused by microbes that have mortality rates much less than C.difficile ... But as soon as they are declared they are investigated by independent outbreak control teams with speedy action as their hallmark. The inspectors dig deep at once. They have powers to close premises, which they use. They prosecute. On the other hand, for the NHS in Scotland just now, it is like a supermarket with a food-poisoning outbreak being left to investigate itself and handle its own media inquiries, only being inspected weeks later."

The cabinet secretary knows very well that I am not suggesting that at all; I am suggesting that the Scottish Government must act. We need earlier intervention. The inspection team must be in right away, not 28 days later. It must have the powers to close wards, tackle the problems and ensure the safety of patients. That would be a sensible measure that recognises the seriousness of the problem, yet the cabinet secretary resists it. Families will be left wondering why. I will now deal with the information that is provided to patients, relatives and the public. I strongly believe that the public have a right to know what is happening in their hospitals and will be our partners in tackling C diff. I invite members to consider the commitment that was made by the cabinet secretary some time ago, and which was repeated in a press release in January this year, to establish hospital-by-hospital reporting on a web portal that the general public could access. How many members have looked at that portal? It takes the form of a web page, tucked away on the Scottish Government website, that provides links to non-standardised, complex information that is, incidentally, two months in arrears. That is nowhere near good enough to allow people access to information. Some health boards do not provide information about individual hospitals, and others do not provide any information at all. The recent report by NHS Tayside, which was considered by the board on 5  November, says nothing about the outbreak because it is out of date. We need a single website, updated in real time, showing the performance of every hospital across Scotland. We also need to issue guidance to national health service boards about when and how they should report outbreaks. I regret that it was three weeks before NHS Tayside reported the outbreak publicly and that only then did the cabinet secretary make a statement to the Parliament. I also deeply regret that her statement was misleading. I do not believe for a minute that that was her intention, but that was the outcome. Let me back up that charge. Members will recall the cabinet secretary making it clear that the patients and relatives were kept fully informed at all times. I have been contacted by a family that lost a loved one in the recent outbreak at Ninewells. I have their permission to describe their experience, and I will quote from their letter: "Never at anytime were we aware or had we been told that it was the virulent 027 strain. This information we have distressingly had to read in our local newspapers therefore the quote in today's Evening Telegraph that 'families were kept informed at all times' is utter rubbish! We (the family) were extremely upset by the lack of continuity between staff with their hygiene. So this confession of an outbreak of C Diff in Ward 31, Ninewells Hospital to the press and television comes as no surprise although very distressing." The cabinet secretary told members in the chamber that patients and relatives were kept fully informed at all times. I am sure that she will want to reflect on what NHS Tayside told her, because the clear view of that family is that that was not the case. Here are some of the family's other concerns: "The smell from the bin, which was full of soiled pads, was absolutely disgusting and I asked a Senior member of staff if it could be emptied ... her reply 'use the airfreshner spray, that's what it's for!'"

I think that it is appropriate to reflect the very real concerns of patients. I said at the start that I think that our NHS staff do a tremendous job, but I also think that they need to be resourced and properly equipped and that they should not be understaffed. The family's letter continued: "Staff would come in to the room at night no apron, no gloves and remove the water jug and glass that was used throughout the day then again move on to another patients room. The oxygen mask, blanket and pillow were lying on the floor at visiting time. At this point we had been told that  the infection was now airborne .... the nurse picked up the mask, pillow and blanket and put the mask back on her face and the pillow and blanket that had been on the floor back onto the bed! When I arrived she was sitting in her chair by the sink in the room. There was faeces on the floor, in the sink, on mum's nightie and all over her slippers." The most basic lessons from the Vale of Leven hospital have not been learned at Ninewells, and that family's experience is heartbreaking. Let me turn to another patient at Ninewells, this time from another ward a few months earlier. The patient had been discharged from hospital while she was still feeling unwell. Here is what she had to say: "On arriving home I received a call from ward 14 to inform me that a stool sample had tested positive for C Diff. No information was provided by Ninewells on how to manage the infection. To be quite frank and honest I had no idea exactly what c-diff was or how to manage it. My mother who is registered disabled and has previously had 2 strokes and 2 heart attacks took over my care as I was so unwell. As you can appreciate I was extremely concerned throughout for her health and wellbeing and the thought that I could pass the infection on to her." That lady was not readmitted to hospital or advised what to do. She was left to manage herself with the help of her aged mother and her local general practitioner, whom she had the presence of mind to contact. She has been ill for three months now. The lady was also not on ward 31. Clearly, other wards at Ninewells were affected over a relatively similar time. Did the look-back consider those, or did it just consider ward 31? What was the trigger-point in that other ward? Would that lady have even been counted in the statistics, given that she was already at home? Is that the kind of experience that patients should expect? I say to the cabinet secretary that, frankly, this is not good enough. We need the Scottish Government to be more ambitious in tackling C diff. Let me encourage the cabinet secretary to look again at Labour's 15-point action plan. The Government claims to have accepted five points, but that is stretching credibility. I can identify only three points, and one is so grudging that it only qualifies as a half. We suggested more robust inspections, and we do so again today. We suggested hospital-by-hospital reporting, as we do again today. We suggested a more ambitious health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment target, as we do again today. The current HEAT target is to achieve a reduction of C diff in Scotland of 30 per cent by 2011. England has managed a reduction of more than 40 per cent in just one year. We believe that the target should be 50 per cent. Is the cabinet secretary content that Scotland should aim lower? Let us remember that behind each of those statistics are real people and their families. We should be much more  ambitious in our determination to tackle C diff and prevent needless deaths. That determination needs to be backed by resources. I was bemused by the cabinet secretary's claim to have increased funding for C diff by 260 per cent, so I went on a journey of discovery, assisted by the Scottish Parliament information centre. Members may recall the cabinet secretary leading a debate in Parliament on hospital-acquired infections in March 2008. There was no mention of C diff in her contribution; the focus was only on MRSA. She did announce in the debate increased resources of £54 million over three years, starting in April, but that was months before the outbreak of C diff at the Vale of Leven. That budget line has not increased, despite the plethora of initiatives. The Royal College of Nursing rightly made that point during the most recent budget round, and it remains true today.

Okay, Presiding Officer. The cabinet secretary said that the NHS would learn lessons from the Vale of Leven. On 18 June, she told the Parliament: "I am determined to ensure that the lessons learned from the exercise will help us to drive C difficile ... rates down and reduce the risks to patients."—[ Official Report , 18 June 2009; c 9893.] She said that again in August 2008. On 11 September 2008, she said that wider lessons need to be learned. On 10 February and 22 April 2009, she said that she would "learn lessons". She repeated that on 24 June and 24 August, and just last week in the chamber, she said: "It is important to learn lessons."— [ Official Report , 12 November 2009; c 21105.]  I say to the cabinet secretary that it is almost two years on from the outbreak at the Vale of Leven hospital, and two years on from people dying of C diff.

The families of all those who died then and have died since want to know how long it will take the Scottish Government to learn those lessons. I move, That the Parliament commends all NHS staff for their efforts in the fight against Clostridium difficile; recognises that significant challenges remain in reducing the number of deaths from Clostridium difficile in all NHS board areas; calls on the Scottish Government to establish a more robust inspection regime that provides for an immediate inspection of any hospital at which there is an ongoing outbreak to provide advice and ensure that guidelines are properly followed; considers that the inspectors should  have the power to close wards, or any other part of the NHS estate, that might contribute to the spread of infection; regrets the delay by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing in making matters public following the outbreak at Ninewells Hospital; believes that patients, relatives and the public have a key role to play in preventing the spread of Clostridium difficile, and further believes that there should be a single website, updated in real time, showing the performance of every hospital in Scotland and guidance provided to NHS boards on reporting outbreaks immediately.

That money has indeed been welcome and it has been used productively. Because everybody is seeing that increasing demand coming at them, we are desperate to know whether that funding will continue in the next financial year.

I am pleased that so many members have chosen to stay in the Parliament when there are other attractions in Glasgow as we speak. I congratulate Citizens Advice Scotland on its report "Drowning in Debt" which was launched this morning. I am sure that members of all parties agree that CAS plays a vital role in helping us to shape social policy. Its influence on that agenda is in no small part due to its ability to translate the experiences of the people who come through the doors of citizens advice bureaux in communities throughout Scotland into changes and innovations in policy. I thank CAS and all bureaux in Scotland for their work. Let us consider the substance of the report and some of the headline information. Debt among citizens advice bureau clients has increased by a staggering 50 per cent since 2003. Average total debt stands at £20,193. What the motion says bears repeating: four in 10 clients have gone without essentials to try to cope with their debt; one in four clients has borrowed further credit to pay existing debt; two fifths of debt clients reported being pressured or harassed by creditors; two  thirds of debt clients said that they would consider going bankrupt to manage their debt. There is no doubt in my mind that the current financial climate is also having an impact. We know from previous reports that CAB debt clients in Scotland have a lower income than people in other parts of the United Kingdom and that their income is below the Scottish average. It is undoubtedly more of a challenge to service a debt if income is low. Debt disproportionately affects lone parents, older people, the disabled and long-term sick, as well as those on low incomes. We know that relationship breakdown is a significant feature among debt clients; it has the attendant problems of a drop in income, increased responsibility for bills and the need to balance the pressures of care and work that we know too well. It will come as no surprise to many members that children cost money too, but the financial consequences go beyond providing for the child. Parents might end up with more limited work options, perhaps through working part time, and they might have to pay for child care and much more besides. That all combines to lower income and, potentially, to raise debt—and it is all much more acute for lone parents. The report shows that one third of the survey participants had an illness, impairment or other health problem. Some had a mental illness, others a learning disability. It also shows that their incomes were generally lower, which underlines the fact that debt has a disproportionate effect on the most vulnerable people in society. We can just about begin to imagine the impact that debt has on households with low incomes: they struggle to make ends meet, are unable to make payments to service their debts and get into a spiral of despair. The stress and depression that that causes is all too evident. The report tells us that a client with a monthly income of less than £400 owes an average of £52 for every £1 of income. It is little wonder that they are stressed when they have to choose between essentials such as putting food on the table for the family and paying off significant debts. I will say a word about creditor behaviour. Twice as many clients have been threatened with informal debt recovery action—not formal, open and transparent action through the courts. The informal action is under the radar and unpleasant. I have had constituents who were hounded at their homes and work, not just by letter—bad enough though that might be—but by telephone and yes, even personal visits. The level of aggression and harassment is unacceptable. We must recognise that the overwhelming majority of people do not choose to get into debt; they would quite like to pay it off and balance their accounts better. The  level of harassment of people when they have nothing is entirely unacceptable.

I absolutely agree, and associate myself with the member's remarks. We had a huge briefing that described the varying impacts on different groups of people who find themselves in debt—young, old, lone parents, those on lower incomes—and I will leave it to other members to develop those points; I will spend my remaining time talking about my local CAB in Dumbarton and what I believe should be the forward agenda for the Scottish Parliament and, yes, the Scottish Government—I am delighted to see that the minister is in a good mood with us this evening. Dumbarton CAB dealt with £713,000 of debt last year. That is a significant figure, but it tells me that, this year, the number of debt cases has increased by a staggering 70 per cent—and we still have a quarter of the year to get through. That leads me to my first suggestion to the Government: it should increase support for debt advice services, and resources should be targeted at areas that experience the most disadvantage. With something like a 70 per cent increase in Dumbarton alone, never mind throughout the country, that is essential if we are to provide people with quality advice. Last year's Scottish budget contained additional funding of some £1 million due to decisions that the UK Government made. It would be extremely helpful if that was continued, especially as the need is getting greater. The low income, low asset scheme—LILA—and the debt arrangement scheme also need to be much more accessible. I strongly believe that the £100 fee to access LILA should be abolished. It is plain daft to expect that people with multiple debts who are struggling to cope will pay a £100 entry fee to the scheme. I know that the minister will consider that proposal carefully. He should be aware of the overwhelming support that there would be for such a move. There are also recommendations for the UK Government on tighter regulation of creditor behaviour, inappropriate access to credit, improved protection against creditor harassment and ensuring that mainstream credit is affordable,  which includes considering the social funds. CAS will raise those issues with our colleagues at Westminster and I am sure that it will get a positive hearing. I commend Citizens Advice Scotland's report to the Parliament. There is much that we can learn from it and I hope that the minister will be positive about many of the recommendations that emerge from it.

I, too, express my condolences to the families who have lost loved ones in the tragic outbreak of Clostridium difficile at Ninewells hospital. I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of her statement, but I regret the lack of transparency that has characterised NHS Tayside's handling of the outbreak. The health board claimed that the problems occurred over 10 weeks; the cabinet secretary said that they have occurred over three weeks. Let us take the cabinet secretary's timeline. Does she agree that patients and their families have a right to know whether there is an outbreak? Why, when cases were identified on 14 October, 17 October and 18 October, was someone apparently admitted to the ward on 19 October, who then went on to contract C difficile and  subsequently died? Their family claims that they were not told. Why is the trigger three cases, when it is two cases in other health boards? We know from the outbreak at the Vale of Leven hospital that the 027 strain is particularly virulent. The mortality rate at the Vale of Leven was 33 per cent, which at the time was the highest in the country. However, at Ninewells, the mortality rate is a staggering 62 per cent. Can the cabinet secretary explain why the mortality rate is so high?

I ask the minister to recollect that the previous Executive took action in raising the age at which treatment could be provided, and I welcome any progress that can be made. Does the minister accept that couples should be able to be referred between health boards if there is indeed patient choice in the NHS?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am sure that I will not be greeted with the same applause when I am finished. Let me take this opportunity to pay tribute to my predecessor Cathy Jamieson for all her work in the health portfolio and in particular for her considered approach to the subject of minimum pricing. I intend to continue that approach Since my appointment as shadow cabinet secretary nine days ago, I have been inundated with briefings from those who passionately favour minimum pricing and briefings from those who are passionately against it. I thank all those organisations for their efforts. Labour's amendment does not close down any option at this stage. I must say that I am delighted that Murdo Fraser takes so much interest in my website, but I say clearly to him that I want to listen to the views of those with expertise on the matter and, over and above that, I have already arranged to meet the cabinet secretary to discuss the Scottish Government's position.

No, not at this stage. Maybe the member should listen. This is a serious issue that deserves thoughtful consideration, and I intend to do it justice. The Parliament has always prided itself on taking an evidence-based approach to its policy making, and that should continue to guide us in this debate.

I have a responsibility as the new shadow cabinet secretary for health to consider all matters in the round. We should not play politics with an issue as serious as this. Let me set out, because I think that it is important to do so, where I believe there is agreement across the chamber. There is no question about the scale of the problem. Rates of death from alcohol cirrhosis in Scotland are now twice the EU average, and almost twice those of England. The age at which alcohol problems emerge has got younger. Rates of alcohol-related hospital admissions have gone up and rates of  alcohol-related crime are rising. The statistics are frankly appalling. Labour members do not disagree that we need to tackle Scotland's unhealthy relationship with alcohol. That is a significant public health challenge, which the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Scottish Executive recognised, and much of the groundwork for action was laid with the passing of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005. Many of its provisions came into force only in September of this year. We need robust enforcement of existing legislation, alongside any consideration of new measures. There is a clear link between price, the level of alcohol consumption and harm. I was interested to find out the experience of other countries. For example, in Finland, prices were lowered, then subsequently raised. Consumption rose when alcohol was cheap, but dropped when the price was increased, in a very short space of time. However, I regret that the entire debate appears to be polarised on the issue of minimum pricing. That ignores the swathe of measures that are already in our armoury and other approaches that have been suggested. Let us be clear that minimum pricing is no silver bullet. Scotland's relationship with alcohol is complex and deep-seated. We have more than one problem group: we have the young adult binge drinkers, with public nuisance and antisocial consequences; we have those with a habit of drinking in excess of safe limits, who are storing up future health problems such as cancer and diabetes; and we have those at the extreme, who are critically alcohol dependent. No single action will provide the solution for all those groups. The University of Sheffield research is persuasive, but I recognise that some criticisms have been made about the modelling. Equally, members will have received a copy of the Centre for Economics and Business Research study that analyses the potential impact of minimum pricing on jobs and the economy. There is claim and counter-claim and acres of text of legal opinion. Concerns have been expressed about whether the recent European Court of Justice ruling on minimum pricing for tobacco has a read-over to alcohol. Can article 28 of the Treaty establishing the European Community be set aside if article 30 is engaged? Will the Government's proposals meet the test of proportionality that is set out in article 30? Those questions need to be answered. If the SNP is serious about its proposals, it should simply share the substance of its legal advice with all Opposition party leaders. There is at least one precedent for doing so in the actions of the previous Scottish Executive. [ Interruption. ] Failure to share the legal advice will leave wide open the  question whether we can actually implement minimum pricing. From a sedentary position, the cabinet secretary asked, "What is that precedent?" My understanding is that a precedent is provided by the Shirley McKie case. If she reconsidered the matter, we would be keen to engage with the Government. Labour has suggested a variety of measures and we are keen to engage in the debate. I know that the cabinet secretary wants to achieve a consensus, but my idea of consensus is not simply waiting until others come round to one's own point of view. No party has a monopoly on the desire to rid Scotland of the problems that are caused by alcohol abuse, so it is incumbent on us all to ensure that we introduce the most effective set of measures to deliver the step change in culture and consumption that we all seek. I move amendment S3M-5118.1, to leave out from "rejects" to end and insert: "looks forward to considering the evidence of all the different approaches that can help to tackle the misuse of alcohol, and urges the Scottish Government to share the substance of all of the legal advice obtained."

I do not have it.

Thank you, Presiding Officer—you will acknowledge how difficult it is to follow Christopher Harvie and Jamie McGrigor, so I will not even begin to try. Instead, I will be shamelessly parochial, because I consider myself fortunate to represent part of the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park. It is undoubtedly a beautiful part of Scotland and, in my understandably biased local view, I might even go so far as to say that it is the most beautiful part of Scotland. I well remember participating in a debate led by Sarah Boyack on the creation of Scotland's first national park around Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. It is right to recall the policy framework that underpinned the creation of the national parks, which Sarah Boyack outlined for us, because their subsequent success is largely grounded in our having got that initial framework right. However, as with anything, there is room for improvement and innovation. I welcome the outcome of the review and the minister's strategic group. I am delighted that Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority will remain as a free-standing NDPB and that the nonsense about merging it with SNH has been parked well away. I will consider what we need to do for the future. I recognise that, in a desire to hit the ground running, the national park authority was keen to address not only strategic issues but long-standing local issues and went about—to the delight of many—plugging a lot of holes, not all of which were its responsibility in terms of service delivery. I do not criticise that, but I welcome the fact that its focus is now increasingly on the park's core purpose, which the authority describes as visitor experience, conservation and rural development and planning. That creates the space for the authority and its partners to ensure that the park is a world-class tourist destination, recognising that all need to play their part locally. There are some clear examples of the way in which the national park authority has managed to fulfil that challenge by embracing the idea of creating a visitor experience and working with local people to do so. That leads to visitors coming not only once, but time and again. For instance, Cruise Loch Lomond won the innovation category of the Scottish Thistle awards 2009 for its west Highland way rambler cruise—I have yet to try it, but I assure members that I will do so—a tourist attraction that uses the unique selling point of Loch Lomond to offer a water-based transportation method, thereby enabling tourists to enjoy the  waters of the loch and experience walking some of the west Highland way. The management responsibility and revision of the Loch Lomond byelaws are another matter on which the national park authority has demonstrated strong leadership. The current byelaws deliver for not only visitors, but residents by helping to protect the islands and environment around the loch, the natural surroundings and the wildlife, as well as by providing more safety and a larger area for quieter activities.

I agree in the sense that there is much to commend the overall approach to the management of visitors at Loch Lomond and that would have wider application. The minister will be aware—indeed, she referred to it—of the need to add to the byelaws, particularly to restrict wild camping, which has caused disruption not only to the east bank of the loch but the west bank, particularly Luss. I congratulate the national park authority on its plans to manage visitors much more actively. I hope that the Scottish Government will assist in ensuring that the process is obstacle free as the authority starts to consider additional byelaws. I turn to the many development opportunities. I am pleased that the national park authority is working with local communities—in particular, around the Tarbert and Arrochar area, which is in my constituency—because there is great potential for further water-based activities there and for positioning Tarbert and Arrochar as a gateway to Argyll. I say to the minister that a little bit of money for a pier would be a most welcome Christmas present—I mean this Christmas rather than next. Joking aside, I invite the minister to consider the benefit of injecting small amounts of capital to improve the public realm because, by doing so, we undoubtedly not only make the area more attractive to visitors, but stimulate economic development and attract commercial interest. We also get other partners, such as local authorities—I hesitate to name the ones I mean, but members will know—and the Forestry Commission to play their part in providing appropriate local services. The minister will be aware that facilities are not as good as we would want them to be. Some of the road signs are not exactly visitor friendly. Indeed, some of the roads, such as the A82, remain a challenge. There is still a lot of work to be done, not just by the national park, but on a partnership basis. There are also financial constraints and there is little growth. Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park has decided to withdraw from providing visitor centres and concentrate on  its core purpose. Some staff numbers have had to be reduced to ensure that money is available for development. The park is also considering charging for things like car parking, and although it has the desire to get an income stream, the idea is being progressed with some caution. The small injection of capital would stimulate a lot more, so I invite the minister to consider that. Before my closing remarks, I turn to the local plan. The national park is in the process of finalising its local plan, which I believe will go to the board in December and thereafter to the Scottish Government reporters unit in the new year. I cannot miss the opportunity of having the minister and Mike Cantlay in the same room to raise the matter of local occupancy conditions. Mr Cantlay could have written my speech for me; he knows that I will say this. Some properties in the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park have a local occupancy condition attached, but I was surprised to find that no one knows how many or which ones, and that there is no list and no idea of where those properties are. There is also very little concrete evidence that local occupancy conditions work and deliver what they are supposed to. They seem to have been used as a proxy for delivering affordable housing, but there are other policy drivers. I disagree with Jamie McGrigor, because I think that requiring a percentage of affordable housing in a new developments works and is a much more effective policy driver. I therefore encourage that approach, rather than the use of local occupancy conditions. For example, I happened to visit a very substantial home—it would probably be well out of the reach of anyone in this room—to which local occupancy conditions are applied, because it is to be retained as affordable housing. There is no way that that house is affordable, certainly not for anyone I know. District valuers say that properties are devalued as a result of having occupancy conditions placed on them. There is some evidence to show that the practice stops people and investment from coming into the community, and there is considerable inconsistency. Cairngorms national park and, in its planning advice, the Scottish Government, have rejected local occupancy conditions. Let us focus on delivering affordable housing properly, not by imposing restrictions through local occupancy conditions. The national parks do a great job. I look forward to having a debate in 10 years' time on where we take them next.

To ask the Scottish Executive how much funding has been provided to rebuild Dumbarton academy; over which financial years, and when it expects pupils to be taught in the new school. (S3O-8170)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of my long-standing campaign to secure a new Dumbarton academy so I very much welcome her commitment to funding and look forward to receiving that detail. Does the cabinet secretary agree that any delay would be unfortunate if it means that young people continue to be taught in sub-standard conditions? Will she therefore take any and all opportunities to accelerate funding for Dumbarton academy?

I am aware that the fact and, indeed, the content of legal advice are not published by the Scottish Government. However, the First Minister has acknowledged the concern that exists about the European Court of Justice judgment on tobacco pricing and its potential impact on minimum pricing. Given the seriousness of the issue that Scotland has with alcohol, which the First Minister has set out clearly, will he follow the precedent set by the previous Scottish Executive and share the substance of legal advice with party leaders, which  would enable progress to be made on considering minimum pricing?

I welcome the work that has been done to produce the new guidance on procuring social care services. However, does the minister recognise that, rather than seeing the action that she describes, we find that the guidance has been delayed by at least nine months? Will she accelerate that work, listen to organisations such as Community Care Providers Scotland and consider adopting the framework approach that is used in England, where care services are not retendered unless they are not performing to the required standard?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of her statement. I look forward to working with her on the full range of issues facing the NHS in Scotland. I also join her in sending condolences to the families who have lost loved ones to the H1N1 flu virus, and in thanking the NHS staff who have worked hard to mitigate the effects of the flu. I have no doubt that the virus has the potential to be one of the most significant public health issues to face the country as we move into winter. The cabinet secretary will, of course, be aware of the concerns that have been raised by some GPs about delays in receiving the vaccine. She launched the vaccination programme on 21 October, but many GPs will not start to receive supplies until 2 November and it has been suggested that the amount will, even then, be insufficient. In Lothian, for example, one GP reports that he will receive barely one tenth of the needs of his practice. Similarly, a GP in Midlothian reports that he will receive a 50-dose vial next week, with no information on when further supplies will be received, although he has among his patients 70 pregnant women who all require the vaccination, and considerably more patients in the other risk categories. Is the cabinet secretary aware of patients being told to call their GPs almost daily because the practices do not appear to know what is happening? On 3 September, the cabinet secretary advised Parliament that 300,000 to 350,000 doses of the vaccine would be delivered each and every week from the date when the vaccine was licensed. Can she confirm that the figure of 367,000 doses from the end of next week is, therefore, barely one third of what she previously anticipated? What impact does she think that will have? In a letter to MSPs on 22 October, the cabinet secretary told us that modelling had showed that  the peak of H1N1 cases will occur from the end of October to mid-November. That, of course, is now. I therefore ask the cabinet secretary what urgent action she will take to ensure that, rather than risk a descent into chaos, delivery of the vaccine will be better co-ordinated so that it can be done more quickly. My concern, which, I am sure, the cabinet secretary shares, is that we might just run the risk of missing the boat with each and every day of delay.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether in vitro fertilisation treatment will be subject to a waiting time guarantee. (S3O-7904)

I welcome the minister's response and recognise her commitment to tackling waiting times for IVF treatment. However, it remains the case that waiting times are a challenge for many of our constituents. Given that  many couples in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area still face a wait of at least two years, does she agree that setting a waiting time guarantee would improve matters by focusing attention on the issue? How long will it be before we know whether such a guarantee can be given?

I thank the minister for that information and I look forward to receiving the analysis. In that spirit, may I encourage him to announce that the Scottish Government will back the campaign for a living wage for all its employees?

I start by congratulating Frank McAveety on securing the debate and by thanking the Poverty Alliance for leading the campaign in Scotland. I can think of few things more important than ensuring that people have opportunities to work and that they are paid a living wage for that work. Others have defined the living wage. I will not repeat that, but it is worth repeating the benefits of moving to a living wage. We know that it helps tackle low pay. It also has the potential to lift thousands of low-paid workers and their families out of poverty, and it recognises and values those who do essential jobs for us in the public and private sectors. In strict economic terms, it is the right thing to do, because it leads to increasing productivity and decreasing staff turnover. There are benefits to the employer, as well as the employee. Although the focus of my speech will be the public sector, we have to remember that the living wage applies equally to the private sector, which I hope will accept the evidence that there are sound and robust economic reasons for paying its employees a living wage.

The members will recognise that the national minimum wage is of course a legal minimum, which has protected many people at the extremes of low pay. Many members will recall that £1 an hour was often quoted as a wage for some people who were working in security, for example. I have no doubt that more needs to be done, but I hope that the member will join me in encouraging the Scottish Government not to wait but to take action now.  I turn first to the Scottish Government. I asked a number of parliamentary questions to seek information on rates of pay for public sector employees in agencies and non-departmental public bodies that are covered by the Government's pay policy. I asked whether anyone was paid less than £7 an hour and what it would cost to ensure that the living wage was implemented. Despite the fact that the Government provides the funding for those bodies—after all, we are talking about the Government's agencies and NDPBs and the Government's pay policy—it could not, or perhaps would not, tell me the answers. I was told that the information was not collected centrally—that, of course, was the answer from John Swinney. Nicola Sturgeon was much more helpful. From her answers to parliamentary questions, we now know that 5,000 staff in the NHS are on pay rates that are lower than £7 an hour. To be fair, they are not lower by much: the lowest hourly rate is £6.76. For a relatively small amount of money—£3 million, which is a tiny fraction of our substantial £30 billion budget—we could move to a living wage, which could also act as an economic stimulus. I say to Gavin Brown that I understand that Mr Salmond has halved his personal advertising budget. Perhaps we could get the £3 million from there. I sound a note of caution to Alex Neil, who I discovered for the first time is indeed fallible. He was asked how much it would cost to implement a living wage. In the true pantomime style that we so love, he threw up his hands in horror and said, "We can't possibly do this. It will cost at least £100 million a year." It is clear that he made that figure up. We should not let the facts stand in the way of a good story, but I say to Alex Neil that this is a serious issue. It is a question of recognising and valuing workers in the NHS, and I am sure that he shares that objective. I would welcome a commitment from him today, on behalf of the Government, to identify all those staff covered by the public sector pay policy and even those directly employed in the Government who get less than £7 an hour and to act to change that. I will finish by telling members a tale about West Dunbartonshire Council. Glasgow City Council is to be congratulated on what it is doing, and I would like the same to be done in West Dunbartonshire. Politics is about priorities, and let me tell members about a choice that West Dunbartonshire Council faces. Its most senior official wanted to walk away from the council with a package in excess of £300,000—I believe that the figure is understated. Contrast that with 300 workers in West Dunbartonshire who earn less  than £7 an hour; the total cost of putting them on a living wage would be in the region of £300,000. The choice is therefore clear: £300,000 on one man to feather-bed his retirement 10 years early or on 300 of the council's lowest-paid workers to ensure that they receive a living wage. As the Americans would say, it is a no-brainer.

In response to a parliamentary question, Nicola Sturgeon helpfully outlined that perhaps 5,000 staff in the NHS are paid below the living wage and that a small sum of money is required—as little as £3 million per annum. I hope that the member agrees that that is affordable.

But with EYF—

Why has the housing and regeneration budget been slashed from £701 million to £448 million—a reduction of £253 million—when communities are crying out for that help? Does the cabinet secretary agree that his Government slashed the affordable housing budget by a third—a home-grown decision that he cannot blame on Westminster—at the same time as cutting the housing association grant and telling housing associations to front fund development themselves without knowing where the money would come from? Has he said by his actions that  neither he nor his Government care about housing and our communities?

As others have said, we face a challenging budget settlement; that is the context in which the Finance Committee undertook its inquiry. Like others, I thank our convener, Andrew Welsh, and, indeed, all those who gave evidence to the committee, our advisers and our clerks. They helped members to shape the report, which I believe provides Parliament and its committees with a useful framework against which to consider the Scottish Government's forthcoming spending proposals. We have seen a period of unprecedented growth in the Scottish budget since 1999. It is without doubt relatively easy in the context of years of plenty to consider what policy priorities we want to take forward. However, we clearly face a much more difficult position now, as we look towards a tightening of our finances across Scotland and, indeed, the UK. Is this therefore a "moment of opportunity", as the permanent secretary told his management team, or will it be a missed opportunity? The answer will undoubtedly be revealed as the budget unfolds. Derek Brownlee is right that we need a new maturity about the debate as we move forward. The choice offered by the permanent secretary and his team—whether we will be "tucked in behind Whitehall" or whether we will stand out—is  intriguing. However, we discover that, as with everything in life, timing is all. Jeremy Purvis and Gavin Brown talked about civil servants—one must assume that it is ministers, too—believing that the opportunity to be radical relates entirely to different scenarios post the UK general election. Members therefore rightly ask whether civil servants and ministers dream—or perhaps it is a nightmare—of the advent of a Conservative Government in order that they can cut deeper and further, and point the finger of blame at the Tories. Whatever happens, it is important that the Parliament stays focused. When all around is claim and counter-claim, parliamentary committees should follow the money. The Finance Committee report essentially does four things: it highlights the tightening of public finances in the context of the recession; it suggests the need to determine our priorities better; it discusses aligning funding to priorities and outcomes; and it emphasises the need to measure impact—in other words, how we demonstrate that we get a bigger bang for our buck. That forms the basis of the framework against which I hope the Parliament and its committees will judge the Scottish Government's budget proposals. Other members have spoken at length about the context, and I do not intend to repeat that—I thought that what Malcolm Chisholm said was spot on. Therefore, in these closing remarks on behalf of the committee, I turn towards the future. There will be much discussion about the forthcoming financial year, and Joe FitzPatrick is right to say that it is the period beyond 2010-11 that is more uncertain. We do not yet know what the budget allocation for Scotland will be. One thing is clear, however: the settlement will remain tight, and committees need to bear that in mind and consider the sustainability of key policies as they look ahead. The cabinet secretary is clearly not tempted by his civil servants' view that we should have an across-the-board reduction of 5 per cent, and that is very welcome. The committee thought that across-the-board reductions were a crude and blunt instrument. Instead, we need to start talking the language of priorities. Some of our witnesses questioned whether universal entitlement to some services was appropriate—services such as free care for the elderly and free public transport. Perhaps we should even target assistance and resources to those who are least well off instead, in order to maximise the impact of our funds. Indeed, Lord Sutherland has apparently called for the reintroduction of tuition fees, so that money can be reinvested to help students from poorer backgrounds with their living costs. All those issues, and many more besides, should be  considered by committees on a portfolio-by-portfolio basis in determining priorities for funding. James Kelly is right about the Scotland performs website. We need to know whether the policy priorities are making any practical difference. Let me illustrate that. One of the key strategic priorities for the Government has been the cut in business rates. Whether we agree or disagree with that, it is clear that there is very little hard evidence of any impact. Do we know whether it has created one single new job? Perhaps it has, but we do not measure that outcome appropriately, so we do not actually know. In these times, that is just not good enough. We need to know the impact that our money has, who it benefits and the outcomes that we expect it to achieve. If it does not achieve those outcomes, we should be brave enough to change direction.

No, I will not. To deliver the step change that is required, we need a robust central challenge function within Government. The committee received a very large amount of evidence to support the creation of a budget office, not least because in these changed financial circumstances the machinery of Government needed to be reformed and we needed a minister who was largely free of spending responsibilities. We know that Mr Swinney runs at least half the Government. He has responsibility for local government, the economy, the voluntary sector, transport and much, much more. Experts tell us that such a challenge function is potentially the most important office in Government, and Mr Swinney needs to be freed up to do that and that alone. Testing times require radical solutions, and I commend that one to Mr Swinney. Tom McCabe made an insightful speech. Scrutiny is an uneven contest for the Parliament at the moment. We need the capacity to scrutinise the budget in Parliament, and the Finance Committee has asked the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to consider just such a "parliamentary budget office", as he described it. I look forward to that idea being developed quickly.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The debate on the budget will dominate the Parliament for the next five months, but its consequences may well be felt for a lot longer. Our responsibility, here in the chamber and in committees, is to scrutinise the Scottish Government's proposals. Are its priorities right? Is  the money aligned to deliver on those priorities? Can we measure the impacts properly? How do we ensure that the budget is fair and, as Helen Eadie rightly said, that it protects the most vulnerable people in our society? Let me put down a marker: we need the fullest possible information to do that. I accept that Mr Swinney has moderated his language, but there is no doubt that some people will still not be able to resist indulging in the blame game, with Mr Swinney cast in the role of a victim—depending on the audience—and pointing the finger at the Treasury. I confess that I find it hard to picture Mr Swinney as a victim, but it is infinitely harder to picture his boss, Alex Salmond, as the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Other people might comment unkindly on Mr Salmond's personal ambition; I will resist the temptation to do any such thing. Rather, I suggest to Mr Swinney that Mr Salmond's departure could represent his first, very welcome strategic budget saving. I commend the Finance Committee's report to the Parliament.

I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement. I am not sure why he mentioned gymnastics, but I can tell him that the somersaults that he performs in the chamber are always interesting to witness. The underspend of £31 million takes the total EYF available for 2010-11 to £270 million. That consists of the £174 million that was previously agreed with the Treasury, the unallocated £65 million and the £31 million that he has announced today. Let me repeat David Whitton's questions. Has the £313 million for 2008-09 been fully spent? How did the £31 million underspend arise? Those are questions of interest. Looking to the future, has any of the £174 million for 2010-11 been allocated? Does the cabinet secretary have plans for that money? Does he agree that, with the prospect of £270 million of EYF in the pot, the funding is more than sufficient to cover the £129 million of capital that is required to counter the reduction in Department of Health spending?

Has it been spent?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it provides for the Scottish maritime museum. (S3O-7420)

The minister will recall the report that he and I wrote way back in October 2002, a copy of which I dusted down, and he will know that some of the issues that we identified remain. Now that he is the minister, will he ensure that a robust and consistent funding framework is in place for the museums sector? Might I invite him to give a specific commitment to provide continual financial assistance to industrial museums and to announce that wonderfully good news at an event at the Scottish maritime museum in my constituency?

I believe that the cabinet secretary will acknowledge that the previous Administration provided approximately £5 billion for 328 schools and promised an additional 250 schools by 2011. Will she therefore accept that what she has announced today—55 schools, only £800 million and no real end date—falls far short of what is required? Will she also accept that a mere mention of Dumbarton academy is no substitute for an announcement? Will Dumbarton academy be in phase 1? If not, when will we get a new school—in 2017 or 2018? Is it the case that almost two whole cohorts of young people will be consigned to school buildings that continue to fail them?

To ask the Scottish Executive for what reason the family planning and well woman clinic is being withdrawn from Dumbarton health centre. (S3O-6785)

The minister will of course be aware that the level of teenage pregnancies in West Dunbartonshire and in Greater Glasgow and Clyde continues to rise and that it is clearly linked to deprivation, with the rate of teenage pregnancy in deprived areas three times the rate elsewhere. Given those statistics and given her stated approach of keeping services local, will the minister intervene on this matter and review whether the removal of family planning and well woman services is appropriate?

The cabinet secretary chooses the language that he uses carefully. He talks about  the budget for 2010-11 being squeezed. Does he agree with Professor Bell and SPICe, however, that, excluding capital reprofiling, there will be a real-terms increase in the budget baseline for 2010-11?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member acknowledge that the facts paint a different picture? Even if we take into account the efficiency savings for 2010-11, the SPICe paper profiles a growth figure of 0.5 per cent.

She said it once; she said it twice; she said it three times; and yes, she even said it a fourth time. I am of course referring to the Scottish Government's director general for finance and corporate services when she gave evidence at the Finance Committee on Tuesday afternoon. "What did she say?" I hear you ask, Presiding Officer. She said that there was a real-terms growth of 1.7 per cent in the baseline Scottish budget next year. That is not a cut, as her boss John Swinney would have us believe, but growth. Now, we are told, she made an error. I confess to being slightly bemused, as that error was made not once but four times. Her repetition of the 1.7 per cent growth figure, which was said with a great deal of confidence, now turns out to be wrong. What bemuses me even more is that that error was made despite the flurry of notes that were being passed to her by the Government's deputy director of finance. Indeed, I had counted seven notes in total by that point, which the director general read from to enlighten the committee. Was the deputy director wrong too? How is it that our two most senior finance civil servants, with their impressive track record, can be wrong on such a fundamental issue? Indeed, I had the privilege to work with one of them when I was a minister, and his advice was always factually accurate. Perhaps  the reason why we now have a letter of retraction is that the director general's boss, John Swinney, was embarrassed. Should I instead say "mortified"? It is a much better word. It appears that officials are made to recant, retract and repent for the errors of their ways to spare the blushes of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. After all, he had been claiming—and still does today—that the budget has been cut. He can assert all he likes, but to be contradicted by his two leading senior civil servants is unfortunate to say the least. It would appear that the budget baseline is in fact growing. I concede that it is not growing as fast as we all would have wanted, but it is growing nonetheless. It is difficult, with all the spin, claim and counter-claim, to discern the facts, but let me shed some light on my new specialist subject: baselines. I confess to developing slight anorak tendencies in this regard, which some less kind souls in the chamber might say is deeply disturbing. Let me take members on the journey of discovery that I have travelled. First, the baseline for the Scottish budget, based on the departmental expenditure limit, is £27.5 billion for 2008-09, £28.4 billion for 2009-10 and £29.2 billion for 2010-11. Those are the figures that are published by the Treasury. Maths might not be everybody's forte but, despite the SNP's reduction in the number of maths teachers, even primary school children could tell us that the baseline is going up. It is worth pointing out that the Scottish Government has taken decisions that are of their very nature short term, and those inflate the budget line for 2009-10. The Government made those decisions freely; they were not forced on the Government. Let me deal with some of them. The main change has been the reprofiling of capital expenditure. Members will recall that the Treasury agreed to John Swinney's request to bring forward capital spending. That was a decision for the Scottish Government. It could have chosen to leave the money where it was. I make no criticism of the Government for deciding to accelerate that spending, but it is disingenuous to claim that there is an adverse impact on the budget overall. Indeed, the Centre for Public Policy for Regions acknowledges that the overall pot for capital remains the same. We are simply bringing forward some capital to spend earlier; there is therefore no impact on the baseline. That should therefore be excluded from the budget baseline for 2009-10. Let us consider end-year flexibility money that was agreed by John Swinney and released by the Treasury. The overall total was approximately £900 million, a proportion of which falls in 2009-10. That, too, was a decision of the Scottish  Government. That, too, is short term in nature and should be excluded from the baseline calculation. Finally, let us consider the Scottish Government's overcommitment of £100 million, which the cabinet secretary explained was to maximise spending. I do not disagree with that but, again, it is short term and a consequence of the Scottish Government's decision, and should not be included in the baseline. I know that all that is complicated—it took me a while to get it. However, when we take out the short-term cushioning in 2009-10, which has never been built into the DEL baseline budget for future years, we see the true picture, which is growth. I acknowledge that some members think that I might be partial, but no such charge can be laid at the door of SPICe or of the Finance Committee's budget adviser, Professor David Bell. I invite members to consider table 2 in Professor Bell's paper for the Finance Committee, which is most interesting. Professor Bell has made it abundantly clear that if we exclude capital reprofiling, there is year-on-year growth in the DEL budget baseline. There is growth, albeit small, whether we use Treasury figures; the figures for the Scottish budget excluding reprofiling; or the figures for the Scottish budget including consequentials without reprofiling. In each case the budget goes up, not down. If members are not content with Professor Bell's analysis, I invite them to consider table 3 in the paper from SPICe, which shows that, without reprofiling, there is an increase in the budget baseline. That even includes the efficiency savings. The cabinet secretary and the SNP have developed a mantra that distorts the level of efficiencies that must be found. Why let the facts stand in the way of a good story? However, it is interesting that, even with the efficiency savings that are required by the UK Government, the budget baseline grows. The letter from the director general gives the game away. She says that the rate is not 1.7 per cent and that an error was made in the manual calculation that was done during the meeting of the Finance Committee. However, members should look closely at line 7 of paragraph 3, where she says: "The figure is in fact 1.3%". That is 1.3 per cent growth, and no amount of spin or assertion on the part of the cabinet secretary can cloud that fact. He has the responsibility for delivery; he should get on with it.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Perhaps Jackson Carlaw would care to reflect on the numerous parliamentary questions and motions on the A82 that have been lodged in my name and withdraw his comment.

I will use the short time that is available to me this morning to  address two projects that are important to my constituency and which I believe are also of strategic importance to the west of Scotland. They are, of course, the upgrade of the A82 and the Airdrie to Bathgate rail line. I dare to correct the minister on the latter: it will enable direct travel from Helensburgh and Dumbarton in the west right through to Edinburgh Waverley in the east.

I turn first to the A82. I welcome the inclusion of the A82 in the strategic transport projects review. I praise the A82 campaigners for their persistence and imagination in putting the issue centre stage. However, my question to the minister is this: when will the funding, which is estimated at £100 million to £250 million, be committed to enable the necessary work to start? Transport Scotland has committed £16 million, which is welcome, but the phasing of the remainder of the investment is of interest to the local community. As I travel around my constituency, I spend much of my time on the A82 between Bowling, Dumbarton, Balloch, Luss and Tarbet. I am very familiar with the traffic gridlock that results from but a few minor accidents. I am equally familiar with the 30-year-old temporary traffic lights just past Tarbet at Pulpit Rock. There is no doubt that it is a challenging stretch of road. There is a sheer rock face on one side and Loch Lomond on the other, with very little space for manoeuvre. However, any engineering solution should not be so difficult as to make improvement impossible. After all, it is more than four decades since we put a man on the moon. Surely we can tackle those temporary traffic lights and widen that stretch of road to make it fit for purpose. The A82 is undoubtedly a lifeline for communities from Glasgow to those throughout my constituency and those north to Fort William. The road is essential for tourism in the west of Scotland. Each year, it carries hundreds of thousands of visitors from home and abroad to the very many delights of our country. It is equally essential for our haulage industry and local businesses. There is no doubt that the A82 has a value to the everyday life of many Scots and our local and national economy. There is equally genuine and long-standing concern about the A82's safety record. Previous route accident reduction plans resulted in a lowering of the number of accidents and fatalities, but the figures that I have seen for 2007-08 indicate that the numbers are rising again. Indeed, there are more accidents and fatalities on the A82 than even on the A9. It is perhaps not surprising that the majority of accidents happen on the single carriageway stretches. If someone arrives in Scotland from abroad at Glasgow airport, picks up  their hire car and heads north, they are on a dual carriageway from the moment they leave the airport until they get to the Stoneymollan roundabout. With little warning, they then find themselves on a single carriageway with cars rushing past them at around 60 miles an hour. I am thinking in particular of the stretch of the A82 near Firkin Point, where the single overtaking lane along Loch Lomond is on an uphill gradient and near to a relatively sharp curve in the road. There have been a number of accidents on that stretch of road. I invite the minister to look into that and consider erecting central barriers to define clearly the roadway, if dualling proves too difficult. Another issue is the stretch of the A82 at Dumbarton between the Dumbuck junction and the Dunglass roundabout and onwards to the Kilbirnie roundabout in my colleague Des McNulty's constituency. When, very happily, the previous Scottish Executive removed the tolls from the Erskine bridge—an issue in which the Presiding Officer has an interest—a commitment was given to consider the impact of the anticipated increased traffic volume on the surrounding roads. I would welcome a commitment from the minister to consider the congestion that is evident at the Kilbirnie roundabout and to work with West Dunbartonshire Council on a proposal for a new road at the pinchpoint on the A82 between the Dumbuck junction and the Dunglass roundabout. That would enhance substantially the local transport infrastructure. I turn to rail, specifically the Airdrie to Bathgate rail line, which was approved by the previous Scottish Executive. The line is, of course, the missing link between Helensburgh and Dumbarton in the west and Edinburgh Waverley in the east. The rail link will bring enormous benefit to commuters in my constituency and our local economy. My concern relates to the implementation of the rail line and investment in rolling stock. I have bored the minister and his predecessor with successive parliamentary questions on the subject. In their answers, I have had promises that sufficient rolling stock will be procured in plenty of time and that it will more than cover the increase in patronage. I refer to the 3 per cent per annum passenger growth that was identified in the network utilisation strategy. It is anticipate that there will be 4.1 million extra boardings per annum on the Airdrie to Bathgate rail line alone. I would welcome the minister's assurance that there will be sufficient rolling stock capacity to cope with projected demand. I also seek his assurance that the class 334 Juniper—I am becoming a trainspotter in my old age—is the preferred train and that there will be no delay in delivering the rolling stock to allow the rail link to commence in December 2010.  I associate myself with Des McNulty's comments on potholes. I fear that the potholes in Argyll and Bute are merging to form craters the size of the craters on the moon. I urge the minister to help hard-pressed local authorities. I hope that we will see investment in transport in the west of Scotland, not least because we need to retain the region's competitiveness, attract jobs and retain skilled people in the area.

I very much welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement of a public inquiry, which is, of course, something for which the families from the Vale of Leven have consistently campaigned. I consider the decision to be a victory not only for common sense but for the families' persistence and courage in pursuing the matter. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for listening to their case.  That said, will the cabinet secretary ensure that the families in the C Diff Justice Group are involved in shaping the public inquiry's terms of reference and that they can participate fully in the hearings—for example, by leading evidence and cross-examining witnesses—by enabling the costs of solicitors and counsel to be covered by the state?

I speak against the cabinet secretary's amendment 2 because it seeks to remove the requirement for personal identifiers in postal ballots. Parliament should be aware that the Health and Sport Committee unanimously agreed the following on personal identifiers: "The Committee considers that health board elections should be seen to be taken as seriously as other statutory elections. The experience of the Scottish general elections in May 2007 shows that the robustness of any new elections introduced in Scotland will rightly come under serious scrutiny." The committee recommended that "the Scottish Government reconsider using personal identifiers for postal votes in health board elections." That was the view of the whole committee and it remained the majority view at stage 2, so I am genuinely disappointed that the cabinet secretary has lodged this amendment at stage 3. I will explain why I think amendment 2 is wrong. First, under existing arrangements for local and national elections, voters are, if they use a postal vote, required to provide personal identifiers—the identifier can be something as simple as a signature—which are, of course, used to ensure the security of the vote. Members will surely not have forgotten the difficulties that we experienced in the 2007 Scottish Parliament elections. In some areas, questions were asked about the validity of the outcome because majorities were small and the number of rejected ballot papers was large. I even recollect that the Scottish National Party recently questioned the integrity of one aspect of the Glenrothes by-election result. The SNP was mistaken, but the validity of elections clearly exercises us all. I do not want there to be a scintilla of doubt about the validity of health board  elections. They will be important elections. They will be Scotland's fifth set of statutory elections.

I am afraid not. I will come to explain why. They elections will be the fifth set of statutory elections and will be run by returning officers, so they must be robust and consistent with other elections. I know that there will be considerable interest in them and that my local community shares my enthusiasm for them. I hope that they will be hotly contested, because the elections will represent the democratic means by which people will be able to express their views on their health boards. The cabinet secretary argued that personal identifiers would lead to increased costs and delay, so I find it strange that she has promised to consider them should there be roll-out of the elections. If the cost for the pilot is too high, the cost for the roll-out will be even higher. I say to Margo MacDonald that it is surely at the pilot stage that the proposal should be tested. What price do we attach to democracy? How much do Scottish Parliament elections cost? There is no suggestion that we should do away with personal identifiers for those. We all believe in increasing voters' access to postal votes. At the heart of the matter is the status that we accord to health board elections. I ask Parliament whether we are content to settle for a lower electoral standard than exists for local government, even though health boards are responsible for spending more than individual councils. The cabinet secretary points to the elections to the boards of the national park authorities, which have postal ballets without identifiers. The annual budget of the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority is £7 million. The annual budget of Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board is £2.6 billion. There is a difference. I know that some people might not be convinced by what I think, so I ask them to look at the evidence from the experts, such as the Electoral Commission and local authority returning officers from throughout Scotland. They are the people who have the responsibility for overseeing and running our elections. They are the experts, and they all believe that personal identifiers should be used in postal ballots. If members will not listen to  me, I ask them to listen to the experts and reject the cabinet secretary's amendment.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am grateful to Ian McKee and I hope that I will be persuasive. Aside from the minister and her officials, did anybody argue against having personal identifiers?

I speak in support of amendment 1 in the name of my colleague Bill Butler. Members with a better memory than mine will recall that, during the previous session of Parliament, I was one of the Labour members who supported Bill Butler's proposals for elections to health boards. I pay tribute to him for leading the debate and to the cabinet secretary for getting us where we are today. Like many members, I am shaped by experience in the constituency. I have witnessed at first hand the dismissive and sometimes arrogant actions of successive heath boards and their contempt for the views of my local community. I therefore strongly believe in amendment 1 and in elections to health boards. Amendment 1 seeks simply to ensure that directly elected members are in the majority—a simple 50 per cent plus one. In evidence taken by the Health and Sport Committee, it was suggested that the wrong type of person might be elected, that community activists who care about their local health services would somehow not be appropriate, and that strange people might win— people who could not possibly be allowed to be in the majority. We should just look around this chamber: sometimes unusual people do get elected, but that is the will of the electorate—that is democracy. The public are perfectly able to elect sensible people to represent them in public services, and health boards will be no different. If we are serious about improving the operation of health boards, it is right that there is a majority of directly elected members. I do make a distinction: councillors on health boards are told that they cannot represent—[ Interruption. ]

I said that strange people get elected—I rest my case, Presiding Officer. I think that there is a distinction to be made and, with respect, that Ross Finnie is wrong on this occasion. Having directly elected members is the right place for us to be. I am sure that the cabinet secretary and the Minister for Public Health and Sport, who will have had a hand in the SNP manifesto, can be persuaded of the value of that approach. If they are not, I hope that at least the SNP back benchers will be. It was a promise in the SNP manifesto, and I would hate to see the commitment watered down. I urge members to be radical and to support Bill Butler's amendment.

To ask the Scottish Executive what projects the Scottish Futures Trust plans to deliver in 2009. (S3O-6078)

The cabinet secretary has, of course, benefited from a series of pipeline projects involving schools, roads and rail links that were left for him by the previous Administration. Can he confirm that not one project has been approved, nor has one contract been signed, since February 2008? That is more than a year of inertia. Exactly how much longer will it be before projects—such as a replacement Dumbarton academy—start to flow again?

And I have yet to get an answer.

There has been talk this morning about the Government agreeing to mesh the 15-point action plan in. Will the Government agree to implement all of the 15-point action plan? Specifically, will the Government commit to a target of a 50 per cent reduction in C diff by March 2011 for all ages from two upwards?

rose—

Does the member accept that we were building on what is happening and that the 15-point plan was offered as a contribution to what more needs to be done?

Can the member possibly tell me when the entire estate of Scottish hospitals will have appropriate isolation facilities, using that single room analogy?

How can I refuse that invitation, Presiding Officer? I welcome to the public gallery families from the C Diff Justice Group and representatives of many other families that have been affected by Clostridium difficile in hospitals across Scotland. I join other members in welcoming Hugh Pennington, emeritus professor of microbiology. I owe Professor Pennington and Professor Brian Toft, one of the United Kingdom's leading authorities on patient safety, an enormous debt of gratitude, because they gave up their time over Christmas to shape the 15-point action plan that is before the chamber today. The plan was also endorsed by the C Diff Justice Group. I commend the plan to Parliament. It is not intended to be the final word on health care acquired infections. New microbes are evolving in real time, and all of us need to be open to new ideas in our constant battle against infection. Although the incidence of C diff may be constant, the number of cases has risen by 10 per cent over the past year, and new, more toxic strains are emerging. It is just over a year since the outbreak of C diff started at the Vale of Leven hospital. Mary Scanlon was right to say that health care acquired infection affects not just that hospital but hospitals throughout Scotland, but the families cannot wait any longer. I call on members today to make 2009 the year in which we in Scotland get serious about tackling all health care acquired infections. At the heart of the plan is a 50 per cent reduction in C diff cases by March 2011, rather than the Government target of 30 per cent over the same period. I will tell the chamber why. In England, the target has already been exceeded—cases of C diff are down by 38 per cent. In Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells, where there were significant outbreaks of C diff, the local target is to wipe out MRSA completely and to reduce C diff infections by 55 per cent by April 2011. Our target applies only to people over 65; in England, the target applies to everyone, from the age of two upwards. We need to be more ambitious. Raising the target will signal the seriousness of our intentions and drive change, if it is backed by a range of actions and resources. The Royal College of Nursing was right to point out to the Health and Sport Committee and in a briefing to members that the sum of £54 million over three years that has been allocated to deal with HAIs is unchanged from the original spending review figure of 2007. I acknowledge that money and welcome it, but not one penny extra has been made available, despite the fact that 2008  witnessed the worst outbreak of C diff in Scotland, if not the UK. I will deal briefly with a couple of issues, starting with hand hygiene. The cabinet secretary reports compliance rates of 93 per cent, but we are not measuring like with like across health boards. The number of observations varies in different hospitals and health boards. Our approach must be more rigorous than simply relying on self-assessment by clipboard. We need temperature-controlled, sensor-operated washing facilities in all hospitals. It is embarrassing that there are better facilities in our airports than in our hospitals. The cabinet secretary announced that all new hospitals will have single rooms, to help to reduce infections. I welcome that, but there is no timescale or outline of resources for the programme. It will take more than a generation to cover the whole NHS estate, but we need a crash programme now—isolation facilities must be available in every hospital. Our proposal is proportionate, targeted and, therefore, more deliverable. Turning to the Liberal amendment, the Parliament has already voted to support a public inquiry and, two weeks ago, the Public Petitions Committee unanimously agreed on the need for a public inquiry without further delay. The committee did not consider that on-going proceedings would be prejudiced, which is welcome. Today, we have a chance to move the agenda on. We need a comprehensive strategy, not a piecemeal approach. Yesterday, the Tories and the Liberals supported the Labour motion that is before us today. Support for the Scottish National Party amendment would remove the support for implementing the 15-point plan. The Parliament will not be forgiven if we allow that to happen.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking in light of the emergence of the new and potentially more dangerous 078 strain of Clostridium difficile in hospitals across Scotland. (S3F-1436)

I simply note that at the Vale of Leven hospital cleaning was not privatised. Existing guidance to health boards requires samples of the 027 strain to be submitted to the national laboratory for typing but is silent on the 078 strain. Will the First Minister ensure that the 078 strain is specified in guidance? Given that the Deputy First Minister has said that the 078 strain is not a new strain, why was it apparently not reported by the Government until just a few weeks ago?

Has the group identified the redeployment of all 11,000 people who depend on Faslane for employment, particularly given the current economic climate? Does he accept that Alex Salmond's promise of a Scottish navy—all seven frigates—related to Rosyth and not Faslane, which would mean that the whole base would close?

Will the member take an intervention?

If anyone happened to turn on the radio this morning, they would be forgiven for thinking that members of the Scottish Parliament were lining up for an almighty  square go, and that, like children in a school playground, we were falling out with each other and making new, but perhaps temporary, friends. There has been a lot of sound and fury from Mr Swinney and his right-hand man, Derek Brownlee, and a touch of the amateur dramatics from our resident panto dame, Alex Neil. We have the vision of Alex Salmond scurrying out of the chamber as he pushes negotiations to the 11 th hour, 59 th minute. I have much sympathy with Patrick Harvie's comments in regard to the process. However, we must not let John Swinney blind us with his assertions, no matter how loudly he makes them and how much he thumps the table. What the Parliament needs is facts. The Parliament takes its responsibility on the budget very seriously. As a member of the Finance Committee, I know that to be the case across the parties. The truth is, though, that if the Government does not get support for its budget tonight, it can introduce another budget bill with a shortened timetable. It does not mean any overall loss of funds to the Scottish budget, that capital spending, which has been accelerated, will somehow vanish, or that local government will suffer. I remind Mr Swinney of legislation introduced in previous sessions of Parliament. Legislation to deal with the Noel Ruddle case took a couple of weeks, as did legislation to deal with the sickness absence of the Lord President. Please, let us not have any nonsense about the budget process.

The date, 12 February, is not a statutory date; it is merely an administrative date. If the member waits until the end of my speech, he will hear my suggestion for how we should deal with that. I turn to the substance, and deal with health first. In general terms, the health budget achieved a 4.3 per cent increase last year. However, the initial allocation to health boards amounted to 3.3 per cent. That might not sound like a great deal of difference, but kept at the centre was something like £350 million across all boards. Glasgow lost £77 million, Lothian lost £41 million, and Grampian lost £28 million, and so on. This year, I understand that that problem occurs again, and that not all money will be passed to health boards. We know that budgets are tight, and we know that some boards are using efficiencies to make real cuts. They are starting to experience real pain in the delivery of front-line services. It is incumbent on us to ensure that every penny reaches those who need it most. I am therefore disappointed that the  finance secretary was unable to convince the health secretary that that was the right thing to do. I listened carefully to Mr Swinney and there was no mention of hospital-acquired infections. I regard that as woeful, as will the families of those who have been affected by Clostridium difficile. The 15-point plan to tackle hospital-acquired infections was not drawn up by me or by people on this side of the chamber; it was shaped with the assistance of Hugh Pennington, who is an emeritus professor of microbiology, and Professor Brian Toft, who is one of the UK's leading experts on patient safety. But, oh no—the Government knows better. The plan is supported by the families. It was offered to the Government and to the Parliament so that we could take action. I know that the Parliament cares about the issue. The plan represents a comprehensive approach, not a piecemeal approach. At a time when C diff is rising, when new 078 strains have been identified and may be in our hospitals, and when C diff is in our care homes at levels that we do not yet know; and at a time when this is the main challenge for the health service, I have invited the cabinet secretary to make 2009 the year when Scotland got serious about C diff. The response is silence. Why does the cabinet secretary not adopt some of the measures that have been proposed? Why does he not cut C difficile rates in hospitals and make our hospitals cleaner and safer? Why does he not ensure that we collectively reduce mortality rates from C diff? I acknowledge the will of Parliament to take measures forward; it was evidenced yesterday by the Public Petitions Committee's unanimous support for the families' call for a public inquiry. At the end of the day, this budget is about the economy. It is about jobs, skills and training, and about accelerating investment in infrastructure. It is about protecting local people. The current budget does not recognise the scale of the challenge that we face. The budget line on accelerating investment in infrastructure contains £90 million for local government. That is welcome, but it is spread thinly over 32 local authorities. It will not have the impact that it could have. No pipeline projects are coming through from the SNP Government. All the approvals have been for projects that were started under the previous Government. How is that stimulating construction? Unemployment in my area has doubled in the past few months. People and families have been devastated by this recession, and I want the Parliament and the Scottish Government to do more in the interests of those people. Much has been said about what will happen next, and I want to finish on that point. The budget  can come into effect for 1 April provided that a bill is passed by 14 February. There is therefore sufficient time for public bodies to know their spending allocations and for the bill to achieve royal assent. The bill can be reintroduced; it can be reintroduced this evening. There can be a shortened parliamentary process. I think that that can work. If the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill does not come into force on 1 April, there are emergency provisions in section 2 of the Public Finance and Accountability (Scotland) Act 2000. Those provisions will come into play, and the allocations from the previous year will move forward. The challenge for us in the chamber is to co-operate and to improve the budget, to make it the best that we can for the people of Scotland in testing economic times.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member join me in asking the health board to reconsider its proposals to remove services that are currently at the Vale of Leven hospital and transfer them to Paisley?

I am instinctively in favour of anything that will improve health boards' accountability to the cabinet secretary, this chamber or the public—or indeed to all three. Inevitably, we are shaped by our experiences: I, for example, witnessed at close quarters the operation of NHS Argyll and Clyde and members will not be surprised to learn that I did not find it a particularly edifying sight. My particular interest, of course, is the Vale of Leven hospital. What I witnessed in that health board was its dismissive treatment of the community's views, its arrogant approach and its strong belief that it knew best. To top it all, there was a payroll vote at board meetings. Perhaps I should explain that a little bit more: when the chief executive of NHS Argyll and Clyde raised his hand in a vote, an array of hands belonging to the executive directors and associated employees would rise simultaneously. It did not matter what the issue was or whether the argument for a different view was overwhelming—all the hands went up. Some have said privately to me that it was probably a case of follow the boss or lose one's job. No one can convince me that that is an open and transparent way of operating—and I certainly cannot be convinced that it is in the interests of either patients or communities.  As a result of that experience, I am predisposed towards taking action to improve matters; in fact, in the previous parliamentary session, I voted for Bill Butler's member's bill. Like other members, I congratulate Mr Butler on his efforts in getting us to this point, and commend the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for taking the matter forward. In that context, I am happy to support the bill's general principles, while echoing some of the concerns that have already been expressed about detail. The bill does not directly improve health boards' accountability to the public. Scottish Government officials have made it quite clear that nothing in the bill changes the current situation and that the board will still be responsible in policy terms to the cabinet secretary, whether or not its members are elected. I understand the reason for that; after all, it is important to have consistency across the NHS in Scotland. However, there is a very real possibility of creating tension between an elected member's responsibility to their electorate and their responsibility to ministers. I am thinking in particular of cases of substantial service change on which there might be a clear difference of views. Inevitably there will be frustration and, ultimately, there might even be disillusionment, which is something that none of us wants. As Ross Finnie rightly pointed out, we need to ask fundamental questions about corporate governance; how health boards work—or, indeed, do not work; and why in some cases they are so at odds with their communities. Although having directly elected members might have a positive effect—as I believe it will—it does not solve the underlying problem of governance structures that are perhaps tired and detached. Given that opinion on direct health board elections is very divided, we should welcome the suggestion that pilots should be carried out. Initially, the Government intended to hold two identical pilots for direct elections using STV and extending the franchise to 16 and 17-year-olds. Before I turn to the detail of that proposal, I point out that the cabinet secretary has rightly accepted the Health and Sport Committee's strong view that the Government must pilot more than one approach, and I look forward to seeing the details of those alternative pilots before we reach stage 3. I want to raise three issues about the current pilot proposal. First, on extending the franchise to 16 and 17-year-olds, significant concern was expressed with regard to setting out details of 15-year-olds on a register with their date of majority. Such a move clearly raises child protection issues. The committee is looking for information on that point prior to stage 2 and I hope that the cabinet secretary will address it when she winds up.  Secondly, on ward boundaries, many of my constituents will be disappointed if it is decided that a ward should cover an entire health board area. In fact, I agree with Mary Scanlon on this point. How can we ensure representation from the very large and diverse geographical areas covered by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde or, indeed, by NHS Highland? If we do not have smaller wards, there is little chance that people in my area, who care passionately about their health service, will be elected. The third area of concern is, as Christine Grahame pointed out, the lack of personal identifiers in a postal ballot. The Electoral Commission, local authorities and returning officers, as well as the committee, have said clearly that such identifiers must be used in a postal ballot. Given the experience of our May 2007 elections, any new elections must be rigorous and robust, and there should be confidence in the system and the people elected. The cabinet secretary has indicated that she is not minded to use personal identifiers. The committee has made it clear that, if that remains the case, she should reconsider the proposal for an all-postal ballot. If we are serious about making this work, we should follow the experts' advice and ensure that no questions can be raised about the validity of the elections. It is essential that, before any roll-out takes place, an independent evaluation of all the piloted approaches is carried out, with further consideration of the cost estimates. As a member of both the Finance Committee and the Health and Sport Committee, I have had two opportunities to scrutinise the bill. It is fair to say that the costs set out in the initial financial memorandum were quite basic; in fact, between evidence sessions, they were revised upwards by about £3 million. It has also been pointed out to the Health and Sport Committee that the financial memorandum does not include fees for returning officers, so there is obviously more work to be carried out in that respect. Although the cabinet secretary has made a commitment to fund the pilots, there has been no commitment to fund any roll-out centrally. The health boards themselves have suggested that that might have an impact on public engagement budgets while, in written evidence, others have raised concerns about the impact on front-line services.

I entirely accept that, but any indication of the cabinet secretary's intentions with regard to roll-out would be very welcome. The bill leaves substantial matters to subordinate legislation that in many cases is subject to negative procedure. I will not repeat Jamie Stone's points in that respect, but the fact is that Parliament requires more scrutiny of these matters. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has recognised that and I look forward to the amendments that will be lodged at stage 2. Finally, on the bill's real-time impact, I am pleased that the cabinet secretary recognises the importance of public participation and consultation. I share her view: this bill is additional to that essential local engagement. As she will be aware, my local community is going through a consultation exercise on the Vale of Leven hospital; indeed, meetings are being held this and next week. One of my community representatives, who has campaigned about local health services for a long time now, asked an executive director of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde whether any of the pre-consultation discussions or written submissions had changed the content of the consultation. A deafening silence fell, and was broken by his response: "No." Although he was then rescued by another senior executive officer, the cat was unfortunately out of the bag. Changing the attitudes of and culture among health board senior executive officers with regard to the legitimacy of the community's views obviously remains a challenge, and I believe that having directly elected members on the board might make that kind of difference. I therefore support the bill's general principles.

Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that, if the C diff rates are compared with those in the same quarter in the previous year, the downward trend that he describes is not shown?

I welcome this opportunity to debate the Scottish Government's budget. Given the other contributions to the debate, it will come as no surprise to the cabinet secretary to learn that I do not believe that, at the moment, the budget goes far enough in tackling the economic crisis. The one thing on which we have all agreed is that we live in challenging economic times. At such times, people in the communities that we represent rightly turn to Government, no matter whether at Holyrood or at Westminster, to help them weather the storm. As a result, the measure of the budget must be how it helps Scotland through the storm over the next year. The UK Government's actions to protect the economy have been well documented. Even today, a further package of support for businesses has been announced. The extent of the Scottish Government's intervention must be greater, but I leave it to others—indeed, they have already started to do this—to outline the measures that are required to help our businesses, our high streets and individual sectors of the economy, such as construction. In my speech, I will touch on local government before focusing on health spending.  I hope that the cabinet secretary recalls my welcome for the reprofiling of the £260 million of capital consequentials resulting from UK spending decisions. Perhaps he also recalls my question about the mechanism by which £90 million of that money would be allocated to local government: would he target priorities by taking bold decisions to maximise impact or would he end up spreading the jam thinly across the 32 authorities, negating the cash's overall potential impact? Contrary to what he said to the Finance Committee, he has chosen to sacrifice maximising impact by spreading the jam thinly, and I have to record my disappointment with that decision. The Finance Committee expressed concern about health efficiency targets and the emerging evidence that efficiencies might be coming from front-line services instead of the backroom bureaucratic functions that ministers have highlighted. As I am sure that the cabinet secretary does not wish there to be any detrimental impact on front-line services, I ask that he reconsider the issue. Specifically, he might wish to look closely at the fact that, in spite of the 4.3 per cent increase in the overall health budget in 2008-09, health board budgets rose by only slightly more than 3 per cent. That means that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has retained £350 million centrally for her disposal, effectively holding back the money from health boards and front-line services. I have to wonder whether that is the best use of that money. Finally, I turn to hospital-acquired infections, which is an area of particular constituency interest. Although I acknowledge the Conservatives' suggestion of bed management pilots as a contribution to the debate, I point out that Scottish Labour has today published a comprehensive 15-point strategy to tackle HAIs, which has been shaped by the families affected by C diff and endorsed by two of the UK's leading experts in this field: Professor Hugh Pennington and Professor Brian Toft. Professor Pennington has said: "This package draws on tried and tested international practice. Its implementation will make a real difference and should—over time—bring Scotland in line with the other countries that have controlled their HAIs far more effectively. Its implementation is needed now—not only are the current problems severe by any standard, but we have to be prepared for the emergence of new challenges because microbes evolve in real time." One priority in the plan is the introduction of a more ambitious target for reducing the number of C diff cases. Although the current Government target of cutting such cases by 30 per cent over the next three years sounds impressive, it is less than the 38 per cent reduction that has already been achieved by the NHS in England.  We want to cut the number of C diff cases by 50 per cent by March 2011. Underpinning that objective are practical measures including the provision of quality hand-washing facilities that are temperature controlled and sensor operated. It concerns me that Scottish airports have better hand-washing facilities than Scottish hospitals. Other measures include the creation of isolation facilities for all C diff and MRSA patients, which would essentially mean the provision of sufficient en suite single rooms in order to end sharing.

I do indeed, but the member should realise why we are so concerned about this issue. If we compare this quarter with the previous quarter, we will see that the underlying trend of C diff is rising. I welcome the reduction in MRSA, but I want to see the same happen with C diff. I understand that microbiologists have identified a new strain of C diff—type 078. We have not yet been told whether there have been any cases of the new strain in Scottish hospitals, but the fact that bugs evolve in real time should concern us all. It is time for the Parliament to unite to take robust action to make 2009 the year in which Scotland shapes up and gets serious about hospital-acquired infections. I will finish with the words of Professor Brian Toft: "The proposed package of proposals to address C.diff in Scottish hospitals is both comprehensive and practical. It should be implemented without delay." The budget effectively sets out the Government's priorities; I commend the plan that Scottish Labour has published to the Parliament and the Government.

I will not take that as a licence to speak for longer. I congratulate Pauline McNeill on securing the debate. I also congratulate her, Sandra White and Hugh O'Donnell, who returned from their trip to Gaza. As a member of the cross-party group on Palestine, I think it is important that these issues are brought to the chamber, to raise awareness of what is happening in Gaza and to send a strong signal of support to the Palestinian people, who are suffering more than ever before. I also pay tribute to the work undertaken by Edinburgh Direct Aid. I have no doubt that the work that it and others do in getting aid through, and demonstrating Scotland's support to Gaza, is crucial. Scotland has always been supportive of the Palestinian people and their cause and today we echo calls for all international organisations to work together in an effort to find a two-state solution. As we have heard, the reality for ordinary Palestinians is that the siege has affected every aspect of their lives. Israel's blockade has meant that, since last month, the Gaza strip has been closed to virtually all supplies. Palestinians inside the territory have had to deal with food shortages, lengthy power cuts and no cooking gas. If that was happening here, we would be outraged; people would be on the streets and the Parliament would be ringing with the sound of condemnation. The situation has led the UN to describe conditions there as the worst ever, but despite all that the blockade continues. Palestinian poverty is now at such a level that Christian Aid has described it as being as crippling a part of the conflict as the suicide bombs and the military incursions. Some 64 per cent of the  Palestinian population now exist on less than £1.10 a day—less than the official UN poverty line. Gaza has been under siege conditions for more than two years now. Most of the population survive only by virtue of the aid from the UN World Food Programme, but Israel has allowed that aid into Gaza only five times in the past month. As others have said, 271 people—it is worth repeating that; 271 people—have died as a direct result of the blockade, and the deaths continue. On 10 December we saw the 60 th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, but the steadily rising death toll in Gaza highlights the painful gap between the declaration's peaceful rhetoric and the desperate reality for Palestinian people. Only yesterday, the United Nations Security Council adopted a resolution that calls on all parties to intensify their efforts to achieve a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We must make real progress. The UN has described the situation as a humanitarian crisis and said that it cannot go on. The people of Palestine cannot be denied basic health care or be allowed to slip further into poverty. Sarah Boyack was absolutely right to talk about practical things that we can do as individuals, but we must take collective action, too. As 2009 approaches, it is perhaps more important than ever that we all commit to ending the siege of Gaza.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to ensure that vulnerable older people in Argyll and Bute receive the most appropriate care services for their needs. (S3O-5261)

The minister will be aware of a number of cases in the past few weeks of pensioners in their 80s and 90s, many of whom are suffering from dementia, being denied appropriate care by Argyll and Bute Council. That is not just my view, but the view of medical professionals. Is the minister aware that that coincides with Argyll and Bute Council imposing financial restrictions on its care budget? Given the minister's active and welcome interest in these issues, will she personally intervene in the interests of old, vulnerable people in Helensburgh and Lomond?

It gives me great pleasure to close the debate on behalf of the Finance Committee. I associate myself with the convener's remarks in thanking the committee clerks, SPICe, our adviser Professor David Bell and the many witnesses who gave evidence to the committee. I also take the opportunity to thank the convener and my committee colleagues for what has always been a robust but generally good-humoured debate. On this occasion, and in the spirit of consensus, I agree with Joe FitzPatrick's comments about Susan Duffy. We all wish her well for the future. The process has been interesting. The convener was right to point out that the majority of recommendations are sensible and were agreed to by all committee members. Equally, it is important to recognise that there were 12 divisions on substantial issues, five of which were decided on the casting vote of the convener. I am sure that the cabinet secretary, in seeking to steer his budget through Parliament, will be mindful that  some areas were hotly contested. He is astute enough to reflect on that. Without exception, all members referenced the current economic situation, and rightly so. We do indeed live in challenging economic times, and it is right that people in our communities turn to Governments, both in Holyrood and at Westminster, to help them to weather the storm. The measure of the budget is how well it helps Scotland through the next year. Is the Government doing enough, is it targeted at the right issues, and can more be done? Johann Lamont is right that assertion and belief are insufficient for the Parliament: facts and evidence are essential to our understanding of what works and what impact we make. The committee took evidence from the cabinet secretary on the Government's six-point plan and asked for information on the shift of resources to back up implementation. The response from the cabinet secretary highlighted the £100 million capital budget that has been brought forward to accelerate housing investment. Any acceleration of funds in that area is welcome, but we must recognise the genuine concern that the focus is not quite on target. Money is being used to buy land and existing properties, which will not have the envisaged impact on the construction sector. The committee is keen for the Government to demonstrate and to seek to maximise the impact. Beyond that, there was a recognition that there was less of a shift in resources than was desired. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will reflect on the committee's recommendations, specifically on: first, ensuring that Skills Development Scotland works to identify and fill areas of shortage—I have heard positive comments from him on that already; secondly, resourcing PACE teams to meet any increase in unemployment; and thirdly, bringing forward infrastructure spending using all available funding models. Like others, I welcome the reprofiling of the £260 million of capital consequentials resulting from UK spending decisions, but the cabinet secretary needs to provide detail on how it will be distributed. He outlined that the substantial share will be allocated to local government, which will be welcomed, but members are keen to know how it will be allocated. Will it be targeted or spread across the 32 local authorities, thereby lessening the impact? I hope that the cabinet secretary will take the opportunity to return to the chamber on those issues before stage 1 of the budget bill. The committee also recommended more help for those who are in need of advice and assistance due to debt, mortgage repossessions and unemployment. The committee will welcome the announcement of the £1 million consequential  from the UK budget for the provision of advice to people who are suffering and struggling with debt, but I am sure that it will want to consider the detail. The cabinet secretary should be aware that we are keen to expand the services not only of CABx but of money advice workers and credit unions, which he did not mention, so I look forward to his response. I have no doubt that efficiency targets have caused concern among members—David Whitton and others mentioned them. The Finance Committee supported the Health and Sport Committee's view that resources should be targeted at front-line services, as there was some evidence of efficiencies being applied beyond backroom, bureaucratic functions, thereby having a detrimental impact. I am sure that the cabinet secretary would not wish that to be an outcome. I also highlight Derek Brownlee's comments on hospital-acquired infections. Members will be aware of my interest in HAIs, and in Clostridium difficile in particular. I am pleased that the Finance Committee has made tackling them a priority recommendation, and I look forward to the cabinet secretary providing more information on that. A number of members, including Des McNulty, mentioned transparency. The Government believes that Scotland performs is the framework to chart the way forward, but it is not yet evident that Scotland performs will provide us with robust monitoring, because indicators are at varying stages of development and the data are not yet available for all of them. Then we have single outcome agreements. Few members would disagree that measuring outcomes is preferable to measuring inputs, but there is no consistency. We currently have more than 3,500 different targets, and it is not clear that we are measuring what matters or that all the baseline data are available. I am a simple person. The Scottish Government has priorities that it wants to achieve, and it has key themes and strategic plans, but there is little if anything to link budgets to priorities to outcomes. I am sure that all Governments strive to make that linkage work but, if the cabinet secretary wants the Government's budget to have the maximum impact possible, it is essential that he focus on that. I agree with what Patrick Harvie, Alex Johnstone, Des McNulty and other members said in highlighting the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's recommendation to include a climate change commentary in the budget documents. I also associate myself with Johann Lamont's comments about equality considerations. I hope that the cabinet secretary will come back to the Parliament with details of how we will ensure the equality proofing of budgets alongside commentaries on climate  change and social change, because they are critical for the future. David Whitton called Derek Brownlee the last samurai, which was interesting, but I am not sure about that. However, I certainly recommend that Annabel Goldie read the Official Report to judge the scale of Derek Brownlee's ambition. He described Iain Gray's elevation from holding the finance portfolio to being the leader of the Labour Party, then spoke about Tavish Scott moving from the finance portfolio to the leadership of the Liberal Democrats. All I will say is that Annabel Goldie should watch her back.

The Conservatives are a small and dying breed and I have no desire to join them. I would not describe Alex Neil as an archangel as Liam McArthur did. However, it is Christmas, and I much enjoyed his performance as a pantomime dame and his mock horror as he dealt with suggestions from other parties. [ Interruption. ] Indeed, somebody is displaying it again. Joe FitzPatrick asserted that the committee was consensual. In the spirit of Christmas, I say that I look forward to him adopting that approach in the future. We return to the budget on 14 January to debate stage 1 of the budget bill. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will reflect on the committee's recommendations and introduce a bill that includes measures that will help Scotland and its people to weather the economic storms that are ahead.

Free personal care was not only fully funded—additional money was made available for it. Argyll and Bute Council is denying services to an 83-year-old woman and a 90-year-old lady who have dementia and live alone; an 89-year-old woman; an 80-year-old woman; a 93-year gentlemen—

Those people are not getting services from Argyll and Bute Council as a result of budget cuts. What does the cabinet secretary have to say to that council?

She does indeed. One of the cuts that West Dunbartonshire Council considered last time round—and I understand that it might well consider it again this time round—was to the early intervention programme. It does cost money to resource; that was the problem for the council.

Is there enough money in the local government settlement—enough for local government to carry out important functions, such as education and social work, and to cope with new pressures? Those are the central questions that the cabinet secretary needs to answer. The response from many local authorities across Scotland is simple: no. As Keith Brown knows, the Scottish Government has provided £175 million to local government over the next three years to fund its new commitments. Equally, he knows that that falls far short of the £500 million that the SNP itself costed as being required to deliver those self-same commitments. Not all of that is necessarily the cabinet secretary's fault. I have no doubt that rising fuel prices and the chill economic wind have made matters that much harder for local authorities. Like other members, I have cast my mind back to last year's debate on the subject. When one strips away all the rhetoric about the historic concordat  and the best-ever settlement, a considerably different picture emerges. I will illustrate that by looking at SNP-led West Dunbartonshire Council. In year 1, its budget increase was 3.4 per cent, which was the lowest increase for any local authority in Scotland, although the area has significant problems with deprivation. There is also clear evidence of additional costs on education and social work if we are serious about lifting children out of poverty. The settlement was not sufficient. In year 1, the 3.4 per cent increase meant cuts of almost £4 million in front-line services and increased charges for day care for adults with learning disabilities, home helps and community alarms—and more. In year 2, the rise is projected to be 4.09 per cent, and the conservative estimate of the projected deficit is £6.266 million.

In a second. When the increased cost of fuel and new policy pressures are added in, the deficit may reach £7 million or £8 million. The consequence of all that is more pressure on budgets, cuts and increased charges. Year 3 is even worse: the rise is projected to be 2.86 per cent and the deficit is estimated to be £7.7 million. No wonder the Government does not want to publish the figures.

I am happy to have another debate with the cabinet secretary about that, but the cuts that I mentioned are happening now, on his watch. There are people without services now as a consequence of the decisions that he is taking. I ask him which services in West Dunbartonshire should bear the brunt of the cuts that are happening now—social work or education? Will there be reductions in teacher numbers? Will our children need to supply their own jotters and textbooks? What about the commitment to reduce class sizes? I genuinely do not know the answers. Last year, West Dunbartonshire Council considered closing primary schools, libraries, community education centres and child care centres. It considered removing free milk, abandoning breakfast clubs and reducing early interventions. In social work, it considered increasing home care charges, closing residential  homes, reducing day care services and reducing its welfare rights team, which helps some of the poorest people in our society. That gives us an idea of where it is likely to look again. As the cabinet secretary pointed out, there is now a different relationship with local government. There is the historic concordat. However, it translates as, "The SNP won't tell you what to do, but the cuts and the consequences are all yours, local government." I turn briefly to Argyll and Bute Council, which will also have a deficit—it will perhaps not be of the magnitude of its neighbour's deficit, but it will not be far off. Again, the consequences will be cuts to services and increased charges. However, the situation in Argyll and Bute is serious now—not next April, but today. Older people in their 80s and 90s—some suffering from dementia and a number living alone—are being denied a service by the council. The official line is that care is being prioritised. "We have a framework," social work tells me, but the framework is not about prioritisation. It is purely and simply about rationing. Employees tell me that there is a moratorium and there are budget restrictions. They say, "Don't worry. It's belt-tightening." However, it does not matter how it is described. The outcome is that old and vulnerable people are being left without appropriate care. That cannot be right. The cuts are real. They are happening to real people. Yesterday, the response to that from the Tories, in the shape of Derek Brownlee, was to stick up for their new pals, the tartan Tories. Perhaps when Derek Brownlee was riding to the defence of John Swinney in the Daily Mail , of all places, he should have stopped to think for a moment about the people who are affected. Many moons ago, I used to work in local government, and I still have many colleagues there. They tell me that things are serious, and I believe them. My concern is not just about the cuts that will be required as a consequence of the settlement. Councils are also reporting that they are losing income. Examples include a reduction in planning fees due to the current economic climate, and a reduction in capital receipts, which is leading to a restricted capital investment programme. What we need is for the Scottish Government to stop blaming everyone else and deal with the challenges. I have considerable respect for John Swinney, but simply trotting out the old mantra of "It wisnae me" will not do. The cuts are happening now. At the very least, the cabinet secretary must reassess and reprioritise the requirements that are being placed on local government, or his historic  concordat will deserve to be consigned to the dustbin of history.

Is it not the case that there are both cash and time-releasing savings for the United Kingdom but only cash-releasing savings for Scotland, with the consequence that our public services are suffering real cuts now?

I am sure that the cabinet secretary agrees that those are pipeline projects. He has made several announcements, but not one project has been approved and no contract has been signed since February 2008. That was the point that was made, to which the cabinet secretary has no answer.

I believe it was Confucius who said, "May you live in interesting times." Some regard that as a curse, but it certainly has a predictive quality when we consider the current economic climate. For the SNP, these perhaps will be interesting times. John Swinney said—quite rightly—that the Scottish economy was his party's number 1 priority. I have no doubt that he is sincere, but it is a responsibility of this Parliament to consider the actions that are being taken and the resources that are being made available. No one in this chamber would disagree that the two priorities that we should adopt are, first, to stimulate the economy, and secondly, to protect the most vulnerable to help them to weather the storm. We will all be judged against how well we do those things. I have no doubt that significant resources have been deployed at Westminster—yes, to sustain the banks, but also to support businesses and, more important from my perspective, to support people. We have seen the cut in VAT, more tax relief for businesses, the small business finance scheme, mortgage rescue schemes, increases in the working tax credit and child tax credit, and more money for pensioners. I am, therefore, confused by the speeches that we have heard today. The Tories have put forward arguments that oppose all those measures. I was genuinely disappointed  with Derek Brownlee's surreal speech, which contained lots of criticism but no answers. I know that the best form of defence is attack, but it is scant cover for the paucity of the Tories' position.

No. It is simply intellectually dishonest of the Tories and the SNP not to recognise that the economic crisis that we face had its starting point in the American sub-prime market, and that it is not simply a UK problem but a global problem. I ask them to stop navel gazing, please. I turn to the SNP's six-point plan. Wendy Alexander is right—our job is to consider how the Scottish Government can maximise its impact in protecting the Scottish economy and its people. Yet, aside from the acceleration of the affordable housing programme, there has been no shift in resources to support the implementation of the six-point plan. Not a single new penny has been allocated to it since it was first announced in August. Furthermore, the £100 million that is being allocated to the affordable housing programme is only a third of 1 per cent of the total Scottish budget. That does not suggest to me that it is the priority that the Government claims it is. We have heard that only £18 million of that money has been spent so far and that, land acquisition being the priority, it has not delivered a single job. I am genuinely grateful for today's announcement about the reprofiled capital spending. Nevertheless, I am concerned about the detail of the cabinet secretary's comments, and I would welcome clarification on them. He stated that £100 million will be provided to local government over the next two years. Is that to be spread across 32 local authorities? If so, the impact—as we would all acknowledge—will be too diluted. If, however, it is to be used to accelerate targeted capital projects, I look forward to seeing a new Dumbarton academy—something for which I have argued for a number of years. I have a second suggestion. We all recognise that immediate action needs to be taken to help homeowners. Two people who are threatened with repossession have contacted me in the space of two weeks—more than have contacted me in the rest of my entire time in the Parliament. I ask the cabinet secretary to consider the cross-party plan and implement pre-repossession protocols. I ask him to regulate more tightly sale-and-lease-back schemes and to encourage shared equity as an alternative to outright repossession. If he does those things, he will get the support of all members.

No. I am just coming to Bob Doris. I ask him to sit down. My third suggestion relates to the provision of advice and assistance—the sixth point of the six-point plan. The Barnett consequentials of £11 million included £1 million to expand such advice. I ask the cabinet secretary to consider allocating that money in full—and, if possible, more—to the network of citizens' advice bureaux, money advice centres and credit unions, which have a key job to do in helping those who are in distress. Again, all members would support that. This afternoon, we have heard dire warnings from the Tories and the SNP, which, aside from comments about the apparent sartorial elegance of Alex Johnstone in a former age, sounded like single transferable speeches from the whinge school of politics, tending to be full of grudge and grievance. I say to Bob Doris that we never cut the budgets for supporting communities, we increased them. However, the SNP's record in government has been to cut them, especially those that support the most vulnerable.

No. I am in my last minute. At times, frankly, it sounded as though the SNP and the Tories were arguing that we should do nothing. I do not think that I heard one suggestion from the Tories as to how we should move forward to protect the Scottish economy. The jury is out on what the cabinet secretary will do now. He does, indeed, live in interesting times. Protecting the Scottish economy is the challenge that we all face and to which everyone in the chamber has a responsibility to rise.

It has been cut.

I start by thanking all members for their contributions to the debate and for their kind comments. The issue has been one not just for me but for several members before me. I recall Duncan McNeil holding a members' business debate on baywatch—the campaign and not the television programme, I hasten to add, although we were slightly confused for a few minutes when he announced it. I also recall the Equal Opportunities Committee inquiry in 2006 into disability and transport, education and lifelong learning. We have done the work together as a Parliament, rather than it being just about me.  I will try to pick up on all of the points in the debate, although I apologise in advance if I do not manage to cover them all. I am happy to talk to members in the days and weeks to come. I associate myself entirely with Johann Lamont's remarks about why we should pass the bill and, in particular, on the funding of organisations such as Fair Deal. They have campaigned long and hard for the rights of disabled people, not just in a philosophical way but in a practical way that has made a real difference to them. It would be a shame if their funding was threatened. Let me proceed to the substantive points that members have made. Duncan McNeil, John Wilson and several others mentioned the blue badge scheme. I am pleased to note that the UK Government has announced an overhaul of the scheme in England. Measures include the immediate confiscation of misused badges, a £10 million data-sharing system to crack down on badges that have been stolen or forged, and the use of new technologies, such as barcodes, from which I believe we could learn. However, we should not conflate the two issues of the blue badge scheme and the abuse of disabled parking. Rather than attempt to explain that myself, I will quote directly from the evidence to the committee of the Equality and Human Rights Commission: "We must make a clear policy distinction between the issue of tightening up the blue badge scheme to make it less open to fraud and misuse and dealing with people who persistently make fraudulent use of blue badges, and the issue of people's choices about how and where they live their lives being curtailed because the number of designated parking spaces is inadequate."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee ,  2 September 2008; c 1068.] I recognise that there is abuse of the blue badge scheme, and members throughout the chamber will welcome the minister's comments about working alongside the UK Government to ensure that we crack down on that abuse in Scotland. I thank the minister for the Government's support. Regrettably, the bill does not ban big, flash cars. The minister may want to consider amending the bill at stage 2 to do that, but the bill currently unites the chamber and I would not want him to upset the nice balance that we have achieved. A couple of aspects of the paper from the Society of Chief Officers of Transportation in Scotland suggest to me that the paper is perhaps not as robust as we need. I will deal with cost and—if I dare—I will start with the painting of lines. For Perth and Kinross Council, that costs about £30, compared with Glasgow City Council, which gave evidence to the committee that it costs £66 to paint lines. That figure has now risen to £87 per  bay in the SCOTS paper—I offer to procure paint for local authorities as they are clearly being overcharged. Equally, the paper makes no mention of income. We know that enforcement in decriminalised areas generates a surplus, so we need to treat the latest piece of information with the critical capacity that members have. It would be easy for me as an Opposition member to tell the Government to give councils a blank cheque, but I think that it is incumbent on the Parliament to secure value for money, so we should be critical in our approach. Like David McLetchie, I believe that councils should take a positive approach to encouraging private car park owners, but contacting the owners by letter is our minimum expectation. I take as a compliment the fact that the minister believes that I alone can negotiate with COSLA on the Government's behalf. However, the Scottish Government is the paymaster and has thousands of civil servants who are much more skilled than I am, so I respectfully suggest that it take the lead, as the committee recommended. I am more than happy to work with it to ensure that we drive down the figures so that they are more robust.

I have no doubt that we are on the same side but, as I said, I take it as a compliment that the minister thinks that I am more able to negotiate with COSLA than the entire Scottish Government and all its civil servants. I do not want us to divide on that, but it merits further discussion on how to move forward. I will stick with costs for a moment, because many members raised that issue. The example from Fife is not imaginary; it is a real cost of £119. Fife Council subsequently confirmed it again. Therefore, members must ask themselves why there is such a disparity. If Fife Council can create a disabled parking space for £119, we need to understand why other local authorities cannot. David McLetchie gently suggested that some were perhaps overegging the pudding. I ask members to remember the claim that it would take two men in Highland Council 12 years to identify their 400-odd bays as opposed to two men in Glasgow one year to do 4,500. The Parliament needs to examine carefully what it is being told. Patricia Ferguson mentioned the size of bays. When they become enforceable, bays will be subject to minimum standards, which is a helpful consequence of the bill.  On fines, we are using the existing enforcement regime, which is a matter for the local authorities and courts. In the main, fines are £60 but reduce to £30 if paid within two weeks. It is worth pointing out that, under the legislation that provides for those fines, the courts can apply penalties of up to £1,000. Mary Mulligan and Patricia Ferguson discussed awareness. I agree with them on that and I hope that the Government will run a public information campaign, as it does for many other issues. I am happy to discuss with the minister how best we do that. I will reflect on Michael Matheson's comments about consistency of approach. He is right about that. He will be pleased to know that the bill will deal with Falkirk Council's restrictions on advisory bays and that regulations will apply at all times. I was going to say that I was conscious of time, but I have more time, so I will keep going.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Michael Matheson highlighted two constituents of his who are both blue badge holders but only one of whom is getting a disabled bay. I know from casework that that happens elsewhere and am keen to promote consistency, so I would be happy to discuss the matter with him. Bob Doris raised the expectation that there will be reactive enforcement in residential areas but rightly pointed out that there would be proactive enforcement in public areas. I thank the non-Executive bills unit, which does a lot of work behind the scenes that helps members' bills get this far. I also thank all the organisations that helped to shape the bill but that I did not have time to mention earlier: Inclusion Scotland, Leonard Cheshire Disability, Fair Deal, the Profound and Multiple Impairment Service, COSLA, various councils, including West Dunbartonshire, which have shaped much of my thinking, Asda, the Braehead shopping centre, National Car Parks and many more besides. The bill is a simple measure with the potential to make a huge difference to the lives of disabled people. I hope that, tonight, the Parliament will take an important step forward for disabled people in Scotland by agreeing to the general principles of the bill.

Does Jim Tolson accept that Glasgow City Council probably has the most advisory disabled parking bays and already has a database that identifies where they all are?

It gives me great pleasure to open the stage 1 debate on the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill. I refer members to my entry in the register of members' interests, because Asda, which I will mention later, has sponsored Christmas card competitions for me. The long journey to get to where we are today started with a constituency case more than four years ago. My constituent was a disabled driver who, due to the nature of his disability, required to park in the marked disabled bay outside his front door in order to access his home. Let me introduce you to his neighbour—a man who, for reasons best known to himself, decided that he should regularly park in the disabled bay. He caused untold misery for my constituent, who became afraid to leave his home in case his bay had been taken by the time he got back. Naturally, I asked the council to help, but there was nothing it could do. I asked the police to help, but equally there was nothing they could do. The bay was advisory, so they were unable to enforce it. Not one to be deterred, I put the neighbour on the front page of the local newspaper for two weeks running, but still he would not move. Clearly, it was time for something else to be done. Throughout the time I was making enquiries, and during the consultation on and the development of the bill, I was inundated with people's stories and experiences. I will share just two of them, or we will be here all night, but the two stories are indicative of the problems that disabled drivers face. They come from Nan McMurdo, whose husband Ian is a former colleague. Nan is about to park in the last remaining disabled parking bay outside Tesco. A young guy shoots into the space in his bright red BMW. She lowers her window as the young lad sprints gleefully from his Beemer, and she explains that she really needs his space, to which the lad responds with the quite magnificent, cheery expression, "Sorry, missus. I'll no be a minute. I'm just going for a loaf." The next story is on Nan's birthday. They have arrived at a local hotel to celebrate. The only  disabled parking space at the front door is occupied by a big, flash car, and the nearest available space is some 200m away. Ian goes into the hotel to ask politely whether the car could be moved. The hotel receptionist replies, "Aw naw, sir. That's the manager's motor. Did ye no recognise the number plate?"

I am happy to take that point on board. I agree up to a point. However, at the moment, it is clear that there are not too many disabled parking bays, because disabled people are not able to park in designated bays. If we have a new culture that ensures that there is enforcement, perhaps spare places will indeed be available. We often see people jumping into the supermarket just to collect a paper. When it is raining, we see people trying to get as close as possible to the door so that they do not get wet. Whatever the reason, the consequences for a disabled person of not being able to access a suitable parking space can be severe. As Eleanor Hind from the Fair Deal transport working group put it quite succinctly to me, "If you want my disabled parking space, please have my disability too." Some have suggested that the problem is really quite marginal. One comment that I confess left me slightly bemused was in a paper to the Scottish Government by the Society of Chief Officers of Transportation, which said: "the current system of advisory disabled parking bays works well and is cost effective and there is little evidence of significant abuse of the system". That, however, is not the real, everyday experience of disabled people. Let us consider some of the evidence. In a recent survey, the baywatch campaign found that one in five disabled bays in supermarkets was being abused; a mystery shopper exercise conducted by Capability Scotland put the figure higher, at 44 per cent; and a survey conducted by the previous Scottish Executive suggested that 44 per cent of all designated parking bays were being abused.  This is therefore not a marginal issue. Of the 1 million disabled people resident in Scotland, 96,000 are registered wheelchair users and almost 230,000 are registered blue badge holders. At present, almost 85 per cent of disabled parking bays are advisory, which means that anyone can park in them without risk of being penalised. Local authorities simply rely on other drivers' goodwill not to park in designated places. This essentially simple bill, which aims to prevent parking places for disabled people from being occupied by those who do not need them and are not entitled to use them, draws on existing road traffic and parking procedures and requires councils to be proactive in their approach to managing disabled parking. It is important to set the proposal in a wider context. Disabled parking provision must be improved in three ways: first, by preventing the abuse of disabled parking bays; secondly, by reforming the blue badge system to stop its abuse; and, thirdly, by improving the process for local authorities. The bill attempts to make a small contribution by delivering on the first of those three counts, but it is for the Scottish Government and the UK Government to deal with the other two. Frankly, such matters are too complex for the stuff of a member's bill. The clear and simple fact is that the abuse of disabled parking is a quality-of-life issue. The problem is profoundly upsetting for the disabled people who experience it and we can—and must—solve it. We can no longer ignore the overwhelming sense of injustice, frustration, powerlessness and, yes, anger that is out there. That sense comes not just from the disabled community. As a result of the volume of weekly customer complaints that it was receiving about disabled parking abuse, Asda was spurred on to set up its own enforcement regime, which duly received an unprecedented 93 per cent approval rating. Customers were telling Asda, "It's not just that I agree not to abuse the spaces—I also think nobody else should abuse them". How would members feel if the disabled space in front of their house were continually blocked by a driving instructor who was using it to let clients practise their reversing? Is that a hypothetical example? I think not. What of the frustration—fast becoming fury—that they would feel if their space were to be pinched by an able-bodied neighbour and they were forced to drive around for two hours before a spot near enough to home came up? The extent of this problem is well documented. In all, the bill does 10 basic things that link directly to the right of disabled people to be treated equally. It places a duty on councils to promote proper use of disabled parking places; prevents them from creating more unenforceable on-street places; and requires them to identify all on-street  disabled places and assess whether they are suitable to be made enforceable. The bill also standardises the application process for new on-street disabled bays across Scotland and requires councils to identify all off-street disabled parking places that they manage and, where appropriate, to begin the process of making them enforceable. In many ways, that is the nub of the issue. What is the point of designating spaces for disabled people if there is no power to enforce them? The Local Government and Communities Committee heard evidence of the scale of the abuse that, as a result of which, Leonard Cheshire Disability concluded: "the age of just relying on politeness has ended and the age of enforcement has come." The bill also stipulates that councils proactively contact car park owners to seek an arrangement to promote enforceability. It requires councils to contact developers of land to seek such an arrangement where new parking is planned. If the owners do not want to come under the local authority's enforcement powers at that point, the council must make contact again in two years to encourage them to adopt enforcement measures. In addition, the bill requires councils to report to ministers on their performance under the legislation and, in turn, it requires ministers to report to the Parliament. Will the bill work? Yes, because, in short, it introduces enforceability to the overwhelming majority of disabled parking places when 85 per cent are currently unenforceable. So the driving instructor, the thoughtless neighbour and those who are determined to abuse those parking places should watch out. Enforcement is the key. The bill is that simple. It will use existing enforcement regimes—civil and criminal. Whether it is enforced by the police or by local authority traffic wardens does not really matter, because it will be enforced. People's attitudes change when education and awareness-raising alert them to the consequence that their actions have for disabled people. For those who persist, a fine will change their behaviour. The recent and rapid success of Asda's scheme, and schemes such as the one at Braehead shopping centre, are testament to what we can achieve. Within a week of Asda commencing its enforcement regime, it reported a 60 per cent improvement in the availability of disabled bays. Frankly, that is astonishing. Let me touch briefly on finance—I am sure that I will have to return to it. I am content with the committee's recommendation that, should my bill be passed, the Scottish Government will negotiate  with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities over the costs of implementing the provisions. I stand by the robustness of the £1.7 million figure, based on the information supplied by local authorities. I invite the chamber to consider some of the wide disparities in costings, and I will give two examples. Highland Council indicated that it would take two men 12 years to identify where its 400 or so disabled parking spaces were and to promote a traffic regulation order, yet it would take two men from Glasgow one year to do over 4,000 spaces. Perhaps it is something in the water. Why does the process of designating a bay cost £119 in Fife and £466 in Glasgow? I confess that the higher cost of paint in Glasgow remains a mystery worthy of Arthur C Clarke. There is clearly much to be gained from sharing good practice to secure best value. Before I finish, I express my gratitude to all the organisations that have supported my bill. Given that I am running out of time, I will not thank them individually. I also thank the many individuals, disabled or not, who have voiced their support and flooded my constituency office with postcards. I thank in particular the people who have helped me from the start of the process: Liz Rowlett of the Scottish Disability Equality Forum; Alistair Watson of Strathclyde partnership for transport; Jim MacLeod of Inclusion Scotland; and Euan Page of the Equality and Human Rights Commission. They have helped to shape the bill. I thank the Local Government and Communities Committee, which gave robust scrutiny to the bill. I am not sure that I should say that I enjoyed our sessions, but I did. Of course, I also thank the non-executive bills unit, which has held my hand throughout the process—do not let go, because it is not over yet. Finally, I thank my staff and my two interns, Scott Smith and Julia Floren, who have vanished under the sea of postcards that people have sent in. Let me draw to a close with the words of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, which wrote in evidence to the committee that the bill "represents a straightforward, practical and cost effective means of making a real difference to the lives of disabled people across Scotland, removing a persistent barrier to disabled people's participation in society." In other words, this is unambiguously the right thing to do. Such opportunities are rare in politics and ought not to be missed. I hope that, come decision time, the whole chamber will unite so that we can take a small but important step in the right direction for disabled people in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill.

Will the minister give way?

In the short time that is available to me, I will deal with the assertions in the SNP amendment. The politics of  assertion that is practised by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing is no match for facts and evidence. Her statements hide a very different picture. The SNP's first assertion is: "the NHS has received a fair share of the financial settlement and ... the Scottish Government is increasing spending on health in Scotland". Now for the real facts as opposed to Nicola Sturgeon's spin. The Scottish budget is rising by 1.8 per cent in real terms, but the SNP's allocation to health boards is only 0.5 per cent, so the SNP has chosen to spend less. This, at a time when spending is rising at a higher rate south of the border. Allocations to individual health boards are also poor, at only 3.2 per cent, and with inflation outstripping the provision of 2.7 per cent, there are real pressures. Indeed, the rate of increase in funding for the NHS in Scotland is so low that we need to go back to the days of Michael Forsyth in the Scottish Office to witness anything comparable. I seem to recall that his nickname was Scissorhands, because of the cuts over which he presided.

That was more of a speech than an intervention. I point out to Nicola Sturgeon that I expect her, as the minister in office 18 months on, to reflect the circumstances and the economic climate that is causing the problems that health boards are experiencing. I move on to SNP assertions two and three. The amendment proposes that we commend "the NHS's record in achieving efficiency savings linked to good quality care". On the face of it, who could disagree with that? However, freedom of information requests to health boards throughout the country show that cuts are being proposed to front-line services. In my area, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is making £42 million of cuts this year and £72 million next year. These real, tangible cuts are not just about reducing red tape; they will affect out-of-hours services, physical disability services and learning disability services. The board's finance director, Douglas Griffin, claims that drastic  measures are needed because the funding provided by the SNP Government is "significantly lower" than it has been in previous years. Moreover, as Mary Scanlon pointed out, NHS Highland is talking about making painful spending cuts, including considering options that were once regarded as "scary or untouchable" because "efficiency savings alone would not be sufficient to address the deficit". We have to stop talking about efficiencies; these are cuts that will happen to services in my area. In order to deliver savings beyond their efficiency targets, boards are cutting front-line services. The SNP's assertion that giving the NHS the ability to retain its 2 per cent efficiency savings is somehow doing it a favour is on the one hand laughable and on the other stunningly complacent. These are real cuts to real services and they affect real people. I am also disturbed to find growing evidence that capital savings are being used to underpin revenue. Such an approach only stores up problems for the future. Finally I want to nail the SNP's defence that, because the previous Government instituted efficiency savings, they are not necessarily a bad thing. A 1 per cent efficiency saving—half the amount demanded by the SNP—in the context of considerably higher year-on-year funding increases to health boards is simply not comparable to the current situation. At that time, services were growing; in the current economic climate, they are being cut. The cabinet secretary is in the driving seat. She cannot deflect blame on to others. She has the power to ease the problems faced by the NHS in Scotland and I ask her to consider suspending these efficiency savings. If she does not, one can conclude only that the legacy of Michael "Scissorhands" Forsyth is alive and well in the corridors of St Andrew's house.

She did take an intervention.

The First Minister will recall the devastating loss of life at the Vale of Leven hospital due to Clostridium difficile. Since then, constituents have come forward to report that relatives have died of C diff when it was not diagnosed and that, in other cases, patients have been discharged carrying the infection, yet tests gave them the all-clear. Is the First Minister aware of a study that was published in The Lancet that suggests that up to a quarter of C diff cases have been misdiagnosed? Will he ensure that the central recommendation of that study, which is that double tests be undertaken in all cases of suspected C diff, is implemented in every Scottish hospital to help to reduce the mortality rate for C diff?

There is much to agree with in the aim of ensuring that the rights of patients are uppermost in the minds not only of the health service but of us all. Like others, I support the principle of a mutual NHS, co-owned by the Scottish people and NHS staff, and I sign up to the principles that the cabinet secretary  outlined. However, she also said something that I have heard before, which is that patients should be at the centre of the NHS. Those words have been said by successive Governments and ministers, and give shape to an aspiration that we all share. However, what that means in practice—in ordinary, everyday life—can fall far short of our expectations. I am grateful, as I am sure we all are, that the majority of patients experience excellent services and care from our NHS. We need to acknowledge the hard work of NHS staff at all levels in delivering that. However, for some, the experience is less than optimal. The test, for me, is how the principles that were set out by the cabinet secretary today, and which will feature in the proposed bill, will work in reality. There are three tests of that. Will the proposed bill improve the quality of service? Will it improve relationships? Will it ultimately improve the experience for patients? Like Cathy Jamieson, I would welcome clarity about which elements of the proposals will be legally enforceable and subject to no-fault compensation. Will it be the charter of rights as a whole, or will it relate exclusively to the new waiting time guarantee? What will be in the charter? Mary Scanlon is right to highlight some of the difficulties that the NHS has experienced, not least among which is the incidence of Clostridium difficile. Will that feature, or will the charter simply be a high-level set of rights balanced by responsibilities? I understand that any legislation is capable of being challenged in the courts. However, given the cabinet secretary's view about avoiding the need to go to court in the first place, is there consistency of approach in ensuring that no-fault compensation applies to that wider area of the charter? I would welcome genuine clarification of that point. I am not persuaded about legally binding guarantees. We have achieved significant improvements in waiting time guarantees over the years without the need for legal redress. Successive ministers have driven down waiting times, and I believe that this minister will do her utmost to do exactly the same. However, the cabinet secretary's signalling of priorities might carry more weight in the NHS system than a loosely defined legal guarantee would. I am worried that there might be unintended consequences, despite the positive intention that I acknowledge underpins the bill proposals. The creation of a framework of rights is something that many in this chamber would instinctively support, but Cathy Jamieson and Ross Finnie were right to ask how that new open framework and mutual relationship will sit with the  introduction of a culture of compensation. Will it lead to more litigation? Is it a charter for lawyers? People are worried about the administrative burden. Will it remove money from front-line services? We all know the tight financial position of some health boards, to which that diversion of resources might not be welcome at this point.

I hope that that would be the effect but, obviously, we do not have a financial memorandum. We look forward to scrutinising that. I am merely listing some of the criticisms that have been made and which need to be explored, and I am sure that the cabinet secretary will do so. More important than those reservations, however, are my original questions. Will the proposed bill improve the quality of service? Will it improve relationships? Will it ultimately improve the experience for patients? I fear that the answers to those questions are, at the moment, unclear. Patients say to me that they want to be treated safely, quickly and as locally as possible. They are ill, and they do not want to spend time complaining and arguing; they simply want to be made better. Christine Grahame was right to say that many people are unable to complain because they are vulnerable or distressed, because they need assistance to complain or because they are too frightened. I welcome the proposal to have a patients' rights office, but I wonder whether the cabinet secretary has given consideration to expanding independent advocacy services more generally. That would have the same effect, but would be more welcome in terms of coverage on the ground. The involvement of patients is central to improving the quality of services in the NHS and their experience of those services. If patients are to be involved, they need information and support and they need to know what choices they have—choices about where they are treated, choices about the shape and design of services and so on—and be able to exercise those choices when they have all the available information. The cabinet secretary will be aware that Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board is consulting on service change at the Vale of Leven hospital. I am interested in her view of the weight that will be accorded to the various views that will come forward. What will be the balance between, for example, the views of clinicians and the views of the local community?  Cathie Craigie raised an interesting point about the fact that the default patterns of service provision that are in place—for understandable reasons—limit people's ability to exercise choice. Can the cabinet secretary indicate whether she will review that? Many of the speeches in this debate, including my own, have contained more questions than answers. Michael Matheson was right, not on his point about age—he and I are slightly younger than other members of the Health and Sport Committee, and I would not dare to suggest that Christine Grahame and others are significantly older—but about vested interests and the need to create a better balance in that regard. In that context, patients' rights matter absolutely. We need a better balance between the rights of patients and the rights of those who are perceived to have vested interests. The best way of ensuring that those rights are given real meaning remains unresolved, however. I am not yet convinced that legislation would be the best way of doing that, nor am I convinced that introducing a compensation culture would necessarily be an advantage. However, principles that we can all support have been mentioned in the debate. I hope that, in doing so, we take forward a new era of patients' rights in Scotland.

I generally welcome the cabinet secretary's statement, which is a positive step in the right direction. However, I have three specific points about the new health scrutiny body. First, I return to Andy Kerr's point about the status of the new bodies, because I am not clear that we got an answer on that. The supplementary information does not tell me whether the bodies are to be agencies, non-departmental public bodies or a mixture. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that it is essential that the bodies are independent of ministers and free from political interference. My second point is about the health scrutiny body's role in the inspection of performance on health care-acquired infections. Will the body operate and report on a hospital-by-hospital basis? Will it deal with health care-acquired infections in care homes? That is an area of substantial and growing concern and I am worried about overlap with the other new body that the Government is to set up, which will be an amalgamation of the care commission and the SWIA. Finally, I have a question about self-evaluation. Although I understand absolutely the merit in that approach, and although Professor Crerar commended it in his report, equally I am clear that self-evaluation is not enough. Argyll and Clyde NHS Board had two successive self-evaluations of its compliance with its HAI targets. It failed twice and no action was taken at a hospital level. We know the results of that. Does the cabinet secretary agree that self-assessment needs to be backed by monitoring and that strong action is needed at the hospital level to correct the systems failure that resulted in so many patients dying of Clostridium difficile at the Vale of Leven hospital?

Like other members, I welcome the bill. The clash of arguments and discordant voices sound in the Parliament many times, but just as often the Parliament rings with the sound of agreement and the quieter but perhaps more powerful murmur of assent. I am pleased that there is agreement on this occasion. As others have said, the bill will remove the obstacle of the House of Lords ruling and provide for compensation to be given, as it once was, to those who develop pleural plaques. In my humble layperson's view, that is without doubt absolutely the right thing to do. I will not attempt to explain in any great detail or to second guess the House of Lords ruling in the case of Johnston v NEI International Combustion Ltd. Far better people than me have considered those matters. I commend to the Parliament Bill Aitken's cogent explanation, the Justice Committee's report and the interesting alternative view that Nigel Don proffered. However, I am clear that, although the judgment relates to England and Wales, there would be an impact in Scotland, in that it is persuasive in our courts. As Bill Aitken rightly said, in the case of Helen Wright v Stoddard International plc, the judgment has had an impact. Lord Uist, who presided over the case, used the House of Lords ruling to conclude that pleural plaques caused no harm at all. Quite simply, we need to fix that. I agree absolutely with the minister that we need to return to the situation in which workers who have pleural plaques can claim compensation. When all is said and done, that is ultimately what matters. I gently suggest to Gil Paterson that he is wrong in his analysis of Westminster and UK Government activity on the matter. I am pleased that there is growing support at Westminster to do the same as we are doing in Scotland. An increasing number of MPs support the introduction of legislation to reverse the effect of the House of Lords decision. Equally, I am pleased that the Ministry of Justice is working on that by consulting on whether changing the law of negligence would be appropriate.

I hope that the member will agree that the issue is to encourage the right action. The bill has come about not only as a consequence of the Parliament, but because of the considerable effort of many outside the Parliament, including the Clydebank Asbestos Group, Clydeside Action on Asbestos, Thompsons Solicitors and the trade unions. Stuart McMillan has been involved, and my colleagues Des McNulty and Duncan McNeil have pursued the issue diligently. When my Westminster colleague John McFall MP is not giving the banks a hard time on the Treasury Committee, he has been unswerving in his support for the victims of asbestos-related conditions, on issues such as the availability of the drug Alimta for the treatment of mesothelioma and compensation for sufferers of pleural plaques. All those people, including the minister, have contributed to our reaching this point today, and they should be commended for that. I acknowledge that there is a different view. I have considered the evidence that insurers have presented. It gives an interesting insight into their thinking, but neither the Government nor the committee is persuaded, and nor am I. Compensation for pleural plaques has been awarded for more than 20 years. Although I acknowledge the right of insurers to bring test cases before the courts and the House of Lords, it is equally the province of the Parliament to ensure that compensation can continue to be paid. I am glad that the minister has accepted Jackson Carlaw's reasoned amendment, because it is essential that we bottom out the costs that are contained in the Scottish Government's financial memorandum. Doing so will allow us to reduce the margin of uncertainty to an acceptable level and will enable dialogue between the respective Parliaments. I agree with Richard Baker that the costs suggested by the insurers appear—dare I say it?—to border on the creative. Equally, there is a divergence on the number of pleural plaques claims. All of that can now benefit from further scrutiny. Robert Brown was absolutely right to outline the impact of asbestos on whole communities. All members probably know someone who is affected by an asbestos-related condition. Those conditions are particularly prevalent in the west of Scotland. Issues arise, such as whether the condition is a result of a brief employment or a lifetime's; which of a number of industries, including shipbuilding, construction and  engineering, was involved; and whether the employment was in the public or private sector. Those are all important considerations, but they are not the central issue that is before us. For me and the Parliament, the issue is one of justice. Des McNulty is absolutely right. Let us not forget that pleural plaques are brought about by exposure to asbestos that can and does lead to terminal illness. That exposure was negligent and people with pleural plaques should be compensated. This afternoon, we go a long way towards setting the situation right.

Does the member not believe that Scottish athletes will benefit from participating in the London Olympics?

I join other members in congratulating Margo MacDonald on her speech. She is, of course, far too modest. She claims that she nags us all into submission, but, as the Presiding Officer, Alex Fergusson, would say, she charms us all into submission. I hope that at 5 pm, the Parliament will signal the strength of support for the 2014 Commonwealth games and our strong desire to ensure that they leave a lasting legacy for this generation and future generations. Glasgow City Council and the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland are to be congratulated on securing the games, whose potential is enormous. For the ordinary person in the street, there is a sense of anticipation, growing excitement and an inkling that we will witness something quite special when the best of our athletes compete with some of the best athletes in the world. For the athletes, the games represent an opportunity to compete, showcase their talents and have their hard work recognised. An unprecedented opportunity exists for Glasgow and Scotland that extends far beyond sport—important though sport is—to the regeneration of an area of the east end of Glasgow. Frank McAveety has already spoken about that, and I am sure that Margaret Curran will speak about it far more knowledgeably than I can. We should consider the recent Olympics and the special Olympics in Beijing. Simply participating in those games was a significant achievement for many of our athletes. There was the glory of winning medals for a few, but people's drive, motivation, ambition and the sense that they were striving to do well stood out. We all shared their journeys through watching our television screens and reading our newspapers—none more so than the young people who were enthused by a new generation of athletes. The names of athletes such as Chris Hoy, Andy Murray and Katherine Grainger could be heard in conversations. My local tennis court down the road, which was previously used intermittently by those of a more mature age, is now enjoying a revival with a  stream of young people, some of whom are clad in white and some in jeans. All of them carry tennis racquets and dreams of being a tennis star. We need to harness that power and energy, mostly for our young people and our communities so that the legacy is theirs. I want to talk a little about some of the extraordinary activities that are going on in my area in West Dunbartonshire. A programme that is on offer through West Dunbartonshire Council's outdoor education service, which Margo MacDonald has visited, underpins the need for holistic education for young people. The project improves their health and wellbeing and provides a grass-roots introduction to a range of sports. It covers children in their very early years—there is orienteering for three to five-year-olds—through to children in primary school, and there are taster courses and multi-activity residential courses for secondary pupils. There is also a summer watersports programme. Young people are sought out who might not otherwise have the opportunity to participate. The programme nurtures abilities or talents that could lead to a vocation in sport and the pursuit of excellence. The country might find its next Olympic or Commonwealth games medallist as a result of such small grass-roots programmes.

I entirely agree with Margo MacDonald. The programmes to which she is referring are the more choices, more chances pre and post-16 programmes, which are unique. They offer the lowest-performing 20 per cent of pupils in West Dunbartonshire the opportunity to participate in outdoor and sports activities, to obtain qualifications and to move on. The results so far are impressive. There is a 95 per cent attendance record, reduced exclusion records, positive changes in young people's behaviour and a growing sense of achievement in sporting activities. Many have gone on to further education and employment. That is the kind of legacy that we want to see from the 2014 games. We want our young people to have improved confidence, aspirations and abilities combined with the physical regeneration of the east end of Glasgow and beyond. I turn to resources. Ross Finnie was right. We can have aspirations, but we need money to fulfil  them. The money for the London 2012 Olympics has come from a range of lottery funds. The contribution from Scotland is £116 million, not £150 million, towards a total of £1 billion in the UK. There are also a number of dedicated lottery games—the dream number and scratchcards. The UK Government has made it clear that income from those games will revert to general good causes after 2012. There is only one point on which I agree with Jamie McGrigor: that money could be a potential future funding stream for Glasgow 2014. However, serious and mature dialogue is required. The Scottish Government is consulting on the Glasgow 2014 legacy, which is welcome, but I hope that it will send a signal that we need to impress on local government the importance of sport contributing to the achievement of national outcomes, that we need better data to guide and monitor progress, and that we need to develop a Scotland-wide approach to planning and investment in sports facilities. Margo MacDonald is right that there is a lack of facilities. She is also right to point out that facilities are closing in many local authority areas in Scotland. One signal that the Government can send today is that that must stop if we are to build the legacy that we want from the 2014 Commonwealth games.

The minister will recall the First Minister's commitment to match Labour's school building programme "brick for brick". Let me share with the minister yesterday's response from Maureen Watt to my parliamentary question, in which she spoke about the £115 million extra capital this year and for the next two years. When that is divided by 32 local authorities, it comes to roughly £3.5 million each. A new Dumbarton academy—which has not been taken forward by the Scottish National Party—will cost at least £25 million. I have two simple questions. Where will we get the money from, and when will we get it? It certainly does not look as it if it will come soon from the Scottish Futures Trust.

Fifty five people were affected and 18 people are dead. Those are the official figures that indicate when clostridium difficile was recorded on death certificates. It is becoming clear that more deaths went unrecorded. Whether recorded or not, the scale is unprecedented. This is Scotland's, if not the United Kingdom's, worst mortality from C diff. The problem is not unique to the Vale of Leven hospital, nor to the hardworking staff there. The incidence of C diff is rising—there have been outbreaks in Stobhill, the Victoria infirmary, Wishaw, Aberdeen, Fife and now the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley—but what has been different is the response. People have claimed that the problem is caused by underfunding or neglect, yet the cabinet secretary herself has said that the prevalence rates at the Vale of Leven are the same as in hospitals in the rest of Scotland. She has also said that what happened at the Vale of Leven was a failure in surveillance. Going by her own words, the issue is much more complex than such claims suggest. If anyone remains in doubt, contrast the Vale of Level hospital and the Victoria infirmary, which are similar in age and condition. At the Victoria, C diff was discovered one day, the ward was closed the next day and the emergency outbreak control team met within 48 hours. At the Vale of Leven, people were dying and we waited six months before the emergency outbreak team met. That is about monitoring and surveillance. As the constituency MSP for Dumbarton, I have been privileged to work with some of the bereaved families, and I join others in welcoming them to the chamber. I pay tribute to their courage and their  determination to find answers to what happened to their relatives. Make no mistake, they do not seek to apportion blame; rather, the aim is to ensure that we will never again see a repeat of the scale of death that occurred at the Vale of Leven hospital at that or any other hospital. We now have the report from the independent review team. That is a welcome first step but, as others have said, questions remain unanswered. From the families' perspective, it is insufficient: they do not know what questions were asked, what documents were considered or even what people said. The report does not deal substantially with the wider relationships with Health Protection Scotland and NHS Scotland. The families have been clear and consistent: they want a public inquiry. I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary has referred the matter to the Crown Office. It is considering whether there should be a fatal accident inquiry, a public inquiry or any criminal prosecution. Having said that, I know that the cabinet secretary has the power to initiate a public inquiry under the Inquiries Act 2005, to which she referred. It states that a minister can call a public inquiry if "it appears ... that— (a) particular events have caused, or are capable of causing, public concern, or (b) there is public concern that particular events may have occurred." Of course, the matter is not reserved within the meaning of the Scotland Act 1998. There is clear public concern. There have been 18 deaths at the Vale of Leven and many more throughout Scotland. Lessons need to be learned fast. Why should there be a public inquiry rather than a fatal accident inquiry? A fatal accident inquiry would take place before a sheriff, the focus would be too narrow and it could consider only what happened at a given hospital over a given period. The recommendations would not be binding, the inquiry would be adversarial rather than inquisitorial and, perhaps most significant, a fatal accident inquiry would exclude and disenfranchise the victims who survived. In contrast, a public inquiry would be wider in scope, the recommendations would go straight to ministers and the inquiry could propose legislation. A public inquiry could deal with all who were affected, and the fact that such inquiries are chaired by a judge would send a strong signal of the seriousness of the matter. In a former existence, the cabinet secretary called for many public inquiries—I have not always agreed with her—and in government she and her colleagues have initiated a number of them. I hope that she will agree that it is right that the victims of C difficile should benefit from a public inquiry, too.  However, this is not only about the victims; it is about ensuring confidence in the national health service. The problem of C diff requires to be investigated as widely as possible. We need to put in place the right system, the right guidance and the right resources to ensure that we minimise the possibility of such events ever happening again. That objective surely is shared by the whole Parliament. We need an independent inspection and monitoring regime for HAIs in Scotland. If I went on the internet, I could run off an environmental health inspection report about my local restaurant and takeaway, a report about the performance of my local school and a report about my local care home. I could even run off a report about the Vale of Leven hospital tea bar, but I could not do so for a report about the hospital itself. Issues such as whether there is a need for an independent inspection regime are too wide for a fatal accident inquiry—that is the terrain of a public inquiry. This debate is about Parliament's view, not about the minister taking a view. It is about how we move forward to provide answers for the bereaved families, how we support NHS staff and how we provide confidence in our NHS. A public inquiry gives us the basis for doing that.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the national park review will consider possible improvements to the mechanism by which Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park discharges its planning function. (S3O-4035)

I like brevity, Presiding Officer, as do you. However, the cabinet secretary may not be aware of an interesting article in the Scottish Planning and Environmental Law Journal that I am happy to share with him. The article relates to the need for significant improvement in the discharge of the national park planning functions. Some in the chamber would argue that the system is slow and inconsistent and that it lacks accountability. Does the cabinet secretary consider that the planning functions of the national park authorities are properly accountable? Does he believe that only elected members should take planning decisions? What changes does he believe are required to ensure that consistent, robust and accountable planning decisions are taken in national parks?

Explain paragraph 90.

Explain paragraph 90.

The Parliament has waited the entirety of the summer before debating the report from the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. I welcome the opportunity for the Parliament to have its say and to determine the matter. In considering the complaint about Wendy Alexander by a Scottish National Party researcher, I will focus on two issues. First, I will examine the robustness of the report and the consequences for our procedures and, secondly, I will consider the implications for all members of the Scottish Parliament. The central question is whether the donations should be considered as a gift and should therefore have been registered. The committee accepted three key points: first, the member was  right to seek advice from the clerks; secondly, the clerks gave clear and unambiguous advice to the member; and, thirdly, the committee accepted that the uncertainty surrounding the interpretation of paragraph 6(1) of the schedule to the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 was not a matter for which the member could be held responsible. The committee rightly concluded that, because of the ambiguity in relation to registration, there was no breach. Christina McKelvie was a member of that committee and cannot distance herself from that key conclusion today. It being the case that there was no breach, there can be no sanction and, to be frank, the committee misdirected itself on the issue of timing. I want to be absolutely clear about that. If the committee did not find that there was a breach on registration, it could not find that there was a breach on timing, because timing is irrelevant. If one pays close attention to the 2006 act, one will find that section 5(2) states: "Within 30 days after the date on which the member acquired that interest, that member shall register that interest" with the clerks. However, the member understood that the interest was not registrable. The clerks and the Parliament's lawyers advised that it was not registrable and the committee accepted that the situation was ambiguous and did not find against the member on that point. If the Parliament's lawyers were asked today, they would tell us exactly the same thing—the interest was not registrable. Therefore, timing has absolutely nothing to do with the matter. There are lessons to be learned. I trust that, as a consequence of the report, the Parliament's procedures will be reviewed. I invite you, Presiding Officer, and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to consider those procedures, because the report has profound and far-reaching consequences for all MSPs. Indeed, Presiding Officer, we have exchanged letters on that point. On 22 August, in a letter that you placed in the Scottish Parliamentary information centre, you advised that members should continue to have confidence in the advice of the clerks. I do have confidence in them, but it is clear that the majority of the committee members do not and instead prefer the opinion of a Queen's counsel. In the same letter, you note that members should consult private legal advisers. We could end up with at least three separate pieces of legal opinion, which would be a bit like pick and mix at Woolworths. Whose opinion will the committee prefer—my private lawyer's, the clerks' or a QC's?

Not at this stage. The committee is not a court and it should not determine points of law. The interpretation of law is properly a matter for the courts. I am astonished that, on the one hand, legal opinion for the standards commissioner was published in full, yet nothing at all has been published from the Parliament's lawyers. Despite the attempt at an explanation by the committee convener, I find that to be an unacceptable and glaring omission. We need clarification on several matters. We need to know about the status of advice received from the clerks and the provision of private legal advice for members. We need guidance for members who are involved in party elections and clarification of whether the procedures are compatible with the European convention on human rights. There is a considered view from leading civil law firms in Scotland that the process that was followed may be in breach of article 6 of the ECHR, as the committee may not be considered to be a fair and impartial tribunal in determining a member's civil obligations. That has profound implications that the Parliament must consider carefully. I urge you, Presiding Officer, to ensure that that happens. Wendy Alexander has paid a high price for a report that some commentators have described as partisan. Some members may regard what they have done as a political victory, but wiser heads will reflect on the consequences for the Parliament and for democracy. Let the wiser heads in the Parliament dismiss the report, which is unfair, unjust and, frankly, plain wrong.

I thank the First Minister for his statement, but I am disappointed to note that it did not mention  independent monitoring of hospitals and their compliance with measures to tackle hospital-acquired infections such as clostridium difficile. Does the First Minister agree that the current and planned system of self-assessment by hospitals and boards is woefully inadequate? Will he agree to introduce early legislation establishing a robust monitoring and inspection framework, so that we will never again witness death on the scale that occurred at the Vale of Leven hospital?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, I accept entirely your desire to deliberate on the report, but I also point you to the statement from the convener of that committee, which is a matter of public record. I raise three further issues that arise from Margo MacDonald's point of order. First, what is the standing of advice that is tendered by the parliamentary legal service and what advice is tendered to a committee where there is a conflict of legal advice? Secondly, where there is such a conflict, is it expected that individual members should personally fund further legal advice and, if so, what standing would that advice have when an unresolved conflict of legal advice already exists? Thirdly, through your good offices and under rule 1.6 of the standing orders, will you invite the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee to review the code of conduct to put beyond any doubt those items that must be  registered as a gift, given that there are gaps in the code? I appreciate that those are substantive matters and I would be pleased if you could reflect on them and bring something back to the Parliament following the recess.

On 14 February, a Scottish Government official attended a meeting with the Department of Health to discuss the United Kingdom Government's new infection guidelines covering C difficile, which were published in January. On returning, the official urged the Scottish Government to issue new guidelines. In the light of the scale of the mortality at the Vale of Leven hospital—a staggering 30 per cent—why, some five months after that meeting, do we still not have any guidance on C difficile in Scotland? Why, when the Scottish Government was advised by Health Protection Scotland on 14 May of deaths from C difficile in Aberdeen royal infirmary, Stobhill hospital and the Vale of Leven hospital, did it only press-release the incidents at Aberdeen and Stobhill and remain silent on the Vale? I am sure that the First Minister agrees that clarity on this serious matter is of the utmost importance.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given that the motion on the financial resolution has been moved, is it not up to the Parliament whether the minister can withdraw it?

It is not a point of order; it is a motion without notice. I ask that the financial memorandum be withdrawn and that the  Parliamentary Bureau timetables the motions for next week's business.

I associate myself with Gil Paterson's remarks. As the constituency MSP, I welcome the minister's statement and her announcement of an  independent inquiry. It is important for the relatives of those who have died to get answers. Is the minister aware whether Health Protection Scotland advised the Scottish Government of the case of C difficile at the Vale of Leven hospital before 2 May? Similarly, is she aware whether further information was provided on separate occasions in May, before 21 May, about cases of C difficile at the Vale of Leven hospital? The minister gave the clear impression that she was first aware of the extent of the problem on 10 June. Indeed, her spin doctor was going around emphasising that point. We now know that the Dumbarton and Vale of Leven Reporter told her about the five deaths on 6 June. More seriously, on 21 May, was the minister briefed about the multiple deaths? Her Government certainly knew about them. Six people contracted C difficile, of whom four died and two were hospitalised. We must have answers. If the minister did not know, why did she not?

I am delighted that the First Minister listens to everything that I say. Let me capture his attention a little longer and enlighten him: when ministers breached the code in the previous Administrations, they came before the Parliament to apologise for their actions.  We waited 14 months for the new code, and there is much to be welcomed. I am pleased that the First Minister has followed Gordon Brown's example, but it is true that he has not done so willingly. While he dithered, the Parliament moved on, and unlike the First Minister, I have respect for what Parliament believes. The Parliament resolved that it, rather than the First Minister, should appoint someone to oversee the ministerial code. There is a question of trust and, frankly, the Scottish National Party Government does not have a blemish-free record: let us consider Trump, Aviemore, Beauly to Denny, class sizes and lots more beside.

Section 1.4 of the new ministerial code states that an investigation will be carried out when the First Minister deems it appropriate. What circumstances are appropriate? Would any issue on the list that I just gave be deemed appropriate, and if so, which one?

Earlier this afternoon, I raised as a point of order the question whether there is a possibility that the Scottish Government will make an urgent statement on the situation at the Vale of Leven hospital. I wonder whether the Government has considered the matter further.

Never!

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Presiding Officer, you were aware of my desire to raise a question, but I recognise that it is your right to select supplementary questions. My point of order relates to the Vale of Leven hospital. I wonder whether you would consider it in order for the Parliamentary Bureau to timetable an emergency statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing on the outbreak of Clostridium difficile at  the Vale of Leven hospital. It is not just a local issue; it is a national issue. Such a statement should set out the timetable for the investigation to date and the measures that are being taken to control the infection. It should also commit the Government to an independent inquiry.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Minister for Environment will report on the effectiveness of the byelaws applicable to Loch Lomond. (S3O-3615)

The minister may be aware of the increase in the violation of speeding laws since the new byelaws were introduced, especially in relation to jet-skis. However, it would appear that, of the almost 300 speeding violations last year, only one report was made to the procurator fiscal, and we are unclear whether that was taken to prosecution. I agree with the minister that education can change behaviour. Does he agree with me that enforcement has a significant role to play? Will he therefore send a strong signal to irresponsible visitors to Loch Lomond by confirming the need for enforcement action on the loch?

Neither were you.

Will the member take an intervention?

I have to confess that I was saving myself for the cabinet secretary, whose intervention I took. Gavin Brown might not read the newspapers  from India, but in the past few weeks the Delhi Government has decided not to increase the duty on whisky.

Does the member agree that it would be welcome if the SNP Government did a U-turn on the reallocation of £34 million for disabled children in Scotland, who are—as she says—vulnerable?

Derek Brownlee should not underestimate the electorate. It expects this Parliament to get on with its own work and acknowledge that we elect 59 MPs. I understand that Scotland has only one Conservative MP, but I welcome Derek Brownlee's candour in suggesting that David Mundell is a waste of space. We elect 59 MPs to work in the interests of the people of Scotland. Today, they are debating child poverty and how to tackle it, while we are debating something for which we have no direct responsibility.

I am still in my first minute. We would find it unacceptable for Westminster to debate Scottish education or the Scottish justice system. A degree of consistency from the SNP and others would be refreshing, but I do not anticipate it. Of course, the SNP's programme is legislation light—only four bills have been introduced this year.

I want to make some progress. All we have are debates about issues for which the SNP Government has no responsibility. Perhaps it does not want us to look too closely at its programme. Despite what the Deputy First Minister or the First Minister might assert, we have witnessed a plethora of broken promises. The promises on class sizes and school buildings have been dropped. Not one proposal has been made directly by the SNP. The £2,000 home buyer grant has been dropped. The commitment to nursery teachers has been dropped. Before Christina McKelvie gets too excited, let me remind her that not one SNP MP bothered to stay up to vote for the introduction of the national minimum wage.

Christina McKelvie would not take any interventions so I will not give way in return. John Swinney invited us—quite rightly, I think—to compare the UK budget with the Scottish budget, so let us compare what the two budgets do for children, who are the future of our country. The UK budget provides an increase in child benefit so that the first child is £20 a week better off, which will help something like 600,000 families  in Scotland. The £50 a year increase in child tax credit will help 301,000 families in Scotland. Compare that with the Scottish budget: 5 per cent in the schools budget has been cut; 20 per cent in the children and young people budget has been cut; no provision for the nursery teachers that were promised; education maintenance allowance scrapped; no reduction in class sizes; and a failure to match Labour's commitment to new schools. The real contrast is that, with the SNP, we get cuts in services for our children and young people. Like my colleague Iain Gray, I remind members of the comments of Stewart Hosie, who is not in favour of the reintroduction of the 10p starting rate of tax. In the only SNP contribution to the debate this week, he said: "No one is going to reinstate the 10p band".—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 28 April 2008; Vol 475, c 106.] Frank Field, who has worked hard with other MPs—including my MP, John McFall—to ensure that mitigation is provided for low-income households, said: "It has already been an extraordinary debate in that the public have learned something that they did not know before today. It is that no party"— including the Tory party— "proposes the reintroduction of the 10p tax rate." —[ Official Report , House of Commons , 28 April 2008; Vol 475, c 111.] An essentially dishonest position has been taken by SNP members in Scotland and by their friends on the Tory benches. I also understand that, back in 1999, SNP MPs did not even bother to vote on the third reading of the Finance Bill that established the 10p tax rate. Such rank hypocrisy is, frankly, breathtaking. Let me turn to whisky, in which I have a particular constituency—not, as some unkind members suggested, personal—interest, given that the industry is a key local employer. The rise in spirit duty must be set against the background of a decade of no increases. I invite Alex Neil to consider supporting me the next time that I lodge such a motion. Let us also not forget that 90 per cent of our whisky is sold overseas. When the SNP realised that incidental fact, it shifted its attack by suggesting that the duty increase would lead to swingeing tax increases in our export markets.

The evidence so far is entirely to the contrary. I hope that Mr Swinney will join me in welcoming the fact that, in recent weeks, the Delhi  Government has moved away from introducing a planned increase in whisky duty. The Chancellor of the Exchequer made it clear that the rise in duty was a revenue-raising measure that is designed to pay for the additional winter fuel payment of £100 for pensioners over 80 and £50 for pensioners over 60. There is a clear contradiction in the SNP's policy. The SNP argues that duty should be levied on all drink per unit of alcohol, but it surely cannot mean to reduce the price of all spirits. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Kenny MacAskill, is clear that he wishes the price of drink to increase to discourage underage and binge drinking. However, the First Minister's oft-repeated phrase that the youth of Scotland are not bingeing on 10-year-old Glenmorangie is, frankly, facile. The First Minister must know—perhaps he does not—that cheap vodka and vodka-based drinks play a role in underage drinking. He must know—it may be that he does not—that Scotland has a spirits industry rather than just a whisky industry. The industry earns more than £3 billion each year in exports, of which at least a third comes from other spirits. The Government will not solve Scotland's drinking problem with a simplified pricing policy, although that seems to be the SNP's approach. I invite the Government to look abroad—to Portugal, Spain, Italy and France—where there is a mature approach to drinking, with no binge drinking and no drunks staggering around the streets, but the alcohol is very cheap.

I wonder whether Mr Neil will share with the chamber how many SNP members signed either of my motions congratulating the Labour Government. I suspect that the answer is none.

As a matter of fact, my understanding is that vodka, gin and other spirits are taxed at the same level as whisky.

To ask the Scottish Executive to what extent it is meeting its target for building social rented housing. (S3O-3114)

I want to press the minister on two points. First, how many of the new affordable houses are for social rent? Secondly, one month after the start of the financial year, housing associations are still awaiting news of their grant funding. This morning, the minister said that they would receive that news soon. I invite him to say exactly when they will receive it.

It is May.

To ask the Scottish Executive why, in advance of a study by Audit Scotland to establish whether the First ScotRail franchise is giving value for money, it announced the extension of that franchise for a further period of three years without prior reference to the Parliament. (S3O-2916)

The minister will be aware of the anger and disappointment felt at the fact that he failed to consult stakeholders, failed to await the publication of the Audit Scotland report in the autumn and even failed to give Audit Scotland advance notice of what he planned to do. There is undoubtedly plenty of time for us to reflect on whether the franchise represents value for money to the public pursue. I hope that he will agree that the best time for deciding whether to renew the franchise is when we have secured such value for money. I ask the minister to indicate whether he agrees with the following comment: "Whatever else we might disagree on, we should surely agree that, when we spend public money, we must seek value for money. That means not tying our hands."— [ Official Report , 5 March 2008; c 6581.]  He may be interested to learn that the comment was made by himself—yes, by Stewart Stevenson—in the chamber on 5 March.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order for ministers—or, indeed, any MSP—to mislead the Parliament? The First Minister knows that a multi-option referendum is not support for a single transferable vote, which of course is what he said was his policy yesterday, to universal astonishment. Do you agree that that signals his retreat from his own policy of independence?

I wonder whether it is in order for the First Minister to misrepresent the Parliament's decision, which was that responsibility for the administration of the elections should indeed be a matter for this Parliament but that legislative responsibility is an entirely different matter, which should be considered by the proposed Scottish constitutional commission? Does the First Minister recall that that was the majority view of the Parliament when we debated the issue?

Absolutely.

I am sure that members will join me in echoing the minister's welcome to members and staff of the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority. I also welcome the Friends of Loch Lomond and the Trossachs, because the organisation played a key role in the long journey to having Scotland's first national park at Loch Lomond. Without question, Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park is an area of outstanding natural beauty, which is enjoyed by many people—including me—from throughout Scotland and the world. Of course I am slightly biased, because I am proud to represent the area. It is clear to me, as it was when the park was established, that the park is very much a living, breathing space and not a wilderness that must be preserved in aspic. That was acknowledged in the park's four aims, one of which is "To promote sustainable social and economic development of the communities of the area". Such an aim is not common to national parks elsewhere, as far as I am aware. Of course conservation and sustainability are important, but the explicit recognition that people live and work in the national park was greatly appreciated by people in my area. I am sure that Mike Russell will forgive me for focusing on Professor Kay's report, which made an interesting read. Mike Russell commissioned the report, so I am delighted that he has rejected one of its key conclusions, which was that boards should somehow be subsumed into SNH. My comments will provide him with an opportunity to join me in rejecting other assumptions in the report. First, the importance of local community involvement has been ignored. I will share with the Parliament comments made by members way back in 1999 when we first debated the issue early on in the Parliament's existence. The Liberals said: "The success or failure of the national parks will depend on the extent to which we involve local people in their management." The Tories agreed, and said:  "there is a vital need for input from the people who live and work in that area."— [ Official Report , 8 June 1999; c 349-50.]  Labour's record speaks for itself, but I am delighted to say that we were joined by Fergus Ewing, who quoted a shepherd in similar terms. I am sure that that shepherd has managed to impart a great deal of further wisdom to him. Handing the national parks and their management to SNH in any shape or form would be wholly wrong. I fundamentally disagree with Rob Gibson on that. First, it is wrong on the basis of accountability, because SNH is currently accountable to ministers. It is hard enough to make it accountable to me and the Parliament, never mind trying to make it accountable to any of my constituents. Contrast that with the national park authority board members: I might not always agree with them—they will testify to that—but they are accountable to local people, I know where to get them and they respond to requests and complaints. Secondly, the report is wrong on the scope of SNH's role. The assumption is that SNH could somehow manage the national parks when it has no experience of their fourth aim: economic development.

Would the minister like another opportunity to agree with me?

I am delighted to hear that the minister does not favour that option but, if we look at the narrative of the report—I have taken time to read it, given that the minister commissioned it—it is clear that it is Professor Kay's favoured option. We need to remind ourselves that SNH has no current role in economic development, which is a key plank of the national parks, no experience in it and no capacity to deliver on it. I am delighted that the minister and I are at one on that.

No, indeed not. Thirdly, in case there was any doubt, in Loch Lomond and the Trossachs, the national park authority is the planning authority, so Professor Kay's suggestion would have SNH in charge of planning too. What then for local accountability and what about the potential conflict of interest? Michael Russell is indeed wise to reject all that, because it is fundamentally flawed. Of course we should review the efficacy of national parks—although I have to say to Nigel Don that mind maps from Jim Mather are not really the answer—and the review should take into account the lessons learned from the operation of the national parks to date. The issue is not the size of the boards. The Parliament agreed that it wanted national representation, local council representation and direct elections for local people. We wanted that balance and agreed that we needed expertise and local knowledge working together. I say to the minister that that has worked and, as one of his members said—if he will not listen to me, he should at least listen to Nigel Don—if it ain't broke, don't fix it.

Excellent; keep saying it.

The important point is surely not the size of the board, but how effective it is and what it delivers. Does the member agree that some of the conclusions that were drawn in that report—and, in particular, some of the numbers that were used—are inaccurate?

Surely not.

I join others in congratulating Trish Godman on securing the debate. Wheelchair services have been the subject of motions—Trish Godman has run with several in the past—petitions and even a Government review. However, like her, I do not think that we have gone far enough in achieving what can be described as even just a good service. I associate myself with Trish Godman's remarks that the debate should unite the chamber. It is neither about having a go at the minister nor about looking again at what the problem is. We have had the review and identified the problem; the debate is about fixing the problem and providing solutions. The independent review of NHS wheelchair services identified the clear need to invest more resources, to reduce waiting times and ultimately to improve the service. The previous Executive invested £1 million to reduce waiting times for this year. I understand that the Government has invested £4 million for next year and £6 million thereafter, and the money is welcome. Questions have been raised about whether that is enough, but I believe that we need to monitor how effectively the money is used to make the right changes in the service. I echo Johann Lamont's call for a national strategy. Only when we bring the focus that the  minister will bring to the issue will we see the change on the ground that we desire. Let me put the debate into some context. People in all our constituencies have had a less than positive experience. The waiting times have been inordinately long, and I agree with Trish Godman that waiting time targets might just bring a much-needed focus. I invite the minister to consider that. Let me give members a couple of real examples. The wife of one of my constituents is wheelchair bound. Her husband describes her wheelchair and the assessment process for procuring her wheelchair or any accessories as a disgrace. He tried for more than a year to find a suitable head rest and neck brace to support her. He was given the runaround about whom to contact for what: the neck brace was the responsibility of one organisation, while the head rest was the responsibility of another. Meanwhile, his wife remained in pain. He is also in a wheelchair, and he has now resolved to buy and repair his own wheelchairs. Clearly, that is not acceptable. In another example, a mother encountered distressingly long waiting times for a wheelchair for her son, who has cerebral palsy. She ordered the chair, which arrived just under a year later. As they had waited for so long, the chair was too small. It then took another seven months for them to receive another wheelchair after an additional request. It sat in the offices at WESTMARC—the west of Scotland mobility and rehabilitation centre—for all that time due to a lack of staff to fit her son in the chair. Again, that is clearly not acceptable. What quality of life was there for that young boy? What is happening is a fundamental breach of people's human rights, so I would be grateful if the minister would consider a national strategy, monitoring to ensure that the additional resources that are being made available are making a difference and finding additional resources on top of that if required. The Parliament is at its best when we put aside our differences and focus on the key issues that matter. This is one such issue. For the sake of wheelchair users throughout Scotland, I invite the minister, with the Parliament's support, to fix the problem.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will fund any additional burdens arising from police pensions in the next financial year. (S3O-2396)

At his lunch with Strathclyde's chief constable, did the minister discuss the  interesting letter from Strathclyde Police's head of finance and resources, which indicates that plans for police recruitment will be undermined because of the Scottish National Party Government's failure to fully fund police pensions over the next few years? A shortfall of £104 million across Scotland is anticipated, which represents a shortfall of £54 million in Strathclyde and, in my area, a shortfall of £1 million in Argyll and Bute and £500,000 in West Dunbartonshire. Will the minister ensure that additional funds are made available to meet that shortfall? Does he accept that, if he fails to do so, extra funding for recruitment might be wiped out and his policy of additional police officers will be in tatters?

It is important to clarify some of the comments that have been made by Joe FitzPatrick and his colleague Keith Brown—and, indeed, that last comment. Is the minister suggesting that somehow my integrity is in question?

Thank you—no is the answer.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given that you are responsible for overseeing members' behaviour in the chamber and their accountability to the Parliament, will you invite the member who has just spoken to reflect on his comments, given that they are wholly inaccurate and inappropriate? I think that he owes the Parliament an apology.

It needs to try to be.

That is outrageous. He is judge and jury.

Does the member agree that never have so many issues about breaches of the code arisen in such a short time? Such issues have brought discredit on the Government and the Parliament.

I live in hope.

In August 1999, when he published Scotland's first ministerial code covering conduct and procedures, Donald Dewar said: "this underlines our commitment to open and responsible government which is fully accountable to a modern, representative parliament." Those words still stand us in good stead. I do not think that anyone in the chamber, irrespective of party, will demur from those sentiments, and I hope that we share an ambition for transparent government that is truly accountable to the people of Scotland. Although the code's provisions are closely based on the United Kingdom ministerial code, reflecting widely accepted principles of good practice, they emphasise openness and partnership with the Parliament to reflect the principles enshrined in the consultative steering group's report. That is as it should be. The code also incorporates the seven principles of public life outlined in the first report, published in 2005, of the Committee on Standards in Public Life. Those very principles of selflessness, integrity, objectivity, accountability, openness, honesty and leadership continue to have resonance in modern Scotland. We sign up to those principles and understand the importance of openness and accountability in order to build trust in Government. However, it is simply not enough to rest on our laurels: more is required. The Scottish National Party Government is reviewing the Scottish ministerial code. I am advised that that is routine and that such reviews generally follow elections and allow the code to be refreshed for incoming ministers. Such an approach is perfectly reasonable and, indeed, desirable. However, I do not recall previous reviews taking such an inordinate length of time. It is now nine months after the election and there has not been a single word from the SNP.  More worrying, in the same period we have had complaint after complaint about breaches of the code. Perhaps I am mistaken but, with the Trump planning application, the Aviemore planning application and the Beauly to Denny power line planning application, a distinct pattern appears to be emerging. Moreover, what about class sizes? We had statement after statement from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and her deputy; parliamentary questions were asked and—after a fashion—answered; and there were even promises from the First Minister himself in the chamber. There was no dubiety; everything was perfectly clear; the SNP pledge on class sizes would be delivered in the promised timescale. Or so they all said. Imagine, then, the genuine disappointment of parents throughout Scotland on learning that the clear advice from Government officials to ministers is that the policy is not deliverable. Did ministers know that before they made their statements? Did they inadvertently mislead Parliament? Have they taken the first possible opportunity, as required by the ministerial code, to correct the misinformation given to Parliament? I suspect that, like the long-awaited new ministerial code, it will be some time before we get any answers to those questions. What about the revelations that emerged only yesterday about the poor Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism?

I was, of course, being very careful about the context in which I used the word. It transpires that the poor minister spoke to the permanent secretary about his £350,000 of shares only on 20 September 2007, after being contacted by a reporter from The Scotsman .

Indeed I will not. That was more than four months after the election. Contrary to the SNP's spin on the matter, the code clearly states that such matters should be dealt with on appointment, not at some unspecified time later. Also, I seem to recall that the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism said that he would set up a blind trust to deal with the issue. Although such a move would have been entirely appropriate, it appears that that, too, has not been done. The overall impression is of a Government that ignores the rules, rides roughshod over expected standards of behaviour and, frankly, plays fast and loose with the ministerial code. It is hardly the  partnership with Parliament envisaged by the consultative steering group; indeed, it is perhaps much closer to the abrasive style of the First Minister, who presides over the code with breathtaking arrogance. We must remember that the First Minister decides on breaches of the code in relation not only to other ministers, but to himself. I invite members to pause for a moment and to see whether they can think of any occasion when the First Minister will find himself guilty of breaching the code. Given what we know of his essential character, I think not. As Patrick Harvie eloquently put it: "There could feasibly be a situation in the future where a first minister needs to be held to account for a more serious issue and the Scottish Executive does not have processes in place to deal with this." Mr Harvie said that in 2006, when Jack McConnell met Donald Trump to talk about investing in Scotland. I do not need to remind Bruce Crawford or the rest of the chamber that at that time there was no live planning application on the table. However, almost a year later, we see Alex Salmond travelling in his ministerial car—indeed, falling over himself—to meet the Trump Organization when a live planning application is on the table. Ah, but how can I forget that Mr Salmond was doing that in his role as constituency MSP? I should also say in passing that I have met the chief planner on a few occasions, but I have never been able to arrange a meeting with him within 24 hours—and certainly not if developers have been involved. In fact, I am confident that no MSP has ever been able to do that. It leads one to conclude that one particular constituency MSP is more important that all the others. In 2006, the SNP and the Tories shared Patrick Harvie's view. Indeed, Nicola Sturgeon herself said: "to discuss specific proposals that require planning permission is clearly prejudicial and, on the face of it, would be a breach of the code." Perhaps she should share that very wise view with her boss. The First Minister will be aware of the Prime Minister's initiative to ensure, as part of a number of changes to the UK ministerial code, the appointment of a new independent adviser to provide advice on ministers' interests and to investigate alleged breaches of the code. The adviser will then report to the Prime Minister. Moreover, an annual report will be laid before the UK Parliament to ensure proper scrutiny of ministerial conduct and a list of ministerial interests will be published. I hope that the First Minister fully supports such an approach.  A modern and progressive Government should have nothing to fear from ensuring transparency and accountability in all that it does. The SNP now has a chance to change its mind in the interests of good government and partnership with the Parliament. The First Minister has said that he will listen to Parliament; I hope that, today, this Parliament sends out a clear signal about introducing independent oversight and improving accountability in the ministerial code. Will the First Minister stay true to his word and listen to Parliament? I want to share with the chamber other people's views on this matter. Theresa May, the shadow Leader of the House of Commons has said: "We need an independent body to oversee the ministerial code". Her opinion is shared by Sir George Young. Finally, I want to share the following comments: "Given that the First Minister is responsible for the enforcement of the ministerial code ... who would undertake any investigation into the question whether a breach had occurred?"— [ Official Report , 19 May 2004; c 8486.]  Our mystery man went on to say: "It might be wise to look at another body to independently oversee their actions. Anything that makes ministers more accountable and any more transparent must be a good thing". Those were the words of Bruce Crawford. I hope that the chamber will reflect on them today. I move, That the Parliament believes that government should be open and accountable; affirms its support for the Seven Principles of Public Life established in the first report of the Nolan Committee and for the further principles governing ministerial conduct as set out in the Scottish Ministerial Code; notes that the First Minister is reviewing the code, in line with practice after each Scottish parliamentary election; acknowledges the increasing calls for independent oversight of the code; considers that a modern and progressive government has nothing to fear from ensuring transparency and accountability in all that it does, and therefore calls on the First Minister to include independent oversight of the Scottish Ministerial Code, taking the new UK Ministerial Code as the starting point, and to bring forward a statement to the Parliament on this when the review is concluded.

I welcome any and every opportunity to debate education and, in particular, building new schools for our young people. Labour has a proud record on the issue. Since 1999, we have delivered 328 new or refurbished schools. As they say in the Irn-Bru advert, that is phenomenal.

No. I am not even past my first minute. If the member waits around, I will take an intervention later. We also committed to build a further 250 new schools, at least 100 of which were to be completed by 2009. I have to confess that I was delighted when Alex Salmond promised to match Labour's school-building programme "brick for brick"—the investment in our schools, which was so desperately needed, was to be guaranteed. It is therefore a matter of great regret that the plans for Dumbarton academy, which previously were in West Dunbartonshire Council's regeneration plans, have now been scrapped. How will the SNP  match Labour's school building programme brick for brick?

The SNP-controlled schools project board was the first on which the SNP casting vote was used, to remove Dumbarton academy from the programme. In the final council meeting—this is a matter of fact—the motion was moved by the SNP leader. The SNP group threatened that if the motion was not passed, investment would be cancelled in not just Dumbarton academy but Vale of Leven academy, Clydebank high school, St Andrew's high school, St Columba's high school and St Eunan's primary school. That was about playing politics with young people's education, which is a disgrace. Just how will the SNP match Labour's school building programme brick for brick? Dumbarton academy was to be completed in 2009. Where have all the bricks for Dumbarton academy gone? How will the SNP guarantee that it is built by 2009? Dumbarton academy is one of Scotland's oldest schools; it was founded 500 years ago. Former pupils include Sir Jackie Stewart—although I gather that he was not too pleased with his time there—the novelist AJ Cronin and Professor John Brown, the astronomer royal for Scotland. The current school building is old and dilapidated and millions of pounds of investment is needed just to keep it wind and watertight. It is clearly not fit for purpose. More worryingly, the school does not have the facilities to meet the modern curriculum requirements for 21 st century secondary schools in Scotland. As a consequence, learning opportunities for pupils are restricted—they have less choice and less opportunity. Rhona Brankin and Elizabeth Smith are quite right: school buildings do make a difference to educational attainment. What about the huge disappointment for pupils, teachers and parents caused by no new investment for Dumbarton academy when, just up the road, there is a welcome new building for Vale of Leven academy and, in neighbouring Helensburgh, a new Hermitage academy is to be opened in February 2008? I say to Christina McKelvie that yes, those schools were built under PPP. She might want to reflect on her less generous comments about PPP, given that her own minister signed off 45 schools to be built under PPP. The minister helpfully confirmed that the SNP will continue to match Labour's school building programme brick for brick, but phase 1 was for  100 schools by 2009, yet the minister appears to have indicated that only 45 schools have been approved. Given that, by her own admission, it will take a while for any new projects to happen, could this be another broken promise? I am happy to be corrected, but will the minister build 100 new schools by 2009? Where have the bricks for Dumbarton academy gone? Will the SNP intervene in West Dunbartonshire Council, as it did in Edinburgh, to ensure that the children and young people of Dumbarton are not disadvantaged? Will she today make an unequivocal commitment to a new Dumbarton academy by spring 2009?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am sure that the Official Report will show that Alex Johnstone said that he wanted to include those on the lower rate of disability allowance in the scheme, not simply that he wanted a review.

In the short time that is available to me, I will focus exclusively on concessionary travel. There is no doubt in my mind that Labour's concessionary travel scheme has delivered enormous benefits for pensioners and disabled people throughout Scotland by building on the 16 separate schemes that operated in local areas, all of which had different criteria. Now pensioners and the disabled can travel for free, from Dumbarton to Dunbar and up to Dingwall—the same set of criteria applies regardless of where in Scotland they live. Such has been the success of the scheme that the number of passenger journeys has grown year on year, as the minister helpfully acknowledged. However, as we have heard, some people have lost out—those who are on the lower rate of disability living allowance, who previously enjoyed concessionary travel in many areas of Scotland, including Strathclyde and Fife. The Tories and the SNP do the Parliament no credit if all they do is seek to lay blame. Adopting that attitude amounts to nothing more than a smokescreen for inaction. There was absolutely no intention to exclude that group of people. When the problem emerged—I will come on to the timing and the cost—after the transitional year to the national scheme, members across the political divide were rightly concerned. Alex Johnstone professes to want what I want, which is the inclusion in the present scheme of people on the lower rate of disability living allowance, but his amendment does not say that, nor does the Greens' amendment. If you mean what you say—I believe that you do—

If the member means what he says, I am sure that he will want to support Labour's motion. Failure to do so will demonstrate a complete disregard for the genuine concerns of people who have learning disabilities. For the benefit of Shirley-Anne Somerville and Ian McKee, let me turn to the timing and the cost. In the first year of the new national scheme, anyone with a local concessionary pass was automatically transferred and issued with a national entitlement card without having to be reassessed. Most people would not have realised that the rules had changed. As those cards have come up for renewal, many people are now being told—often wrongly—that they do not qualify for a card under the new national eligibility criteria. That is a particular issue for adults with learning disabilities, and it is causing considerable distress to them and their families, as members will know from their postbags. We were first alerted to the problem not in April 2007 but after May 2007, so the fixing of it falls to this Government. Enable and Capability Scotland realised that there was a difficulty when people came forward to them in the summer and autumn of 2007. I respectfully say that the issue at stake is not a budget matter—the suggestion that it is is another smokescreen. When the old scheme was rolled forward, it was not acknowledged that a number of the people who had previously qualified for concessionary travel would no longer qualify for it in the future. The minister does not need to wait until 2009 or 2010 to take action; he could do so now. We seek two solutions from the minister. First, we want him to change the law now to extend eligibility for concessionary travel. That would be the right and proper thing to do. Secondly, he might want to consider improving the procedures and guidance to ensure that people who qualify for the scheme get the right advice and support to enable them to access it.

I welcome the minister's administrative changes for those who suffer from epilepsy. Will he tell the chamber how long it will be before he commences a review on extending the other eligibility criteria?

So—three years on.

Will the member take an intervention?

Twenty-four.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I absolutely understand that commitment, but the essential point that the minister made when he withdrew his legislative consent motion was that the amendment acted against the primary legislation. Is it in order to withdraw the motion and bring the matter back to Parliament if inherent in that is a requirement for you to take again a decision on an amendment that the Minister for Parliamentary Business says is not competent? Did you and your team get it wrong—

I ask that question because the minister is withdrawing the motion on the basis that the amendment acts against the bill.

Further to the point of order, Presiding Officer.  To be absolutely clear, would you not rule out exactly the same amendment—which means that this is simply a debate delayed?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I think that we need to set the record straight. The legislative consent motion has been withdrawn because the SNP opposes the amendment on youth facilities and it would have lost this evening's vote. I might add that a similar proposal has won support at Westminster. I understand why the Minister for Parliamentary Business is keen to say how reasonable he is—I think that I counted five occasions on which he said that—but his saying so does not necessarily mean that it is the case. I want to raise four issues. First, is it in order for the SNP to withdraw the legislative consent motion at this late stage, given the business programme that has been approved by the Parliamentary Bureau and the Parliament? Secondly, will you reflect on whether it is in order for any member of the Parliament to move a legislative consent motion? I understand that that is acceptable, so I ask you to reconsider. Thirdly, is it not the case that as the Parliament agreed the business motion, its agreement must be sought for such a motion to be withdrawn? Finally, my esteemed colleague, the Minister for Parliamentary Business, quoted the Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts Bill. Has the Presiding Officer and the business team, on that basis, misunderstood the bill?

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will support the development of a new recreational route, the Loch Long way. (S3O-1629)

The minister will of course be aware of the west Highland way on the east side of Loch Lomond, but I am talking about a proposed new footpath to the west of Loch Lomond which, I am sure everyone agrees, is a truly wonderful new tourism opportunity. I am grateful to the minister for accepting an invitation to meet those involved in the project but, in the interim, can he do anything to encourage Argyll and Bute Council to devote just a little resource to help the development of the project, which I believe would be of significant long-term benefit to the area?

Given that the First Minister has acknowledged that he is responsible to the Parliament, will he listen if the  Parliament agrees to have independent oversight of the ministerial code?

The First Minister promised to match, brick for brick, Labour's school-building programme, which included the building of eco-schools. Will the minister encourage her colleagues to call in the planning application for Dumbarton academy?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given what the Minister for Parliamentary Business has just said, is it in order for the First  Minister to answer questions on the Trump planning application?

I will speak against the motion. Presiding Officer, you are aware that I requested at the meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau that the Scottish Government make a statement on the circumstances surrounding the planning application from the Trump Organization to build a golf course, hotel and housing in Aberdeenshire. My request was not taken on board, which is unfortunate, so I am forced to bring the matter to the attention of the Parliament. At the outset I want to say that the position of Labour members and probably many other members is one of broad support for the proposal. We acknowledge that it represents significant investment in north-east Scotland and could be regarded as being of national importance from a tourism perspective—never mind an economic perspective. Our concern centres on the process that has been followed and on the alleged actions of the First Minister, which have the potential to open the matter up to judicial review, which would be unfortunate, given that the delay arising from any legal challenge would be significant. Our purpose in requesting a statement is to provide ministers, in particular the First Minister, with an opportunity to clarify the confusion that has surrounded the proposal during the past few days. Questions need to be answered. What mechanism was followed for the call-in? Had the decision letter been issued? On what grounds was the application called in? Was the application notified to ministers and, if so, by whom? Was it notified by the local authority, as is set out in the town and country planning notification of applications direction of 2007? What is the timetable following the call-in? Will the application be decided on the basis of written submissions to reporters, an informal hearing or a full public inquiry? How long will that take? Planning professionals tell me that what has happened is "unprecedented". It is therefore essential that the Government is open and transparent about the process and I urge it to make a statement to the Parliament.  It is of the utmost importance that the First Minister should clarify his position. Was he acting as a constituency member? If so, why was a Government car used, and why have comments on the matter subsequently been issued to the press from the First Minister's spokesman and not a constituency spokesman? Does the First Minister not realise that he needs to separate his two roles completely, not just by saying that they are separate but by demonstrating that they are separate in everything he does? Was he really not aware that the application—for a development in his own back yard—was being called in the next day? That is why we need a statement. The Government must do nothing that jeopardises a fair and balanced hearing for the project. It is time for ministers to clear up the confusion. The Scottish National Party's business manager suggested at the bureau meeting that perhaps First Minister's question time would offer just such an opportunity. I remind members that, only last week, three members asked the First Minister about the Trump proposals. That was on 6 December. The First Minister made no mention of his meeting with the Trump representatives three days earlier. I am sure that you agree, Presiding Officer, that the bearpit of First Minister's question time, which generates more heat than light, is not the place in which to consider matters of such sensitivity. The latest, informed suggestion from the Aberdeen Evening Express is that a decision will be made before Christmas. I am not opposed to having a speedier planning service, but such a timescale would be breathtakingly fast. Indeed, one wonders whether due process could be followed in such a short timescale. The project is hugely important to the north-east of Scotland, and to Scotland as a whole. For that reason, ministers should make a statement to the chamber, to clarify matters. I ask them to reflect again.

It is Andrew Robertson.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the welcome conclusions of the Clyde scrutiny panel report, which states quite clearly that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde should think again about the proposals for the maternity unit, the medical assessment unit and mental health services at the Vale of Leven hospital. Will the cabinet secretary comment on NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde's press release, which is either an interesting piece of spin or and indication that the board has not read the scrutiny panel's report? When the cabinet secretary next meets Andrew Robertson, will she insist that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, which is an agency of the Government, fully implements the recommendations of the panel's report?

The Scottish Labour Party, in partnership with others, supported and worked with the Constitutional Convention, campaigned to win the referendum, and brought forward the Scotland Act 1998, which created the Scottish Parliament. As many have said, Donald Dewar regarded devolution as a process, not an event. Let us not forget that the SNP was absent for much of that process. The SNP claims to stand up for Scotland, but there were empty chairs with its name on them during the years of hard work of the Constitutional Convention. Let us not forget that context. We should remember the Scottish Parliament elections. "Don't worry," they said, "a vote for the SNP is not a vote for independence. It's simply a vote for a referendum." They said, "Don't worry. The referendum won't be now. It'll be at some time in the future," so that they could keep the fundamentalists on their back benches in line for as long as possible. I welcome the speeches from Annabel Goldie and the Conservatives. They are right to remind us that the overwhelming majority of the people of Scotland want not to rip Scotland out of Britain, but to build on a partnership within the constitutional framework of the United Kingdom. Nicol Stephen rightly wants Scotland to be forward and outward looking rather than, as the SNP would have it, constantly looking over our shoulder at history. The SNP's only vision is about division and separation. We have heard lots of musical references this morning. I hesitate to get involved, but we heard references to The Clash, to Billy Bragg—I pay tribute to Mike Russell's researcher, because I am sure that Mr Russell has never seen Billy Bragg—and the Strawbs. Let me offer two more. My hero, Ronan Keating, has advice for the SNP's Kenny Gibson, Tricia Marwick and Roseanna Cunningham. He said: "You say it best when you say nothing at all." Also, I say to Mike Russell that we need, to quote the king himself, "a little less conversation, a little more action". That is fitting advice for the SNP. I will stick with Mike Russell for a moment. We are not afraid of the people's choice, but he is. The SNP should hold its referendum now. It should not do so at the fag end of the session of Parliament  because it expects to lose. Brian Adam, wonderfully, let the cat out of the bag. The reason for the SNP's existence is independence and nothing else—[ Interruption. ]

The reason is not social justice, tackling poverty, economic justice or environmental justice. It is one thing only, and that is independence. Rob Gibson's history is appalling. He said that the discovery of oil is somehow linked to devolution. I remind him that the discovery of oil, I think, was in the early 1970s. Is he not aware that Keir Hardie called for home rule all round some 70 years earlier than that? Of course, the SNP was not here then. What have we had from the SNP? A so-called national conversation that appears to be more like a nationalist conversation. It is populated in large part by the SNP's green-ink brigade, who, as we know, are regular contributors to blogs. It is a one-sided conversation and a so-called dialogue with the SNP Government, which is deaf to any view other than its own. David McLetchie got it right—it is "wee Eck's big blether." [ Interruption. ]

I turn to the white paper on independence and the SNP's proposed bill on a referendum. That will not be competent, because it will be outwith the provisions of the Scotland Act 1998. I remind the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing of the ministerial code of conduct. If she is being accurate when she says that the referendum bill will be competent, she should publish the legal advice in full. Does she have something to hide? Wendy Alexander, Annabel Goldie and Nicol Stephen are right. This is an historic moment for the Parliament. The motion is an unprecedented cross-party and cross-border initiative. It places Scotland and the interests of the Scottish people at the heart of working within a partnership with the United Kingdom. It calls for an independent commission that is focused on what matters to the people of Scotland—not simply the constitution, but what devolution delivers and how it makes people's lives better in their communities day to day. Left to the SNP, we will get the politics of grudge and grievance. Murdo Fraser rightly said that the SNP is backward looking. It is more interested in symbols than in improving people's lives, and more interested in flags and fights with the UK Government than in making progress.

The majority of MSPs are interested in making devolution work for the people of Scotland. The SNP, on the other hand, is interested only in itself. I ask members to support the motion.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order for the Deputy First Minister to continue not to address the terms of the motion but to wander on to other subjects?

Will Nicola Sturgeon give way on that point?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Mr Neil is, of course, right. The candidate was Mike Russell. Perhaps we might be forgiven on two counts. First, it is so difficult to tell Mr Neil and Mr Russell apart as they sit together right on the shoulder of the First Minister. Secondly, everyone in the chamber knows that Alex Neil has pretensions to the throne. However, the key point, Presiding Officer—

Indeed I do. The SNP needs to confirm that, in a three-month election leadership campaign, every candidate was entirely self funded—

—and that each of those candidates, including Mike Russell—

—received no donations and no support—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. First, I welcome your announcement in today's business bulletin setting out clearly the way in which alleged misconduct in the chamber will be dealt with in terms of the standing orders, the "Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament" and the "Scottish Ministerial Code". That clarity is welcome. Secondly, I am aware that the Scottish Government is conducting an internal review of the "Scottish Ministerial Code". I invite the First Minister to follow the example of Prime Minister Gordon Brown by establishing, as part of that review, the post of an independent adviser who can investigate alleged breaches of the ministerial code of conduct. That would provide the openness and transparency that are the hallmark of this Parliament and which should equally be the hallmark of the Scottish Government, as I am sure the First Minister would agree. I note, Presiding Officer, that I am not alone in holding that view. In a comment to The Scotsman on 21 September, Patrick Harvie called for changes to the ministerial code of conduct and suggested that part of the solution is for an independent body, rather than the First Minister, to control the ministerial code.

I realise that the "Scottish Ministerial Code" is not a matter for you, Presiding Officer. I hope, however, that the First Minister will take this opportunity to set a gold standard for the ministerial code of conduct. It would be unthinkable for him to agree to a lesser standard of accountability for his ministers in Scotland than exists in the United Kingdom Parliament. Through you, Presiding Officer, I therefore urge the First Minister to seize the opportunity to put in place independent oversight of the Scottish ministerial code of conduct.

I suggest that Kenny Gibson read the press release from the organisations that he named, which actually contains that information. It is a matter of fact. The SNP promised to match Labour's school building programme "brick for brick". However, where are the bricks for Dumbarton academy? This week, SNP-controlled West Dunbartonshire Council removed the school entirely from the schools regeneration project. Thirty million pounds has been wiped out at the stroke of a pen, and not a single brown penny will be spent on any school in Dumbarton. Will the First Minister personally ensure that generations of children in Dumbarton are not disadvantaged by that decision by providing the funds for a new school without delay?

I, too, congratulate Paul Martin on securing this debate. At the outset, I should make it clear that I recognise that the motion very much deals with  Stobhill hospital and that, as other members have pointed out, the same situation applies to other hospitals such as Gartnavel, the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley and, indeed, the Vale of Leven. Maybe, like Duncan McNeil, I should get it out of the way at the start that I was not born at Stobhill hospital. However, my husband Stephen was, so some might say that Stobhill has a lot to answer for. The charge is that what is happening at Stobhill is unfair to patients, visitors and staff. Paul Martin is absolutely right to say that, according to NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, the move is somehow part of a green transport strategy. It has also said that people use hospital car parks as park-and-ride facilities. Indeed, Alex McIntyre, the board's very own director of facilities, has said that car park charges are necessary to address severe congestion. Let me consider those remarks in the context of the Vale of Leven hospital, whose situation is very similar to that of Stobhill hospital. The Vale of Leven is not near a train station or a major bus route; it sits on a hill; and the distance from the front gate to the hospital is about a quarter of a mile. On my frequent visits to the hospital, I have never found the car park congested. As a result, I find it difficult to understand how the Vale of Leven or, indeed, Stobhill could be described as a park-and-ride facility. The health board's fundamental reasons for introducing these charges are clearly not justified in these cases. Many have described hospital car parking charges as a tax on the ill. It is hard enough for a sick person to ensure that they have the right change or for people on low incomes to worry about having to pay £7 for a full day's parking. However, what of those with long-term conditions who need to visit hospital again and again? A local person said to me: "I'm often required to attend the hospital with an elderly relative who suffers from heart problems. I've sometimes been sitting in the medical assessment unit for up to five hours while they treat her. The last thing I want to do, when I'm with a frightened old woman, is leave her and go and feed the meter indefinitely." Like other MSPs, I have also been approached by hospital staff who are genuinely concerned about affordability. Many are part-time, low-paid workers; indeed, a lot of them are women, who, to live their lives, need their cars to meet tight timetables and to juggle work and things like collecting their kids from school. Like those who are served by Stobhill, many people are required to travel to other hospitals for tertiary treatment. What of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde's green transport strategy when it sends people miles for treatment and charges them for the privilege? Using alternative travel  arrangements, it takes two and a half hours to get from the Vale of Leven hospital to the RAH. Clearly in such circumstances it is quicker to take the car. I therefore very much welcome the review announced in September by the Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. I am not convinced that that was down to the efforts of Jackson Carlaw, but in the spirit of generosity we should all encourage the cabinet secretary's actions. Given the scheme's evident complexity—certainly, as Patricia Ferguson made clear, in Glasgow—I wonder whether it is sensible to continue with it at all. I was particularly taken by Bill Kidd's suggestion of fining those who use hospital car parks as park-and-ride facilities. As Bob Doris pointed out, the review reports in a mere two weeks' time, at the end of November. Because I believe in father Christmas, I invite the cabinet secretary to give the communities around Stobhill, the Vale of Leven, the RAH and other hospitals throughout the country a very early Christmas present by wiping out these charges.

I understand that the cabinet secretary enjoys dismissing the comments of Labour members. However, will he ignore the comments of Shelter Scotland, the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland, the Scottish Council for Single Homeless, Scottish Churches Housing Action, and local authority chief housing officers when they say that next year's budget for new affordable homes has been cut by 6 per cent in real terms and that the new Scottish Government's budget figures will fail spectacularly to provide the 30,000 affordable rented homes that Scotland needs by 2011? Are they wrong, cabinet secretary?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that a new school is required to replace Dumbarton academy. (S3O-1129)

From her answer, the minister may not be aware that, only yesterday, the SNP members of West Dunbartonshire Council's schools project board voted to remove entirely Dumbarton academy from the schools regeneration project. The consequences of the decision are that there will be no new school and there will be no investment of almost £30 million that had been promised—nothing to improve the educational environment for children at the school. The First Minister promised to match Labour's school building programme "brick for brick". Where have all the bricks for Dumbarton academy gone?

rose—

May I come back in, Presiding Officer?

I am grateful, Presiding Officer. It is important to correct inaccuracies that are spoken in the chamber. The minister may wish to be aware that the planning committee is not, of course, a committee of the whole council; it involves only a small number of members. Will she join me in trying to seek solutions? Her Scottish Government official, who attended the schools project board meeting yesterday at which the decision was taken—it was taken not by the planning committee, but by the schools project board—said that the Government would be prepared to extend financial close. Will she do so now?

Will the member give way?

I advise the member that the Presiding Officers care about the language that is employed in the chamber. I ask the member, who is evidently confused—along with his colleague Mr Brownlee—if he is not aware that David McLetchie contributed to the Labour motion that is before us? Could he perhaps tell me what rule or standing order has been changed? Does he agree that no motion that is contrary to the standing orders would be accepted by the Presiding Officer? Why are the Tories rejecting the opportunity for debate on the budget priorities? Perhaps the answer lies in the price that the Tories extracted from the SNP for denying the Parliament the right to debate.

That is—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order for the member to mislead Parliament in the pursuit of humour? It was him I was looking for last night in order to do a deal.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take following the recent publication of the Social Work Inspection Agency report into Argyll and Bute Council. (S3O-1032)

I thank the minister warmly for that response. As he is aware, the report contains 24 substantial recommendations that point to weak leadership, unmet need and underfunding of older people's services by the council. The spin that is coming from Argyll and Bute Council attempts to suggest that the report is positive and that things happened just in a time of change. Does the minister regard that as a sufficient response to a report that I consider to be, frankly, dire? Will he intervene to ensure that there is absolutely no doubt in the minds of those at Argyll and Bute Council about the challenge that it needs to meet?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am sure that the chamber agrees that I would not—[ Interruption. ]

I hope that the chamber agrees that I would not at any point want to be discourteous to the Parliament or, indeed, to the Presiding Officer. If that has been interpreted as being the case, it is a matter of personal regret. I would take full responsibility for the inadvertent release of a press statement in my name. I wish to make it absolutely clear to the chamber that, in line with the standing orders of the Parliament, the ultimate decision on whether the statement was heard was for the Presiding Officer, and for him alone. I hope that members and you, Presiding Officer, recognise that I would not abuse this Parliament, unlike some others in the chamber. Frankly, despite Alex Neil's best attempt at smoke and mirrors, there is no getting away from the central reason behind your ruling today, Presiding Officer. That view is shared by all the parties in the chamber, bar one. The Scottish National Party Government has been found out today. It has no regard for this chamber. It appears to have quite deliberately  released information into the public domain before coming to the chamber. That, as you pointed out today, Presiding Officer, is indeed wholly unacceptable.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I welcome your ruling on the statement. In the spirit of generosity, I welcome the attempts that Bruce Crawford, the Minister for Parliamentary Business, made to ameliorate the situation, but—frankly—it should not have happened in the first place. Your ruling was absolutely correct.

The minister will be aware that Scottish Power in particular continues to target prepayment meter customers by collecting backcharges that have arisen through the company's inability to reset meters following 13 price rises. That has plunged many vulnerable people into debt. Is the minister aware that Scottish Power, which contributed €320 million to Iberdrola in profits, is now discriminating between its very own customers? If people live in central Scotland, the west of Scotland or the south of Scotland—in whole swathes of Scotland—they will continue to be pursued for their debt. However, if they live outwith those areas, their debt will be wiped out. Their debt will be cancelled—not on the basis of their ability to pay but on the basis of where they live. That is completely scandalous. Does the minister agree? Will the minister talk directly to Scottish Power and do so urgently—perhaps when he sees the company at his party's conference later this week? Will he urge the company to end the scandalous practice of targeting vulnerable people and discriminating against people in Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that, as so many SNP MSPs are taking up residence outside the gates of Faslane, additional funding for policing in Strathclyde would also be welcome?

We all share those very laudable aims, but what action will the minister take to ensure that Argyll and Bute Council meets the expectations of the Government and the Parliament?

I welcome the debate because it offers a much-needed opportunity to consider the implications of Lord Macphail's judgment in relation to free personal care. I congratulate the Conservatives on bringing the matter to the chamber for debate, but I record my disappointment that the SNP Government did not think that clarifying the policy of free personal care for older people merited Government time.

I do not have time for an intervention. Mary Scanlon helpfully set out the context of the debate, but I want to look into it further. We know why William McLachlan, who is a resident of Helensburgh in my constituency, complained to  the ombudsman. We know why Argyll and Bute Council felt the need to have an unseemly scramble to the courts. Incidentally, the hundreds of thousands of pounds of public funds that have been spent on court fees would have wiped out the so-called waiting list for free personal care in Argyll and Bute. We need to remember that free personal care is only one element of the care services for older people that local authorities deliver. Mr McLachlan had his needs assessed. It was not disputed that he was eligible and in need. The dispute arose because the council claimed to have insufficient money. He was deliberately placed on a waiting list. His family, quite rightly, put his needs first and arranged for him to be cared for in a nursing home. Members might feel some sympathy for the council. After all, it claims to have had no money. However, it would be a serious mistake to feel such sympathy. The council's actions mask the deliberate and cynical removal of funds from older people. Argyll and Bute Council has consistently spent less than its grant-aided expenditure on older people. Put simply, we give the council the funds but it diverts them to other things—£3 million less in one year; £5 million less in another year; this year, an anticipated underspend of almost £5 million. Previously, the council was controlled by the independents. Now, it is controlled by the independents and the SNP. I want to look ahead, because I do not think that it is productive to spend time apportioning blame. I understand that the Social Work Inspection Agency will publish a report shortly that will expose Argyll and Bute Council's failings towards older people. It will point to weak leadership, variable quality of provision, underfunding and unmet need. Older people have been comprehensively failed. Apparently, the report will be one of the worst to be seen in a long time. Ministers must intervene in the interests of older people. I do not think that the SNP is seriously suggesting that it is okay for people to wait for extraordinary lengths of time because a local authority decides to park them on a waiting list and spend the money on something else. However, the SNP had a chance to tell the courts what the Parliament wanted and a chance to protect older people who receive free personal care and those who might enjoy it in the future. Lord Macphail clearly invited the Government to instruct counsel and appear. As others said, he expressed his disappointment that some of the arguments that were made for the Government's non-attendance were trite, and he states that he reached his decision with considerable reluctance. The only way in which the Parliament and the Government can begin to salvage the situation is  to be clear about what the Government expects from local authorities. We should not wait six months for a review—that would mean a further six months of people on waiting lists—but should consider interim measures.

I am in my last 15 seconds. The Government should stamp out the suggestion from one or two local authorities that they will fund free personal care only in their homes and not in private homes. It should examine the funds that are allocated and the funds that are spent, and it should make local authorities live up to their responsibilities. I cannot help but think that the SNP was always keen to tell us that it would stand up for Scotland, but when it had the opportunity to stand up for Scotland's pensioners, it ran away. "Disappointing", says Lord Macphail. I think that he is overly generous. I think that it is unforgivable.

Does the cabinet secretary accept that the delay on the part of Argyll and Bute Council was deliberate and not a consequence of trying to arrange a service?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My point relates to rule 13.3, which was cited by Shirley-Anne Somerville. I wonder whether it is in order for that member to mislead Parliament. I have reflected on your comments and I wonder whether you will consider the matter further. The Labour Party made a clear commitment to funding schools in Edinburgh, yet as I understand it—[ Interruption. ] SNP members themselves might want to reflect on this. Kenny MacAskill, their own Cabinet Secretary for Justice, said in an e-mail to parents that schools in Edinburgh would be funded, but a matter of days later Fiona Hyslop, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, said no. The Labour Party will continue to put children and education first, unlike the SNP.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will support the disabled persons parking (Scotland) bill. (S3O-857)

The minister will be aware of the very real problem caused to disabled people by the abuse of disabled parking bays; indeed, that much is clear from the Government's own research, which was published just last week. It is equally clear that the current legislation is not fit for purpose. Will the minister tell the chamber why the Scottish Government has declared its support for the proposed sunbed licensing bill, which has yet to be published, and the tartan register, which is not even before the chamber—both worthy proposals, I am sure—but remains silent on improving the lives of disabled people in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

We will be delighted if the member wishes to take a further intervention. Does the member believe that the £2,000 first-time  homebuyer grant is an effective use of public money?

Where is Annabel?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. This is becoming a habit—a habit that, I have to say, has been caused by the actions of this Government. I raise this point of order with reference to your good practice guidance note, which very clearly sets out the process to be followed for making announcements to the chamber. In that context, I refer specifically to the ministerial statement on the Edinburgh airport rail link that is due to be heard. I am very disappointed to find that substantial parts of the statement are in the public domain before this Parliament has heard one word from the minister. Members who tuned into this morning's "Good Morning Scotland" will have heard exactly what the minister is due to say and, indeed, The Scotsman on Tuesday was able to tell us, first, that the direct line to Edinburgh airport will be scrapped; secondly, that it will be replaced by a tram line from nearby stations; thirdly, that there will be a new station at Gogar; fourthly, that trains from the west and north will stop at a new station on the Edinburgh to Fife line; fifthly, that trains from Dunblane and Glasgow will be diverted by using a link line between Winchburgh and Dalmeny near South Queensferry; and, sixthly, that rail passengers will switch to the airport to Newhaven tram line at an already planned interchange at Edinburgh Park station to the south. It goes on, Presiding Officer, but I am sure that you will have had the chance to read the statement and those exact phrases in it. That level of detail clearly illustrates that the statement was briefed to the press in advance of its announcement in this chamber and shows the Scottish National Party Government's wilful disregard of members. Presiding Officer, I really hope that you will strongly discourage such gross discourtesy in future.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The First Minister referred to pairing arrangements. As I want to be generous, I will accept that he has not been here for much of the past eight years and so will not know what his party has been up to in his absence. Presiding Officer, perhaps you would like to invite him to reflect on the number of times the Scottish National Party paired with members of the previous Government. What about when Ross Finnie or Rhona Brankin were pressing the case for Scottish fishing or, indeed, during the previous serious foot-and-mouth disease crisis? Of course, the SNP never agreed to any pairing arrangement on any issue. We on the Labour benches are willing to consider pairing requests case by case because, unlike the SNP, we will act in the interests of the people of Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My point is separate and relates to the points of order that Kenny Gibson and Bob Doris of the Scottish National Party raised earlier today. At First Minister's question time last week, Wendy Alexander asked Alex Salmond why the SNP was reviewing the central heating programme, with targeting the likely outcome. Alex Salmond made a truly valiant attempt to twist the facts by suggesting that targeting was not part of the review. I will point out the factual position to the Parliament—a full transcript of the relevant Local Government and Communities Committee meeting is of course available. Quote number 1 is from Stewart Maxwell, who said: "The review that we must conduct should examine targeting and how things are done."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 19 September 2007; c 85.] If members are not satisfied by that, I present them with quote number 2, which is again about the central heating programme. The committee's convener said: "So there are no guarantees for its future in its present form", and Stewart Maxwell replied: "Nothing stays the same forever ... It is entirely reasonable to review it"—[ Interruption. ]

Stewart Maxwell continued: "The programme will continue, but we have to ensure that it targets those who live in fuel poverty".—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 19 September 2007; c 88.] So the SNP is reviewing the central heating programme; it is considering targeting; and it will not say whether all pensioners will qualify for the programme. I am sure that the Presiding Officer agrees that accuracy in the Parliament is essential.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Further to Alex Neil's earlier point of order on his assertion that he made a submission to NHS Lanarkshire's consultation entitled "A Picture of Health: A Framework for Health Service Improvement in Lanarkshire", information from NHS Lanarkshire suggests that four MPs and seven MSPs responded to its consultation and, try as I might, I could not find his name. Elaine Smith, Karen Whitefield and Cathie Craigie responded, as did our former colleagues Carolyn Leckie and Janis Hughes. Margaret Mitchell and Michael McMahon also responded, but not Alex Neil. Therefore, I invite him to apologise to the Parliament for misleading members earlier today.

I entirely support the comments of my colleague Robert Brown. Like Robert Brown, I indicate that we will not oppose the business motion. However, I invite the Presiding Officer to take a wider look at the use of ministerial statements, including consideration of the circumstances when debates may be more appropriate than ministerial  statements, the conventions about the timing of providing statements to Opposition spokespeople and the briefing of the press in advance of such statements.

I think that you have missed out question 6, Presiding Officer.

I do apologise.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to improve social work services for older people in Argyll and Bute following the publication of the Social Work Inspection Agency report on Argyll and Bute Council's social work services. (S3O-402)

The minister will be aware that Argyll and Bute Council underspends on older people's services by a substantial amount—under one budget heading alone, it spends 50 per cent less than the Government gives it. I understand that questions might arise about the quality of the services that are being delivered, too. On that basis, when the report is published, if Argyll and Bute Council does not produce a robust improvement plan that addresses both the funding and the quality of services, will the minister use her powers of intervention to protect the needs of older people in Argyll and Bute?

I am truly grateful for being given time to speak in the debate. It will not surprise the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing or other members to hear that I will talk about the Vale of Leven hospital. I make no apology for reiterating my concerns and those of my community. I will continue to do so until such time as the future of the hospital is secure. I will start with the actions of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. Frankly, its arrogance has been breathtaking. It announced its plans—and they include the wholesale transfer of services away from the Vale of Leven hospital—a mere two days after the appointment of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and on the very day that the First Minister announced his intention to keep health services local. To add insult to injury, despite clear public opinion telling the health board that it had got things wrong and despite the proposals from the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for independent scrutiny, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde confirmed just yesterday its decision to withdraw a range of services from the Vale. Anyone with any sense would have taken their time to reflect on the matter, to look again at the proposals for the Vale of Leven hospital and to consider all possible options. But no, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde ploughs on regardless. Not only are we to witness the wholesale removal of services, of the medical assessment unit, of integrated care—meaning no emergency care at the hospital, day or night—of coronary care and of the community midwife delivery unit, but to add insult to injury the health board wants us to travel to the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley. I do not intend to give members a geography lesson about the River Clyde, but I suggest that they refer to a map. It is extraordinarily difficult to get to the RAH in Paisley from my constituency. There is little direct public transport there. People need to travel for two and a half hours, by a combination of train and bus into Glasgow, bypassing five other hospitals en route. I remind members of the words of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, when she spoke about A and E at Monklands and Ayr hospitals:  "It is my view and the Government's view that, given the circumstances that are involved in these cases—the geography and demographics, the high levels of deprivation and ill health, and the concerns about access and public transport—A and E services at Ayr and Monklands should be maintained."— [ Official Report , 6 June 2007; c 391.]  It will come as no surprise to the cabinet secretary to hear that all that applies to the Vale of Leven hospital. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde ignores the cabinet secretary's approach, however. Time is short, so I will quickly raise three specific issues. The first is anaesthetics, which is key to sustaining services at the Vale of Leven hospital. Just what models did the health board consider in that regard? There is little evidence to suggest that it examined closely the integrated care model that was operating at the Vale of Leven. I know for a fact that the board did not analyse the statistics for the 7,000-odd patients who have used the medical assessment unit. I am told that there is one episode a week that requires the intervention of an anaesthetist. Potentially, that means 52 visits in 365 days. One wonders if there is perhaps a shortage of anaesthetists. There are no such things as vacancies. There are 169 anaesthetists, according to NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde itself. Secondly, I will mention risk. We are told that clinical safety is paramount, and I do not disagree with that. What about the risks for somebody who has to spend more than an hour in the back of an ambulance to reach hospital? Thirdly, and simply, we do not want to have to go to Paisley. Instead, we want a north-of-the-river solution. I associate myself with the comments that Pauline McNeill made about A and E services in north-west Glasgow. I close by saying to Jackson Carlaw that the history of the Vale of Leven hospital is very different. Decisions to remove services were made in the past by clinicians, not ministers. The decision on the Vale of Leven hospital will, in my view, be the first real test of SNP health policy. I welcome Nicola Sturgeon's presumption against centralisation. She knows that I will do all that I can to help. For people in my community, however, she must pass that test.

I hesitate to interrupt the love-in that was going on between the Tories and the SNP. Mary Scanlon's presence in the chamber is, as ever, entertaining. While she was speaking, I was reflecting on the fact that the collective age of the Health and Sport Committee is in the region of 400 years. Its members include Malcolm Chisholm, Christine Grahame, Ian McKee, Mary Scanlon and Ross Finnie as well as one or two of our younger—perhaps I should say less experienced, as the Presiding Officer is glaring at me—members. Given all their experience, I am sure that the policy of free personal care will be safe in their hands. I welcome the comments of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and her announcement of the Executive's independent inquiry into free personal care. I also associate myself with Lewis Macdonald's comments about the inquiry and I welcome the cabinet secretary's clarification. Existing data sources and work streams can provide some answers on how personal care should develop, and such information should be harnessed immediately, so that progress can be made and the experiences of older people in communities throughout Scotland can improve sooner rather than later. I invite the cabinet secretary to consider Argyll and Bute Council, because solutions for the council's area need not await the inquiry's outcome. In highlighting the key concern to older people in my area, I will talk carefully about matters that are in the public domain. Presiding Officer, I am sure that you will guide me if I unintentionally stray into areas that I should not cover. I focus on the reality of being old in the Argyll and Bute Council area. My mailbag is full of stories about waiting lists for free personal care, lack of services, services that have been withdrawn, carers who are unable to cope and older people who have ended up in hospital because they were not given the right care at the right time. It would be understandable for us to conclude that there are insufficient funds to go round and that the stories in my mailbag reflect a national problem. However, that is not at all the case. I could count  on the fingers of one hand the complaints that are made about West Dunbartonshire Council, compared with the sackloads of complaints that emanate from the Argyll and Bute Council area. The problem was clearly made entirely in Argyll and Bute. It took some time for me to consider the issue—

I ask the member to give me time to develop my point. In a nutshell, Argyll and Bute Council is not spending the money that the Executive gives it each year for the care of older people. Under a budget heading of "home care/personal care for older people", the Executive provides £12 million each year as grant-aided expenditure. Most local authorities spend more, because they accord older people's services a high priority. How much of that £12 million does the cabinet secretary think that Argyll and Bute Council spends? The answer is half of it—£6 million. The Executive says that the council needs £12 million to cope with older people's needs, but the council ignores the Executive and diverts the money elsewhere. Where is the missing money? I implore the cabinet secretary to investigate the matter. Two years ago, underspend on social work services was £3 million, but underspend under one heading alone is now £6 million, despite the smoke and mirrors from the local authority and the one-off addition of £1 million to its budget last year. The lack of finance is reflected in the lack of capacity in the levels of management staff. Concern about the matter was such that the Social Work Inspection Agency was sent in to make a full inspection of services for older people in Argyll and Bute Council. I look forward to the publication of SWIA's report and I understand that informal feedback to the council fully justifies my concerns. I hope that the cabinet secretary will use the report's publication to encourage the new Argyll and Bute Council—a coalition of independents and the Scottish National Party—to take positive action to restore the budgets at least to the level that the Executive provides and to restore the quality of the service to the standard that we should expect for our older people. There are very good staff in Argyll and Bute, but they do not have the support or the resources to do their jobs. In the absence of a rigorous improvement plan from the council, will the cabinet secretary consider using her powers of intervention to direct the local authority, in the interests of older people in Argyll and Bute? A case on free personal care in Argyll and Bute is awaiting a decision from the court—I will be careful about how I refer to the case, Presiding  Officer. The case was considered initially by the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman, whose decision went against the council. The council then appealed to the Court of Session. As we await the court's judgment, it would not be appropriate for me to discuss the details of the case. I reflect instead on two matters. First, let us consider the resources that have been used by many public agencies—the council, the ombudsman's office and the courts. The internal costs and the costs of legal council and court time amount to at least £250,000. Would it not have been better and perhaps much more cost effective to make personal care available? Secondly, I pay tribute to the family that brought the case. Their father passed away during the consideration of his case, which is regrettable, but they have courageously pursued the matter. I was brought up to believe that the mark of a civilised society is how we treat our older and most vulnerable people. I ask the cabinet secretary to ensure that older people in Argyll and Bute are part of a civilised society.

To ask the Scottish Executive what analysis of the 7,000 patients presenting at the Vale of Leven hospital integrated care project has been carried out by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. (S3O-211)

I thank the minister for her response and welcome the meeting that she has afforded me, which we will have in due course. I understand from those involved in integrated care that little if any of the data underwent qualitative analysis by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde in advance of its proposal to remove integrated care from the Vale of Leven hospital. Will the minister reaffirm that decisions on health service changes must be evidence based? Does she agree that if we are to take "Delivering for Health" from theory to implementation, pilots such as the integrated care model are critical? Will she therefore instruct a full analysis of integrated care at the Vale of Leven hospital, which is a model that might have resonance for other general hospitals in Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

I refer members to my contributions to the various debates on this subject that have taken place in the chamber—I do not intend to rehearse the arguments in detail again. Murdo Fraser did not share a platform with me, but he will be able to read the Official Report . I will concentrate on the impact on and disruption to the lives of the people who live on the Roseneath peninsula and have to cope with the blockades organised by Faslane 365. I say at the outset that peaceful protest plays a vital part in a democratic society, and we have a long and respected tradition of it in this country. Many of the rights and freedoms that we enjoy today were gained because people were prepared to protest. I therefore defend absolutely the right to peaceful protest. I acknowledge the Faslane 365 activists' determination to make their views known, but their illegal blockades cause more severe disruption than just preventing workers from clocking in at the base. In fact, the activists have caused little, if any, disruption to the base's operation. Instead, students have missed examinations, carers have been unable to get to their older and more vulnerable charges, and others have been unable to get to work or to go about their daily lives. That is to say nothing about the potential for fatalities if emergency vehicles are caught up in the blockades. When not actively stopping the flow of traffic, protesters are known to illegally paint road markings and obscure sight lines for drivers. That is not just further disruption, it is criminal damage that could cause accidents.

I would rather make progress. Members will be aware that the SNP supports Faslane 365, the organisation that is responsible for the blockades. In a letter from Alex Salmond's office, I was told that the SNP support does not extend to the blockading of adjacent roads. However, there is really only one road in and out of the peninsula, and supporters of Faslane 365 are blockading it quite deliberately. Will SNP members encourage their First Minister to withdraw his support for that illegal action but not necessarily his support for the principle of what Faslane 365 is trying to do? Mr Hepburn wishes to intervene. I look forward to receiving a yes or no answer from him.

Then I am not going to accept the intervention. I turn to the Greens, who take a principled stance on the issue. I quote from an e-mail from Robin Harper to one of my constituents.

No. These are Robin Harper's words, not mine: "Given that my perception was that these blockades were I thought designed to make things difficult at the base, not aimed at the local community, and that according to recent reports, the protesters are fighting amongst themselves, I am seriously considering withdrawing my support—I need to consult with colleagues, and write to the camp before I take such a step, so give me a little time over this". That is a well-judged comment. If members need to be further convinced, they should consider the ill-conceived proposal to hold a disco and barbecue with live music outside the gates of Faslane cemetery. I am grateful that that will not now happen. The organisers did not realise the sensitivities and I commend them for changing their view. That is an illustration of the problem for local people, and I encourage Robin Harper and others in the chamber to reflect on it. In closing, I refer to Peninsula 24/7, which is a group formed by local people to give them a voice in what is going on in their area. I ask all MSPs and parties that support Faslane 365 to think about the consequences for local people, many of whom do not support the presence of Trident on the Clyde. What about the peace camp? I understand that there have already been two evictions, and on that basis it looks like "Big Brother" has nothing on the peace camp at Faslane. It is hardly behaving in  unity to oppose Trident, which is what Faslane 365 seeks to do.

Consistency is indeed an admirable quality, particularly in politicians. I may have had my doubts about Rob Gibson this morning, given his complete amnesia in relation to his time on the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill Committee, but I have no such doubts about Kenny MacAskill. As members are aware, the cabinet secretary was the deputy convener of the Justice 2 Sub-Committee. I am sure that his views in government will be consistent with his thinking when he was a member of the committee.  I remind members of the instructive and rigorous piece of work that the Justice 2 Sub-Committee undertook. It was the first time a sub-committee was used in Parliament. A sub-committee offers a focused way of Parliament dealing quickly but substantively with serious issues. We achieved cross-party consensus on all but one recommendation—I will perhaps say more about that later. We took evidence from a wide variety of people and agencies, including law enforcement departments in Massachusetts and Florida and, of course, Margaret Ann Cummings, whose son was the tragic victim of a sex offender. I join other members in paying tribute to her for her courage and bravery in pursuing the matter. The recommendations that we arrived at were, in my view, comprehensive. They covered the monitoring and supervision of sex offenders, the extent to which local communities should receive information on child sex offenders in their locality, how housing should be allocated and the nature of sentences. The cabinet secretary is right to build on the achievements so far. We have had the Cosgrove, MacLean and Irving reports, which underpin the framework that is now in place to ensure that there is much more robust monitoring of sex offenders. It encourages a more co-ordinated approach to managing the level of risk posed and it will strengthen the existing arrangements for multi-agency working. All of that is to be welcomed. Members will be pleased to hear that I will not rehearse all 33 of the sub-committee's recommendations, but I ask the cabinet secretary to confirm that he will accept and implement them all because, after all, as deputy convener of the sub-committee he agreed to them all. First, on community notification, we recommended that when a sex offender absconds or behaves in a manner that might cause alarm, their information and photographs should be published. I believed that that was proportionate and the right thing to do in the interests of community safety. I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment today to take the recommendation forward, but will he confirm that it also applies to a sex offender who might behave in a manner that, although it is just short of absconding, is nevertheless sufficient to cause alarm or distress? Secondly, if a sex offender breaches conditions set as part of their inclusion in the sex offenders register, we believed that such a breach should be an offence that is arrestable without a warrant and leads to prison or further prosecution. In other words, if someone breaches conditions they will end up back in jail. Does the cabinet secretary still  agree with that recommendation and will he take it forward? Thirdly, on the power of entry and examination, the sub-committee was clear in its recommendation—albeit by majority—that in cases involving the safety of children, the police should have the absolute power to enter and search without warrant the premises of sex offenders who might be considered to pose a risk. We considered that the safety of the child must be the paramount consideration. Does the cabinet secretary still agree with that and will he take it forward? If we are to monitor sex offenders properly, we need to ensure that the police, social workers, housing professionals and voluntary agencies have what it takes to enable them to do that. Will the cabinet secretary bring to Parliament the results of the exercise—which the sub-committee asked for—that will be undertaken between the Executive and ACPOS to determine exactly what those additional resources should be? Will he ensure that that determination is reflected in the spending review? We know, from talking to the professionals, that what matters to them is not the extra measures that might be taken but having the resources that will enable the police and social workers to do their jobs properly. On the retention of DNA samples, I suggest to the cabinet secretary that we simply cannot ignore the compelling statistics that are coming from England and Wales—88 murders solved and 116 rapists brought to justice as a direct result of DNA retention. For the sake of potential victims of murder and rape in Scotland, I hope that the cabinet secretary will consider the matter again. We have a good base on which to build, but we must remain vigilant. This cannot be the end of the story. We need to consider all ideas, from whatever quarter. If the result is just one less victim of a child sex offender, the Parliament will have done a good job.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that peaceful protest does not hinder access to roadways. (S3O-113)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the significant disruption that is caused to people living on the Rosneath peninsula by the illegal blockades that are being carried out by Faslane 365 protestors. Students are missing examinations, carers are unable to get to older people, and other people are unable to get to work. He will also be aware that the SNP supports Faslane 365, the organisation that is responsible for the blockades. Imagine my surprise when I was told in a letter from Alex Salmond's office that the SNP's support does not extend to blockades of adjacent roads. There is only one road into and out of the peninsula, and supporters of Faslane 365 are blockading it quite deliberately. Will the cabinet secretary therefore encourage the First Minister to withdraw his support for that illegal action?

Will the member give way?

Will Rob Gibson give way?

Will Rob Gibson give way?

The subject of fire safety was not covered comprehensively this afternoon, but I know that it is dear to the minister's heart. He alluded to the significant changes to the fire service in the past few years, many of which have been positive, such as the change to community fire safety. Will he reflect on and evaluate those changes so that the modernisation agenda delivers the changes that are required and so that there are improvements for the safety of firefighters and the communities they seek to protect?

I am disappointed that the minister did not cover the fuel poverty measures in the energy white paper, and specifically the sections on the recalibration of prepayment meters and social tariffs. He might be aware that people who use prepayment meters pay on average £200 per year more for their fuel than people who pay by direct debit. In the spirit of consensus and in the interests of the people of Scotland, does he welcome the UK Government's approach to reducing the cost of prepayment meters? Will he go further? Does he also support the UK Government's approach to social tariffs?

I welcome all converts to a north-of-the-river solution. The cabinet secretary will be aware of the community engagement group that has been formed by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and tasked with considering the future of services at the Vale of Leven hospital. Is she aware that the group believes that it was not allowed to participate fully, that its views were ignored and that information was deliberately withheld from it? Does she agree that that is an appalling example of community engagement, and will she ensure that that forms part of her process of independent scrutiny of the health board's proposals?

I join other members in welcoming John Swinney to his post as cabinet secretary for everything and then just a little bit more—I keep discovering that there are more things for which he is responsible. Nevertheless, I am sure that he will rise to the challenge that will come from the sheer size of his portfolio. My colleague Wendy Alexander referred to the bedtime story, "The Very Hungry Caterpillar", which I was delighted to hear is Margo MacDonald's favourite story, but I confess that I could not quite get my head round John Swinney turning from a caterpillar into a butterfly—that would be a fairytale worth reading. I am sorry that Roseanna Cunningham has left the chamber because my memories of bedtime reading with my daughter are of that well-known tale, "Little Red Riding Hood". For those members who have not read it, in that story the big, bad W is the wolf. For the nationalists, I suspect, the big, bad W is Westminster. They spend most of their time blaming Westminster for all the ills and show no signs of stopping. Now, however, they must move from rhetoric to reality, which involves making the right—but tough—decisions. That is what comes with being in Government. I turn to the subject of the debate—the Government's approach to government. Interesting. Once I got beyond the novelty of the lack of a motion to outline the Government's position, and John Swinney's beguiling speech, I concluded that empty vessels do, indeed, make a lot of noise. However, far be it from me, at this very early stage in proceedings, to break up the consensus about what needs to be done. As I came to the Parliament today, I did not think that the people I passed in the street would have had the subject of this afternoon's debate uppermost in their minds. If asked, they would probably have concluded that they cared little for a discussion about the approach to government. They would probably have said that what they cared about, ultimately, were results—outcomes rather than inputs. They would have wanted to know how we would improve the quality of their daily lives and how we would deliver on their priorities. On that basis, I have two points to commend to John Swinney. Frankly, a massive reorganisation of institutions wastes time and diverts attention. I speak from experience because I have been through a public sector reorganisation and I know that it is about nothing but people taking their eyes off the ball of delivery. Instead, Mr Swinney should consider working in partnership with the wealth creators in our economy, with those charged with  the delivery of public services, with civic Scotland and—for me, this is perhaps the most important partnership of all—with the people of Scotland to drive forward policy priorities. The basis of such partnership is all about delivery. Scotland is uniquely placed. As a small country with a population of 5 million, we are able to talk to each other, to try things out, to innovate and to get things done quickly. In short, we are able to deliver for the people who put us here. However, I have a genuine concern about what John Swinney said. The SNP can have in place the very best strategic framework, but if it does not have a handle on delivery and the means to monitor outcomes, the results that people want will not be achieved and it will be unable to deliver on its priorities. I fear that the Government's idea of reform is simply a reorganisation of the public sector. That would be a missed opportunity to build a meaningful engagement of third parties in the delivery of public services. I waited—in vain, unfortunately—for more than a passing mention of the voluntary sector or the role of the Scottish social economy. I think that that is a serious omission because Labour members desire to focus not just on delivery in general, but on delivery specifically for the very poorest people in our society. I am talking about those who live at the margins and who often live in communities that are disadvantaged, in which the market is non-existent, where the private sector will not go and where the public sector tries, but is not sufficiently flexible or sensitive to deal with the real problems experienced. It is often in communities like those that voluntary sector organisations come into their own. That is not to diminish their role as the major provider of services in sectors such as care and housing—in some cases across Scotland—but the added value that is achieved from voluntary organisations providing services in communities is of considerable interest. Aside from the range of quality, person-centred services that it provides, the sector is close to the communities that it serves because local people are involved in the delivery and management of the services. The voluntary sector enhances the capacity of the communities in which it operates. That is good value, so it is disappointing for all of us in the chamber to learn that many of Scotland's voluntary organisations are on the wire due to funding shortfalls from the public sector. The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations is quick to point out that the issue is not only about money; it is also about relationships and about how the voluntary sector and the Government can work better together. Will Mr Swinney rectify his earlier omission and make a commitment to the meaningful involvement of the voluntary sector as a significant delivery partner? It can deliver on our priorities.

I am in my final minute.

That certainly was not a question, but I am happy to accept the clarification because it is well intentioned. My criticism is that there was no detail beyond that initial statement. I will take John Swinney up on his offer and commend to him and Mr Mather some bedtime reading. It is not a fairytale, but a report from the Better Public Services Forum, entitled "Quality through Diversity: emerging models for Scotland's public services". It does not sound desperately exciting, but I assure members that it is. I cannot do justice to all the report's recommendations. Suffice it to say that the challenge to Government is to put service users at the centre of thinking and action, to give service users an enhanced role in designing services and to empower communities to influence delivery and priorities. I suggest to John Swinney that he needs to stand on its head the approach that he has outlined today and, instead of tinkering with the institutions, focus on delivery and put people in our communities in the driving seat.

I do not think that I can match Roseanna Cunningham's effusiveness, so—forgive me—I will not try. The First Minister will be aware that on the very day that he announced his plans to keep health services local, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde announced proposals that would see the wholesale transfer and centralisation of services away from the Vale of Leven hospital to the Royal Alexandria hospital in Paisley. Given the geography of the west of Scotland, that would patently be absurd; more important, however, it is not in the interest of patient care. In the spirit of the new politics, I welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing's intervention in instructing independent scrutiny of the proposals. I will work with her to try to find alternatives that will result in the retention of services locally. Will the First Minister clarify what weight will be given to patient need and public opinion in assessing proposals about the Vale of Leven hospital? Further, will he, also in the spirit of the new politics, today commit to saving the Vale?

It is indeed appropriate that, in the final debate of this session, we look ahead to the future of Scotland. What kind of Scotland do we want to live in? More important, what kind of Scotland will our children live in? I want to live in a Scotland in which our imagination is not limited; an ambitious and dynamic Scotland that gives everyone an opportunity; and a caring Scotland in which every child and old person matters and our most vulnerable are cared for. I want to live in a Scotland that is based on equality and fairness, builds tolerance and respect, and changes lives for the better.  I want to live in a country that is truly international in its outlook, welcomes people from around the world and is not characterised by narrow nationalism. We live in difficult global times and we should be breaking down boundaries and borders rather than putting them up. We should be embracing other cultures. There is more to unite than to divide people across different nations. We should strengthen those bonds, not isolate our people. When we leave the Parliament, we will set out our respective programmes for the people of Scotland and I am sure that there will be a robust debate. Labour's vision is about building up Scotland and building on our record. More people are in work than ever before, unemployment has been more than halved and a generation is working in the local economy, and average earnings are rising. Crime is falling. Our health is improving, too. Waiting times are down, free eye tests and dental checks are in place and we have introduced the smoking ban, which in the longer term will reduce the daily deaths from smoking-related illnesses. We will build on our record on education, too, because we want to give young people the best start and the best opportunities in life, by providing a nursery place for every three and four-year-old, reducing class sizes and improving the school estate. When the Tories were in power, they built four schools a year, which is quite impressive. However, Labour is building a new school every week, and soon a new school will be built every five days. That is the difference that Labour makes.

Sorry, there is no reference to Europe in my speech. Under the SNP, at least 80 new schools that are in the pipeline—the plans are drawn up and teachers and children are engaged and excited about the prospect of their new school—would be cancelled at a stroke. The list of schools includes the Vale of Leven academy in my constituency, Dumbarton academy, and other schools in constituencies throughout Scotland, such as the Western Isles, Dumfries and Galloway and Moray. The SNP would deny schoolchildren opportunities and let them down. Contrast the SNP's plans with those of Labour. We will invest in our children and young people. We will continue to build new schools and to build achievement in our classrooms. We will create 100 skills academies and invest in child care and after-school care to help hard-working families. We will continue to build opportunity, to ensure that every child in Scotland has the best start in life.  I have long believed that a strong society and a strong economy are opposite sides of the same coin. We will build our economy, ensure full employment, create 50,000 modern apprenticeships and help businesses to grow. We will work in partnership with the Labour Government at Westminster to deliver all that, because working in partnership makes us stronger. An SNP Administration would be characterised by fighting, turmoil and argument—by Alex Salmond's own admission. SNP members sound like fractious schoolchildren in a playground. There would be no consensus, no putting the interests of the people of Scotland first; everything would be viewed through the constitutional prism and—my goodness—it would be fisticuffs at dawn from wee Eck every day of the week. That might be an unedifying and slightly ridiculous sight—[ Interruption. ] There is a serious point to be made, and SNP members would do well to listen. Alex Salmond would focus on dissent rather than on building Scotland. What can we expect from someone who prefers the bright lights of London to doing a hard job in the Scottish Parliament? Kenny MacAskill made a jibe, which was unworthy of him, about a member on the Labour benches doing two jobs. Perhaps he has missed this, but Alex Salmond says that he will do two jobs. Not only does he have a fantasy about being the First Minister of Scotland, but he thinks that he can do that and be a member of Parliament at Westminster at the same time. Being the First Minister of Scotland is not a part-time job. Therefore, Alex Salmond is not fit to do that job. As somebody once said, there are two certainties in life: death and taxes. Let me add another: the SNP will cost people money. I am not trying to scaremonger, which is something that the SNP is good at; I am trying to expose the arguments properly and get to the truth. The SNP has admitted several times that its top policy priority is independence. Therefore, we would not get the SNP without independence and we would not get independence without a cost. For every hard-working person in Scotland, the cost would be £5,000. That is not based on my sums, or the Labour Party's; it is supported by independent financial experts.

Oh dear, oh dear. Would the SNP care to apologise in advance for getting its  sums wrong on the £11 billion black hole at the heart of the Scottish budget? I will spell out the situation so that nobody is in any doubt. The spending commitments that the SNP has made in this session of Parliament amount to more than £4 billion a year. If that is not enough, we would lose the union dividend of £11 billion. I am inclined to be generous, but even on the most generous estimates, oil and gas revenues would not fill the gap. Basically, if we do the sums, they show that we are £11.9 billion short and that the cost to each household would be £5,000. Apologise for that, John Swinney.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. How will the SNP ensure, as it seeks to break up Britain, that it has enough in the kitty to pay for pensioners, social security benefits and defence? Gordon Jackson was absolutely right that the SNP has no answers on the issue of the 4,000 jobs that depend on shipbuilding on the Clyde or on the matter of the 40,000 or so jobs throughout Scotland that depend on our defence forces. Contrast that with the 10 Labour pledges and the partnership between Tony Blair and Jack McConnell. The pledges cover matters such as a successful strong economy; developing skills; investing in jobs; protecting the Scotch whisky industry and enabling it to grow; and renewable energy. In contrast to that list of partnership pledges, the SNP has not made such pledges, would not deliver and would permanently be in argument with London on those issues. There is a contrast indeed, as Gordon Brown has reduced the base rate of tax by 2p, whereas the SNP would raise tax for every person in Scotland by 3p in the pound, which would make us the most taxed part of Britain. Wait for it—that would come hand in hand with cuts. As Pauline McNeill rightly said, there would be cuts in local government, which would be aimed at the people and agencies that we want to deliver for children and local communities. With the SNP, people would pay more but, remarkably, they would get less. We will focus on building Scotland and changing people's lives for the better, but the SNP has made it clear that it will focus on the politics of identity and division and on its first and only priority, which is to break up Britain. The people of Scotland will stop and think. As John Home Robertson said, we are a prudent and canny lot. As people go to the ballot box, they will reflect on what matters to them, their families and their communities. They will not wander blindly into something that they might regret, because they will reject the SNP. The Labour Party is the  party of ambition, progress and opportunity; the SNP is the party of the past and constitutional chaos and the party that will tax people more.

The member said earlier that Parliament should not rely on English handouts. Is he suggesting that the new  Liberal policy is for the Scottish Parliament to raise taxes?

What is the statistical basis for the member's assertion?

The member has not answered my question.

I thank the Justice 2 Committee clerks, our advisers, the ministers and their officials and everyone who gave evidence and helped to shape the bill before us. I very much welcome the bill for two reasons. First, despite Bill Aitken's deluded attempts to rewrite history, it delivers Labour's commitment to end automatic unconditional early release, which, as we have been reminded several times today, was introduced by the Tories. Secondly—

Of course.

The difference is that we are changing the system now. The record will show that the Tories did not do so and that, in fact, they wasted opportunities to make changes that would have benefited communities. This bill is also important because it completes a very robust package of measures to tackle knife crime. I want to start with sentencing, because considerable public concern has been expressed  not only about the issue of early release but about the appropriateness of the sentences that are being given. The bill lays the foundations for the clear and transparent system of sentencing that we all want. As the First Minister said earlier, with the introduction of custody and community sentences, when a judge says to an offender, "You will spend X years in jail," that is exactly what will happen. The offender will spend the whole of the custody part of the sentence in jail, with no prospect of early release. It is also worth remembering that the custody part can be increased to 75 per cent of the overall sentence. The Executive has struck the right balance between custody and rehabilitation, because it is not enough simply to lock people up in the knowledge that, when they are released, they are likely to find themselves in a revolving-door scenario of reoffending and then being sent back to prison. We have to ensure that the community part of the sentence works and that there are better opportunities to reintegrate people in their communities. When there is a seamless continuation of rehabilitation programmes—when programmes start in prison and then continue in the community—we know that the programmes can be successful in addressing offending behaviour and reducing the risk of reoffending. Unlike the previous system, the community sentence will have conditions that make clear what is expected of the prisoner. For example, there might be a requirement to attend drug or alcohol counselling, a restriction on travel or movement, supervision by the police, or even tagging. I am pleased that the minister has made clear that serious breaches will be dealt with swiftly, with offenders being recalled to custody. I want to turn quickly to part 3 of the bill, which covers the restrictions on the sale of weapons. I have had hundreds of postcards from constituents who—because of their real experiences in the constituency—asked that the Executive restrict the sale of knives and swords. That is exactly what this bill will do, so I am glad that my constituents' voices have been heard. The bill adds to the Executive's earlier actions to double the length of sentences for possession of a knife, to increase the powers available to the police and to increase the minimum age for the purchase of a knife. Today we are going further, introducing the licensing scheme for the sale of non-domestic knives and banning the sale of swords. The bill completes the work that was started with the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006.  Each year, people are injured—and some people die—at the hands of knife-wielding young men. In many cases, the attacks are not premeditated but spring somehow from the mistaken belief that people who carry knives are somehow protecting themselves. The statistics tell us that that is an incredibly foolish view. If, through the measures in the bill and a process of education, we can help to end the needless bloodshed that is cutting short young lives, the bill will have made a considerable difference. My community welcomes the proposals and I urge members to support the bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to improve literacy and numeracy in primary schools. (S2O-12273)

I thank the minister for highlighting the success in West Dunbartonshire. He will also be aware of the council's literacy initiative. Recent evaluations tell us that the initiative is succeeding in completely wiping out illiteracy, particularly in disadvantaged areas. For example, in 1997, 5 per cent of primary 1 children had very high scores on word reading, but today the figure is 45 per cent and still improving. Among primary 2 children, 11 per cent had very low reading scores, but today the figure is less than 1 per cent and still decreasing.

One in three children leaving primary school was functionally illiterate, but now virtually none is. Will the minister commend all the staff involved and learn from the approach so that children from across Scotland, and not only those in West Dunbartonshire, can get the best possible start in life?

The minister has acknowledged that voluntary organisations that provide regulated care services on behalf of local authorities have raised concerns that powers in section 64 could be used to allow commissioning authorities to override their recruitment decisions. Such concerns have been raised with me as well. Will the minister reassure me that that is not the intention of the stage 2 amendment by clarifying what circumstances he envisages will be prescribed in future regulations?

To ask the First Minister, in light of recent statistics, what steps are being considered to help raise children out of poverty. (S2F-2751)

It cannot be denied that in Scotland we are on course to achieve Labour's commitment to end child poverty in a generation. However, the next stage is potentially the most difficult one: tackling the circumstances of children and families who are still in absolute poverty will be challenging. As work remains the best way of lifting whole families out of poverty, what additional measures will the First Minister take to target children in communities such as Dumbarton and the Vale of Leven, so that they can have the best possible start in life?

It is indeed, but does the minister acknowledge that it probably amounts to a difference of only £10 to £15, which is not significant for a person who faces a debt of £200 because of the companies' practice of back-charging?

I join other members in congratulating Scott Barrie on securing the debate, not least because politics is all about timing and fuel bills have been dropping through people's doors over the past few weeks. I am sure that members will agree that nothing concentrates the mind more than the realisation that one's income may be insufficient to cover one's debts. I want to focus almost entirely on prepayment meters. I will consider who opts for such meters and why the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on tackling debt, along with members of all parties, is so agitated about back-charging. Finally, I will turn to tariffs. I do not want to overgeneralise, but the majority of prepayment meter users are on low incomes. Indeed, some of them could be considered to be vulnerable because they happen to be pensioners, disabled or unemployed. They opt for prepayment meters for the sensible reason that doing so allows them to budget. By paying for their fuel in advance, they are able to manage their money and their fuel consumption at the same time. That is precisely why back-charging leaves such a bad taste in my mouth. People are ending up in debt through no fault of their own. We know that there have been something like 13 price rises in as many months, but the practical problem that arises with prepayment meters is that engineers are unable to recalibrate them quickly enough. When they do, potentially vulnerable households on low incomes find themselves in debt. Through energywatch, I have heard that someone in  Edinburgh owes £200 as a result of that. They do not know how they got into that debt because the money is unaccounted for and they are unable to pay. I welcome the fact that not all energy companies operate in the same way. Scottish and Southern Energy and EDF Energy do not apply price rises until meters have been reset. Following political pressure at Westminster and in the Scottish Parliament, Scottish Gas also ended the practice of back-charging in December. Members might therefore ask: who is left? Who is out of step? One of the major suppliers in Scotland is Scottish Power. So far, it has not agreed to end the practice. I acknowledge that it has the most meters and that it is moving as quickly as it can to smart meters, which do not require to be reset manually, but it will be approximately two years before that programme is complete. Come on, Scottish Power—stop back-charging customers and stop back-charging the people who are potentially the most vulnerable customers. If people are in any doubt about the scale of the problem, higher prices have led to many more disconnections. In 2005, there were 65 disconnections for debt, but in 2006 there were 250—four times more. I shudder to think what the current figures are as bills are dropping through people's doors. Scott Barrie was right to say that people who use PPMs face a double whammy. They pay more for the privilege of paying for their fuel in advance. He is right to challenge the energy companies to equalise their tariffs. Let us take a closer look at some of the recent price reductions. Scottish Gas prices are down by 17 per cent for gas, but it is not the same for their prepayment meter customers—the price is down by only 10 per cent for them. Another example is Scottish and Southern Energy. Prices are down by 13.5 per cent for their direct debit customers, but—this is to be welcomed—they are down by 13.8 per cent for their prepayment meter customers. I look forward with bated breath to the other companies, including Scottish Power, announcing reductions. I note, as did Karen Whitefield, that the cost to the energy companies of purchasing fuel has dropped by 50 per cent, which is considerably more than the percentage that has been passed on so far. I echo the call for Scottish Power to end immediately its practice of backdating and to acknowledge that prepayment meter tariffs are a mess. Like other members, I think that Ofgem has a remit to protect vulnerable customers, so I call on it to take on board the need for a wholesale review of the use of prepayment meters and their impact. I call on all suppliers that are installing prepayment meters for debt to offer a full package of measures, which should include energy  efficiency and money advice as well as offering the user a tariff that is discounted, based on their circumstances. I congratulate Scott Barrie. I hope that the energy companies and Ofgem are listening—I know that if they are not, we will be back.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I acknowledge the difficulties that have been experienced by workers in Simclar, NCR Dundee and Young's, and in Methode Electronics Europe in my constituency, where workers' rights were swept aside. Other members have addressed and will address those issues eloquently, so I will focus on the general issue of workers' rights. Let me share with the chamber some headlines that I have read over the past year: "Betrayal of their workers", "Collective agreements—ripped up", "Contracts—unilaterally broken" and "Riding roughshod over pay and conditions of staff". Is this some reactionary employer—a multinational, perhaps—with scant regard for its employees? Here is another quote, which calls on the employers concerned to "put aside petty political squabbles and honour their agreed contract with the workers. Workers are suffering as a consequence of their intransigence. It is ironic that the two MSP boast about their support for trade unions and workers in struggle when they are riding roughshod over the pay and conditions of trade union members." I am talking not about some reactionary, right-wing business that cares nothing for its workers, but about two members of the Parliament: Rosemary Byrne and Tommy Sheridan. It is worth pointing out that the words that I quoted are not mine: they come from the National Union of Journalists—Mr Sheridan's trade union—and the Industrial Workers of the World, whose members are affectionately known as the wobblies. They come from people who were friends of Mr Sheridan.

A member has responded to Mr Sheridan's point from a sedentary position. I understand that both the organisations to which I referred are in formal dispute with Solidarity over its treatment of members' staff. I was astonished by the fact that before Christmas there was a demonstration on the issue at the very door of the Parliament. The irony was not lost on some of us that Solidarity members, who speak at every passing protest, were strangely absent, perhaps because they were the subject of the protest. If there is one lesson for the chamber to learn from the matter, it is that consistency is important—members cannot do one thing privately and another publicly and expect to get away with it. Labour has a strong record of improving workers' rights. Mr Sheridan may laugh, but one of our first actions was to sign the European social chapter, which was resisted by the Tories. We have increased maternity leave, increased paternity leave, increased holidays, provided a better work-family balance, provided rights to trade union membership, and—I hesitate to invite Mr Sheridan to laugh at this—we have restored rights of trade union membership to workers at Government Communications Headquarters. We have ended the two-tier workforce in the national health service and introduced the national minimum wage, which was articulated as a demand by Keir Hardie more than 100 years ago and delivered by a Labour Government. At the time, unsurprisingly, the Tories were unashamed in their opposition to improving employment rights. The Scottish National Party slept through the vote and was absent for it. Jim Mather's claims to be concerned about workers' rights ring hollow—we should look at the SNP's actions. I hate to say this to Jamie Stone, an acknowledged member of the Transport and General Workers Union, but the Liberals thought that the introduction of the minimum wage was too dangerous. Workers' rights are safe only with Labour.

I am surprised.

Jim Mather has talked about the Government's position. I wonder what the Scottish National Party's position is on the proposed bill to reform the trade unions. Would they support it?

I could not agree with Bill Butler more about the lack of trust. Does he acknowledge that the changes in services at the Vale of Leven district general hospital over the past several years have been based on decisions by clinicians, not ministers, and that that causes a problem with trust in what the Parliament does? There has been talk of communities not being rational, and leadership and governance have rightly been mentioned. Does Bill Butler think that it is rational for a health board to make people travel two and a half hours from the Vale of Leven to Paisley for a basic service?

rose—

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Like Bill Butler, I thank the Justice 2 Committee clerks, our advisers, ministers and their officials, and everyone who gave evidence to the committee, because I can muster considerably more enthusiasm for the bill than can Phil Gallie. I very much welcome the bill, which delivers on our commitment to end automatic unconditional early release. There is no doubt that there is considerable public concern about sentencing. Like many members who have spoken in the debate, I am aware of the distress that victims and communities feel when someone who has been convicted of a crime is released early and is back on the streets, with no requirement for the person to report to the authorities or for further action to be taken. People just do not understand that. We must ensure that there is clarity and transparency in sentencing. The bill lays the foundations for such an approach and will improve communities' understanding. As other members said, the bill contains proposals for an overall sentence that will consist of two elements: a custody part and a community part. A minimum of 50 per cent of the overall sentence must be served in custody, so if a person is sentenced to a combined term of four years, made up of two years in custody and two years on licence in the community, they will serve the whole of the two-year custodial sentence in jail. They will not be released early—indeed, the custody part of the sentence can be increased to 75 per cent of the overall sentence. I welcome that approach. I want to highlight two issues on which the committee thinks that further clarification from the minister is necessary. First, I turn to the bill's provision on the home detention curfew. The home detention curfew has been an extremely useful initiative, releasing certain prisoners—when it is appropriate to do so because they are low-risk offenders—to serve the remainder of their sentences in the community. However, although the home detention curfew has been relatively successful, I am genuinely concerned that the clarity that will be brought to sentencing by the main provisions of the bill will, in effect, be undermined. Rather than a guaranteed minimum of 50 per cent of the sentence being served in jail, less time might be a consequence of the home detention curfew. The minister has, helpfully, said that the Executive does not envisage the use of the home detention curfew in the early stages of the bill's implementation. That is welcome. However, there is genuine concern that the clarity and transparency that ministers, rightly, seek to deliver in sentencing may be undermined. On that basis, I hope that the issue can be reviewed.  Secondly, I welcome the proposal for there to be a community part to each sentence as a means of helping the rehabilitation and reintegration of offenders. We know that the seamless continuation of rehabilitation programmes that are started in prison and continued in the community is desirable to address offending behaviour and reduce the risk of reoffending. Unlike the previous system, which was introduced by the Tories, the community sentence will have conditions attached to it, making clear what is expected of the prisoner. There might be a requirement to attend drug or alcohol counselling; a restriction on travel and movement; supervision by the police; or tagging. Serious breaches will be dealt with swiftly, with offenders being recalled to custody. The concern that was expressed to the committee is that, in the case of short sentences, it would be difficult to do a meaningful amount of work with offenders either in custody or in the community to rehabilitate them. It would, equally, be difficult to put in place meaningful supervision and assessment of need in the case of the shortest sentences. I have some sympathy with the suggestion that it would be better to target resources at the serious offenders who are on longer sentences. Ministers themselves may well have suggested that. I wonder, therefore, whether ministers will consider a system of assessment and supervision that is proportionate and which reflects the reality of what can be achieved, given the length of the sentences. Part 3 covers restrictions on the sale of weapons. I remember when the First Minister announced a five-point action plan to tackle the problem of knife crime. It was widely welcomed by the police, who tackle knife crime in our communities daily; by health professionals, who deal with the serious damage that knives do to victims; and, importantly, by communities themselves, who suffer the consequences of knife crime. The First Minister said that the Executive would double the length of sentences for possession of a knife from two years to four years. He also said that we would ensure that the police made more use of stop-and-search powers and had powers to arrest people whom they suspected of carrying knives. He said that we would increase the minimum age for the purchase of knives from 16 to 18; that we would introduce a licensing scheme for the sale of non-domestic knives; and that we would ban the sale of swords. The bill completes the work that was started in the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 in September, and it is very welcome. Each year, we see people being injured and, in some cases, dying at the hands of knife-wielding young men. In many cases, the attacks are not premeditated but spring from the mistaken belief that people who carry knives are somehow  protecting themselves. The statistics tell us how foolish that view is. The minister is absolutely right to focus on the booze-and-blade culture in Scotland. If, through these measures and a process of education, we can help to end the needless bloodshed that is cutting short young lives, the bill will have made a considerable difference. I welcome the proposals—more important, my community welcomes the proposals—and I urge support for the general principles of the bill.

My colleague John McFall MP and I are grateful for the strong action that the minister has taken to improve the operation of West Dunbartonshire Council. I know that ordinary members of staff, who deliver services daily to my community, share that view. That said, will the minister ensure that the council takes up his offer of external assistance? I believe that such assistance is necessary on two counts: first, to ensure that there is sufficient capacity to take forward a challenging agenda for improvement and, secondly, to restore trust and confidence in the local authority.

Will the member give way?

I would be delighted to.

What?

We have had as many as four debates on the subject of Trident in as many months. As ever, the consequence is that more heat than light is generated. As I did in previous debates, I reflect  that, if the SNP cared so much about the issue, it should allocate more than one hour and 15 minutes to the subject, as it has done today. I regret that the debate is more about a cheap political headline than it is about genuine debate. At the start of her speech, Nicola Sturgeon quoted from a survey. I listened carefully to what she said, so I will share the results of another survey with her. In a survey by the Electoral Commission, almost two thirds of people said that they wished—passionately wished—that the Scottish Parliament would stick to talking about the areas for which it has responsibility.

Will the member just hold on a minute? The SNP needs to be a bit less disingenuous. MPs at Westminster will decide the issue—the 59 MPs who were elected to represent Scotland. Those MPs, six of whom are from the SNP, have responsibility for the decision. So what have the feeble six been up to?

Absolutely. When Nicola Sturgeon tried to tout that round the press last week, no one picked up on it. What I said is entirely consistent with a multilateral position. If Nicola Sturgeon had been honest enough to read further from my letter, Parliament would have heard that what I said was that the issue was about the need for a jobs diversification strategy. The SNP has not engaged with that issue. I did not get an answer from Nicola Sturgeon, so I pose the question again: what have the feeble six been up to? When did they last focus properly on the issue? As Roseanna Cunningham suggested on a previous occasion, there has been no debate on the issue at Westminster. One would have to search quite far back to find the answer. Instead of debating the issue at Westminster, the SNP prefers to posture in the chamber of the Scottish Parliament, where it has no direct influence on the decision. Indeed, some less kind commentators have suggested that the debate is entirely diversionary, given that it comes in the week that an £11 billion black hole has been exposed in the SNP budget and leading experts shredded its plans for council tax reform. I would not be so unkind.  Nicola Sturgeon talked about the honourable thing to do in the debate. Everyone wants to see the decommissioning of nuclear weapons—I do, and I hope that she does, too. A world that is free of nuclear weapons is a genuine and shared aspiration, although we may disagree on whether disarmament should be done on a multilateral or unilateral basis. However, in an increasingly uncertain world, we have a responsibility to consider what is best for the nation's security.

No. I challenge the SNP on whether it is being honourable in the debate. Since the last debate took place, what action has the SNP taken to consider the alternatives, including those for the people who are employed in the defence industry? I am referring to the 11,000 people whose jobs are dependent on Faslane and Coulport, 7,000 of whom are employed directly by the Faslane base, never mind the impact on the wider defence industry throughout Scotland. Has the SNP moved on from its previous position? Let me remind its members what that was. Alex Salmond said that the Scottish navy would be at Rosyth. Great. However, someone in the west said that the Scottish navy would be at Faslane. My goodness, but the Scottish navy will be massive. We are not that stupid; the SNP's position is inherently dishonest. There is also the sheer hypocrisy of SNP members who argue for Trident submarines to be refitted at Rosyth. The SNP has no answers and takes no responsibility for the consequences of its actions. God forbid it, but if the SNP ever ended up in charge, 11,000 P45s would be issued to hard-working people in my area and to thousands more throughout Scotland. If the SNP was serious, it would rise to the challenge of considering alternatives, but it is not.

I congratulate the committee, the convener—Cathy Peattie—and the clerking team for a comprehensive report on the barriers that disabled people face and, importantly, on identifying some solutions. The report is a seminal piece of work on which we will draw for years to come. I join committee members in acknowledging all those who gave evidence, the organisations both of and for disabled people and, most important, disabled people themselves. They have directly shaped the report, and I suggest that that degree of ownership means that interest in its implementation extends well beyond the walls of the Parliament. That is as it should be. It is not often that Sandra White and I agree, but she is right to say that delivery matters. I hope that when the Scottish Executive responds formally, it will provide us with a robust framework with timetables for implementing each recommendation and a monitoring system that charts progress in a transparent and open way. That will instil confidence. It will also serve to underline that we want to do more to move from warm words to practical action that makes a difference to the everyday lives of disabled people. I want to talk about transport and access. If members ever thought that transport and access were a marginal issue, I commend to them the Sunday Mail access for all campaign, which highlights in a straightforward and practical way the implications of someone being denied access simply because they are disabled. Let us imagine for a minute not being able to get into our local newsagent or shop for a pint of milk,  or not being able to get into our library, housing office or even—for goodness' sake—our local hospital. There are real barriers, and basic opportunities are denied. I know that minimum standards are required by law, and I welcome them. New public buildings will be accessible in the future, but we need to do more now with existing buildings. Constituents come to see me about a range of issues. I will mention a selection. On buses, they say, "Jackie, we've got a wonderful concessionary scheme but we can't get on the bus because it's not low floor." As others have pointed out, timetable information does not indicate which buses are accessible, never mind when they will arrive. Surely that is easy to fix. Some bus companies do well in extending and improving their fleet and ensuring that they have more low-floor buses, but others just do not bother. One suspects that they do not care. My challenge to the Executive is to examine accelerating the requirement for vehicle accessibility before the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 deadlines. That could be done by encouraging those who contract with our bus companies, for example for school transport, to ensure that there are minimum standards across the whole fleet—but I am sure that the minister will have more imaginative ideas. When it comes to travel by train, we know that some platforms are inaccessible and that there are challenges because of the geography surrounding stations, but I have learnt from my constituents that even when people can gain access, they cannot get their mobility scooters on the train because they are too big for the entrance areas of certain trains. I hasten to add that I am not to be confused with a trainspotter and I do not possess an anorak, but I now find myself looking at trains with renewed interest. On advice and assistance, I commend to the chamber the thistle travel card scheme, which we have debated before. Launched by a range of disability organisations and the Executive, it is designed to help people with a disability by alerting transport staff, on trains and buses, that the traveller might need some extra help. Finally, I will mention the abuse of disabled parking bays and the report's recommendations 126 and 127 on accessible parking spaces, which I support. Members will be aware—I hope—that I have launched a consultation on a proposed bill on disabled persons' parking. Essentially, it would make all disabled parking bays legally enforceable. I will pause and ask those present how often they have parked in a disabled person's parking bay because they wanted to nip into the  supermarket or a high-street shop for a few seconds. After all, what harm could that do? As someone put it to me starkly, "If you want my disabled parking space, please have my disability too." The consequences of our unthinkingly occupying a disabled parking space can be extremely distressing for a disabled person with acute mobility problems. I know from disabled constituents the frustration that they experience when they are unable to park near enough to the shops or their own home. In many cases, because they are unable to walk any distance, they end up driving around for hours on end until a disabled parking space becomes free. The problem is that the majority of disabled parking bays are not legally enforceable—in other words, someone who does not have a disability is not penalised for parking in one. The reason that is often cited is the long, complex and costly process that a council has to go through to designate a legally enforceable parking bay. The purpose of my proposed bill is to sweep that aside and simplify the process to ensure that any disabled parking bay, whether it is on street, in a private car park or in a residential area, can be enforced. I hope that I get support for that across the chamber; I can tell members that I am getting support for it from disabled people across Scotland. I congratulate the committee and commend its recommendations to the Executive.

I presume that the member will encourage the Conservative group to be among the early signatories to my bill proposal to make all disabled parking bays in Scotland legally enforceable.

The First Minister will be aware that Methode Electronics is likely to close its operation in the Vale of Leven, making 151 staff redundant as from 20 December. That would not be good at any time, but it is particularly bad for those employees and their families in the run-up to Christmas. Although I welcome the assistance of Scottish Enterprise Dunbartonshire in helping people secure alternative employment, will the First Minister join me and my Westminster colleague, John McFall, who is in the gallery, in encouraging Methode Electronics to meet its legal obligation to provide 90 days' statutory notice to all staff and to reflect that fully in the final payment of salaries?

I support amendments 2, 3, 3D, 3E, 3F, 4 and 4A, which are in my name and that of Jim Wallace. Positive partnership working has taken place between me and my Liberal colleague Jim Wallace and between back benchers and ministers in arriving at this point. Without that and the ministers' willingness to listen, I am not sure whether the amendments would have succeeded. I am delighted that, as I understand it, the Executive will support the amendments. Most members will be aware of the Law Society's concerns and the debates at stages 1 and 2 about ECHR compliance, with the focus on the commission's independence and the absence of an external right of appeal. I pay tribute to the Law Society for its work on the issue, but I confess that I will not dwell on the relative merits of the opinions that have been obtained; rather, I will focus on what the amendments would do. The amendments would provide a right of appeal to the Court of Session against decisions of the commission. However, the right would not be automatic. We would provide for leave to appeal, which would need to be sought from the Court of Session. That would remove any vexatious or unfounded appeals.  Appeals would be allowed only on the grounds that are set out in our amendments, which are that the commission's decision was based on an error  of law, that a hearing that the commission conducted had a procedural problem, that the commission acted irrationally in exercising its discretion or that the commission's decision was not supported by the facts that were found. In those circumstances, we do not envisage a significant number of appeals. The proposed provision is not unusual. Members will of course recall that the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 allows for decisions of mental health tribunals to be appealed to the Court of Session on similar grounds. On a point of principle, it is important to have an external right of appeal against commission decisions. However, I am not in favour of creating a mechanism that would delay unduly the resolution of complaints for individual complainers. The creation of the commission will speed the process. Amendment 3 recognises that. It is proportionate and fair and I hope that the Parliament will support it.

The aspiration to ensure access to the resolution of complaints for inadequate professional service and negligence is shared throughout the chamber. The disagreement is about the upper limit of compensation. I am afraid that I have to disagree with Jeremy Purvis, no matter how charming he is—it is okay, I do not mean it—because I believe that there has to be an upper limit. We need to have clarity about what properly should fall to the proposed commission and what properly should fall to the courts. I am happy to withdraw amendment 1 in the light of the minister's comments—in particular, the assurance about ministers' power to review the level. It is important that we listen to the profession and reflect on the experience of the operation of the commission. I seek leave to withdraw amendment 1.

At stage 1, the Justice 2 Committee—rightly in my view—considered that there is no clear rationale or justification for the proposed maximum compensation level of £20,000. Indeed, there was a feeling that the £20,000 figure bore more than a passing resemblance to what had been suggested for England and Wales, but was otherwise conjured out of nowhere in the Scottish context.  I remind Parliament that the proposals in the bill allow for maximum compensation of £20,000, through the proposed Scottish legal complaints commission, for an upheld services complaint that includes any element of negligence. I completely understand the Executive's thinking in wanting to make moderate-value negligence claims available to be dealt with by the commission, rather than only by recourse to the courts. That opens up the system to make it far more accessible to the individual complainer. For that reason, the provision is welcome. That said, it is worth remembering that the current level of compensation, which was fixed by the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980, is £5,000. The figure was uprated a mere 18 months ago from £1,500. In that context, a jump to £20,000 seems quite steep. As I understood the matter from stage 2, the Executive's justification for the figure is that £20,000 is a compromise between the current level of £5,000 and the Financial Ombudsman Service's scheme, under which up to £100,000 may be awarded. I still do not understand the logic that underpins the figure of £20,000, however. It could equally well be £25,000, £30,000 or, for that matter, my more modest proposal—which I commend to the minister—of £15,000. The case for £15,000 is based on information that was provided about claims that have been made against the master policy in recent years. A substantial number of claims are below £5,000—the majority, in fact. By setting the level at £15,000, we would capture virtually all the rest. The figure that I have arrived at is based on real experience of claims that have been made. At the time of the stage 2 debate here, clause 110 of the draft Legal Services Bill, which was considered at Westminster, also contained the figure of £20,000 for compensation. However, that included consideration of fees and outlays. In effect, the level of compensation could be lower once those had been taken into account. Our position on the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill was that it should exclude fees and outlays. Ultimately, the inclusion of the figure could have meant that we would unduly penalise lawyers in Scotland compared with their counterparts in England and Wales. I understand that the Legal Services Bill is now before the House of Lords for its second reading, and that the position there has changed to reflect the provisions of the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill. I have no doubt that the Scottish ministers' influence now extends to the House of Lords. That is welcome in ensuring consistency where it is appropriate, but I stress that the base level of compensation at which we started in Scotland was lower: it was £5,000 and, until about 18 months ago, it was £1,500. In my view, and in that context, £15,000 is more  proportionate and will still capture the overwhelming bulk of claims. I look forward to hearing the minister's comments. I move amendment 1.

To ask the First Minister what action can be taken to ensure that full and easy access to public buildings is available for disabled people. (S2F-2605)

I am sure that the First Minister is aware of the recent Sunday Mail investigation into disabled people's access to existing buildings. With the help of a team of wheelchair users, the Sunday Mail found that, in parts of Scotland, people cannot get into shops, post offices, railway stations, housing offices, libraries and town halls. In some cases, astonishingly, people cannot get into hospitals. However, in other parts of Scotland there is excellent access to many public facilities, including the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall, which was singled out for special mention. Will the First Minister do what he can to encourage the best possible standards of access and ensure that they are the norm in buildings so that disabled people can truly access all areas?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish its review of the blue badge scheme. (S2O-11373)

As the minister will be aware, I am consulting on a bill proposal to make all disabled parking bays legally enforceable and the proposal is already meeting with considerable support. Given that many disabled people have reported abuse of the blue badge scheme, I hope that the minister will ensure that the review of the scheme is truly comprehensive. I commend to him the investigation into blue badge abuse that has been established by City of Edinburgh Council. I strongly urge him to learn from that experience and to reflect that in the review.

I speak against Roseanna Cunningham's amendments 94 to 98. Like many members, I have thought long  and hard about the issue. It is important to set the discussion in context. Karen Gillon was right to say that absolutely no one—whether heterosexual or homosexual—has an automatic right to adopt. Adoption—never mind fostering—is not decided overnight. A comprehensive and detailed assessment is made of a family's suitability in the context of the child's interests. The courts decide every case on the basis of what is in the best interests of the child, not the adopter. That is the nub of the matter. Children are of paramount importance in the debate. We all acknowledge that children need stable and loving families. Without question, they deserve the best possible start in life. It is worth reflecting on the known outcomes for children who live in care, no matter how good that care is. Those children have lower educational achievements and poorer health than children of the same age and they are more likely to have experience of the criminal justice system. Children of all ages and stages of development need love and support. Knowing all that, I find it difficult to think that anyone honestly believes that creating inappropriate barriers to adoption is right. Somebody who came to the debate cold would be forgiven for thinking that we were considering for the first time giving homosexual people the right to adopt. Fiona Hyslop is right—the bill is entirely about the rights of children and not those of anybody else. However, homosexual people have been able to adopt since the 1930s—almost 80 years ago—so that is nothing new. A large number of same-sex couples are parents and many have adopted, but in such cases, only one person is legally recognised as the parent. The bill will allow both parents to be so recognised. I have examined the bill's sections again and again. They do no more or less than afford both parents the right to be recognised as parents. They do not confer new rights to adopt, diminish the fact that the child's interests are of paramount importance or replace the detailed and comprehensive assessment of a family's suitability.

I urge the Parliament not to prevent any child from having the best possible start in life and I urge members to reject the amendments.

I put three questions to the minister during the stage 3 proceedings. I appreciate that the debate was very full and that he did not have sufficient time to respond to all the points, so I would be grateful if he would respond in writing and make that response available to Parliament as a whole.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is taking to sustain the provision of anaesthetics at the Vale of Leven hospital. (S2O-11260)

I thank the minister for his intervention on the matter, which has been particularly helpful. I wish to make the minister aware that, to my current knowledge, no action has been taken to fulfil vacancies for anaesthetists at the Vale of Leven hospital and no advert has appeared in any local or national newspaper. When I asked about the matter, no one had spoken to the locum consultant anaesthetist about whether they might be interested in a permanent post and no consideration had been given to a systems-wide approach to anaesthetics. Will the minister agree that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde needs demonstrably to do much more to sustain anaesthetics at the Vale of Leven hospital?

I want to address the amendments in the minister's name, and express the genuine cross-party concerns about land attachment, the unintended consequence of which could indeed be homelessness. Aside from the impact of homelessness on whole families, which we know to be costly in terms of human and financial resources, what is proposed could run contrary to Executive intentions elsewhere. That said, the minister has acknowledged those concerns and has introduced useful manuscript amendments, one of which could be used to exempt the sole or main residence from the sale stage of the diligence and another of which could be used to make the sheriff pay more attention to the risk of homelessness. I had hoped that the minister would have gone further, given his evident commitment to strengthening key parts of the bill to provide for enhanced debtor protection, but his amendments do offer some comfort. However, I wish to ask him three specific questions, which I hope he will address in summing up, to give us some additional comfort. First, if problems are identified within two years, will ministers have the power to act, and will they do so? Secondly, what will he be seeking to lay before Parliament by way of information? It has already been pointed out that simply to count the number of attachments and the number of sales would be insufficient to get a flavour of how land attachment is actually operating. Will he therefore, as part of that process, commit to monitoring the implementation of land attachment with organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland? Finally, what circumstances will trigger ministers to use the powers contained in the manuscript amendments? Answers to those questions would make more sense of the amendments.

I have long believed that a strong economy and a strong society are but two sides of the same coin. Equally, I believe that getting people into work is the best and most sustainable route out of poverty. I have witnessed at first hand the liberating effect that gaining employment has on people. In my former work in community economic development, I worked with women and their families to improve their opportunities. Poverty is not simply about income poverty—it is also about poverty of opportunity, which visits itself on successive generations. For those women, employment enhanced their confidence and self-esteem and made them feel valued for their skills and abilities. Their employment transformed their entire families. I want that for every family and every child. I acknowledge the work of the Executive, which has, in partnership with the Labour Government at Westminster, achieved much in tackling poverty. In Scotland alone, some 100,000 children have been lifted out of relative poverty and as many as 200,000 have been lifted from absolute poverty. We have moved from one in three children being in poverty to one in four. There is, rightly, an ambitious target to end child poverty by 2020, but that is not enough. I urge the Executive to redouble its efforts. As long as any children are born into poverty, are destined to live in poverty and perhaps even to die in poverty, we in Parliament must not rest.  Although 2005 figures from the Child Poverty Action Group suggest that relative poverty in Scotland is less than the UK average, the Scottish index of multiple deprivation shows that two thirds of the most deprived areas are concentrated in Glasgow, Inverclyde, North Lanarkshire, South Lanarkshire, Renfrewshire and West Dunbartonshire, my area. We need urgently to focus on two things. First, we need to tackle the obvious geographical concentration of disadvantage in the west of Scotland and, secondly, we need to target our resources at the poorest children in the poorest families. That is why I welcome Save the Children's campaign to end child poverty in Scotland. It estimates that some 80,000 children in Scotland live in severe poverty. Its research tells us that the poorest families will experience particular hardships with what we regard as normal life events, such as the birth of a child, the extra cost of fuel in winter and buying school clothes. Understandably, there is little resilience in their family budgets to cope with such extra expenditure. The fact that there is no spare cash for a rainy day means that families have to make tough choices. Parents of some 1.3 million children in the United Kingdom say that they cannot afford to buy new clothes and one family in five struggles to pay household bills. The parents of 770,000 children in the UK cannot afford to give their children a healthy diet and 1 million children live in houses that have rotting walls and floors. None of that is acceptable, but let me dwell on winter for a minute, when no families—not only the poorest—are helped by the 60 per cent rise in the cost of electricity and the 90 per cent rise in the cost of gas. No physical measures to combat fuel poverty can counter the price rises that we have seen from power companies. Therefore, I commend the comments from the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, which I believe signal that he will take action. Next week's pre-budget speech provides an early opportunity for him to clarify his intentions. I encourage him to do so. The chancellor has explicitly acknowledged the pressure on low-income households and has said that he will consider extending to families with children the winter fuel payment that is currently enjoyed by pensioners. That is welcome, but we should not let power companies off the hook. I hope that he will use his influence to ensure that all power companies face up to their responsibilities: indeed, I would go so far as to encourage him to insist on social tariffs rather than discretionary schemes that require people to apply for relief. Save the Children is to be commended for calling on the Scottish Executive and Westminster to prioritise the needs of the poorest children. It is right that we should target the most effort and  resources on that. Tackling child poverty matters not just to Westminster, the current Executive or Parliament, but to all the people of Scotland. In that context, I want to highlight several suggestions that are at the heart of the Save the Children campaign and which have been echoed by Barnardo's and NCH in their briefings to MSPs. First, will the Executive identify the families and children who are living in the severest poverty so that our policy interventions can be well targeted and therefore effective? Secondly, we should consider a package of policy responses that include increasing the availability of free child care, extending the entitlement to free school meals for the poorest families, improving school clothing grants and tackling the numbers of children who live in fuel poverty. Above all, we should understand what works and apply it in a focused way. Finally, we should continue to work with our colleagues at Westminster. That could be through a joint ministerial committee—I know that many exist—or a joint parliamentary committee. Whatever the mechanism, I am clear that this is a shared agenda: our aspiration should be to do nothing short of ending child poverty across the UK, not simply in Scotland. In the words of Save the Children, "Children can't wait any longer. Let's fill in the missing pieces for children in struggling families." Let us continue our work—all of us together—to end the scandal that is child poverty.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will try to take less than that. The debate has been both passionate and disappointing. Many of the points that have been made have been based on a perception of what amendment 123 seeks to do, rather than on what it is actually trying to do. I am genuinely disappointed that some colleagues have not taken the time to examine the detail of my proposal. I want to deal with the different views that have been expressed, beginning with those of Euan Robson, Dave Petrie and John Home Robertson. I say to Euan Robson that of course there will be different views. That is the beauty of working in communities. There were different views when we had two-tier local authorities. Applications are already sent to ministers for a 360º view and we think that they can continue to cope with that. I say to both Euan Robson and John Home Robertson that we seek to allow ministers to set the criteria under which community bodies will be registered with their local authority each year. We think that it is important to recognise local knowledge and to prevent the formation of the nimby groups to which Andrew Arbuckle referred—I am sure that he meant to suggest not that his community was made up of groups of nimbys, but that people had genuine and serious concerns about planning matters. We recognise that there may be difficulties, which is why we have sought to give ministers enabling powers to set out criteria for the community bodies that will be recognised. I say to Karen Whitefield that there will be no restriction on the developer's right of appeal, except that the timescale will be reduced from six  months to three months. We understand why the Executive has gone for that approach and we do not demur from it. In our proposal, we have gone with the grain of the Executive's approach, both as regards the criteria for notification and the process that would otherwise be followed. I say to Susan Deacon that I acknowledge her passion and her commitment to her community. As a member of the committee that considered the petition from Musselburgh racecourse, I know just how difficult some of the issues are when there is a clear local authority interest. Such a proposal would fall to be considered under a community right of notification. I will talk briefly about what happens now and illustrate that with the example of a local supermarket development on what is probably the prime amenity site in my town. As it is a local authority interest case, the decision to call it in should have been relatively quick, but it took 700 letters from some very articulate people for that to happen. For the Executive to have to respond to 700 letters is not a good use of its time. Also, it leaves less articulate communities without a voice. Our procedure is simpler and transparent. It is not a question of trust, as Scottish ministers already overrule local authorities' decisions through the notification procedure. Our approach is fair and proportionate. It gives rights to communities, not only at the start of the process but throughout it. It will deliver certainty for communities, local authorities, and—above all—developers.

I am indeed.

Unusually, I will start by telling the chamber what amendment 123 is not. I do so because there is an enormous amount of mince—[ Laughter. ] I am sorry; I did not mean to say "mince". There is an enormous amount of misinformation in the ether. This is not the third-party right of appeal by the back door. If members do not believe me, they should consider the comments of RSPB Scotland on our amendment: "This process would not introduce a third party right of appeal regime. While this is not our preferred solution to the problems inherent in the planning system it offers a constructive way forward with minimal inconvenience to the development industry." To label community right of notification as a form of TPRA deliberately misunderstands our proposals. Community right of notification is not anti-development and it is not anti-business. I come from an economic development background and I do not want to stifle development. It is about transparency, fairness, and involving communities in a strategic way where their input will be valuable and appropriate. It is about ensuring that we have the best possible planning system. We have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to ensure that  the planning system is fit for purpose for developers and communities. Amendment 123 is a joint effort from me, Sarah Boyack and Pauline McNeill. It has been developed during the past year and it reflects soundings that were taken from a variety of people such as planners, senior lawyers, members of the Faculty of Advocates and communities themselves. We applaud the Executive's intention to give communities the opportunity to participate at the very start of the planning process. That is entirely sensible, but we also want to give communities a say before consent is given. A community right of notification mirrors the requirement that is placed on local authorities to notify ministers of planning applications that merit call-in. That is not new, nor is it rocket science. We are working with the grain of what already exists in legislation. The criteria for notification by a local authority are already set out in regulations under the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997. The Executive indicated its intention to expand the criteria to include all local authority interest cases, major and local developments that are significantly contrary to the development plan, and developments that require an environmental impact assessment. That is all welcome. Our proposal would have minimal additional cost, as local authorities are already required to notify Scottish ministers. The Executive anticipates that more notifications will come from local authorities as a result of the expanded criteria, rising from 350—the current figure—to 800. So, again, we are working with the grain of Executive legislation. The procedure would be relatively simple. First, a body would have to be registered as a community body. Our amendment clearly sets out that criterion for registration and gives ministers enabling powers to make regulations in that regard. In order to trigger a community right of notification, a community body would be expected to have objected to the planning application in the first place and, within seven days, the local authority would have to notify the community body of its intention to grant permission. Within 14 days, the community body would have to get back to the local authority with its views on whether the application should be called in. One organisation has suggested that we would be adding at least seven weeks to the process, and that—horror of horrors—the minister would have a period of 28 days in which to consider the matter, which could be extended. The last time that I counted, seven and 14 made 21—that is three weeks, not seven weeks—and the minister currently has 28 days in which he can consider matters, which period he can extend under existing legislation. We are not, therefore,  proposing anything different. Let us keep things in proportion. I want to make two points in closing.

Our proposed approach is proportionate. It would not create a third-party right of appeal or cause unnecessary delays, but it would deliver certainty for communities, for local authorities and—above all—for developers. I move amendment 123.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I will be really quick. Does the member agree that the partial transfers that go on throughout Scotland every day are about community ownership? I deeply regret the fact that in ward areas in which it has representatives, the Scottish Socialist Party says one thing, but says something completely different here in the Parliament. I do not think that that is entirely honest.

I welcome the minister's confirmation that the integrated pilot will remain in its current form and thank him for his letter setting out the next steps. I am sure that he  will agree with me that the provision of anaesthetics is key to the future provision of services at the Vale of Leven hospital. Will he therefore make two things abundantly clear to NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and, indeed, to Parliament? First, will he make it clear that the starting point for any review of services is that all options must be considered to sustain anaesthetics at the Vale? Secondly, will he make it clear that a north-of-the-river solution will underpin the review, with the majority of health care for my constituents delivered at the Vale of Leven hospital?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will announce the outcome of the consultation on byelaws for Loch Lomond. (S2O-10854)

I know that the minister will be considering the submissions carefully. She will, however, be aware of two issues that unite all the campaigners, irrespective of where they stand on the question of the need for byelaws. First, there is a deeply held desire to ban jet-skis. Secondly, there is a need to enforce the existing byelaws, never mind create new ones. Will the minister act on those remarkably united views?

Is it not the case that under an SNP Government, we would lose them all?

I approach the debate with a sense of déjà vu: another SNP debate, another reserved matter. I will digress for a second to point out to the SNP that, in a seminal piece of work, the Electoral Commission identified that almost 60 per cent of people in Scotland were critical of the Parliament because it spent too much time talking about issues over which it has no power. The SNP might want to reflect on that.

No. I will give a friendly warning to the SNP: the people of Scotland will soon begin to wonder whether there is any point in having SNP MPs at Westminster. Are the sorrowful six incapable of making the case there, where—let us not forget this point—the decision will be made? Let us consider that for a minute. I looked back at Hansard and found that Angus Robertson asked a question in December 2005. That was nine months ago. There was also a question in June 2005, six months earlier, but I had to look back to 2002 before I found anything else. Perhaps my research is not that great, but it is interesting that, in the place where the SNP can influence matters and argue for change, it just does not bother. It prefers instead to work through this Parliament, which is not the body that will be responsible for the decision. Of course—wait for it—the SNP believes that independence is the answer to all ills.

I say to Nicola Sturgeon that I am genuinely curious to know whether, in a brave new independent Scotland, the SNP would view Trident as an asset or a liability in its negotiations with Westminster? Would it hang on to it for a bit in order to barter it away and trade it for something else? What would its approach be? We deserve to know, because I am not convinced that Nicola Sturgeon has thought that through. In that policy vacuum lie uncertainty and instability.

No, I will only give way to Nicola Sturgeon if she wants to answer the point.

The point is simple: I posed Nicola Sturgeon a question but she is unable to answer it, and the record   will reflect that. I pay a genuine tribute to the many people who marched from Faslane to Edinburgh last week. Many are from my constituency and, indeed, many are party colleagues of mine. I respect their commitment to the issue. It is fair to say that many people have campaigned for nuclear disarmament over the years. I acknowledge in particular the contribution of the churches, the trade unions and many communities besides. A nuclear-free world and achieving world peace are aspirations that we all share. We may differ on how to achieve those aims, but I know of no sane person, inside or outside the chamber, who wants nuclear weapons ever to be used anywhere in the world.  It is right that there should be the fullest public debate about Trident. There are questions that need to be answered, but I make no apology for commenting about the economic impact of Faslane. [ Interruption. ] The SNP may scorn, but it is important. The 7,000 direct jobs and 4,000 further jobs in the supply chain represent one quarter of the total workforce in the Dumbarton constituency. That is a staggering number of jobs. I have been accused—[ Interruption. ] Kindly listen. I have been accused in the past of using that as an excuse for keeping nuclear weapons. Far from it—those are the facts; they might be uncomfortable to the SNP, but they are real and must be addressed. Hard politics is about having the maturity to get beyond the rhetoric and accept our responsibility to the people who work in the defence industry. Roseanna Cunningham and Bruce Crawford are very quick to defend Ministry of Defence jobs in their constituencies, and rightly so. However, they would pull us out of NATO and throw our defence workers in Faslane and Coulport on the dole. Oh yes, I almost forgot—there is also Alex Salmond's wee, pretendy Scottish navy. It has been promised to Rosyth, but when the SNP thinks that we are not looking, it promises it to Faslane in the west. There would be only a handful of jobs. In concluding, let me congratulate the Greens. At least they have started to recognise our responsibility to the workforce. However, their scorecard reads six out of 10, as they make the mistake of letting Westminster off the hook. I do not understand why we constantly seek to use MSPs as messengers when we have Members of Parliament whom we can lobby directly. After all, it will be their decision. I respect all views expressed in the chamber, but I will continue to argue that if we truly want to rid the United Kingdom of nuclear weapons, we have to mitigate the consequences of so doing. I will not take lessons in morals or ethics from the SNP, because people expect real action, not rhetoric and most certainly not the empty posturing of the SNP. I move amendment S2M-4864.5, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert: "notes that decisions pertaining to national defence, such as any future replacement of Trident, are reserved to the Westminster parliament; notes that the United Nations Security Council plays a vital role in working for peace and security on a global basis; welcomes the United Kingdom's role within both the United Nations and NATO; notes that the General Election manifestos for 2005 of the Labour, Conservative and Liberal Democrat parties called for the retention of an independent nuclear deterrent; believes that there should be the widest possible debate on the future security of Scotland, the United Kingdom and the wider world, covering all options on Trident, including non-replacement; notes the comments of the UK Government that no decisions on replacing Trident have yet been taken;  welcomes the significant reductions in the UK's nuclear weapons arsenal; is committed to the goal of the global elimination of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons, and wishes to see the United Kingdom continue to work both bilaterally and through the United Nations to urge states not yet party to non-proliferation instruments to become so, to remain committed to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and to make further progress toward significant reductions in the nuclear arsenals of the major nuclear powers."

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made with West Dunbartonshire Council's  application to the community ownership programme. (S2O-10478)

I am delighted with that response. As the minister will be aware, the council has submitted a bid for early action funds as part of the programme to kick-start improvements by demolishing properties and building new homes. The minister has indicated that he will decide soon on a move that will ensure that the people of Dumbarton and the Vale of Leven see welcome investment in their communities. Does he think that such investment will help to regenerate local communities such as Castlehill, which he has visited?

The Justice 2 Committee, which was charged with scrutiny of the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill, heard evidence from a wide spectrum of people. Yes, we heard from the legal profession, but we also heard from those who have had a less than desirable experience at the hands of the legal profession. Some said that the bill goes too far and others said that it does not go far enough, and some of that debate has been replayed today in the chamber, but all broadly welcomed the provisions in the bill. We need to remember the context. People were increasingly unhappy about how complaints were dealt with, about the time taken and about the perception of vested interests. That led to accusations of bias, which generated the very lack of trust and confidence in the system that we are debating today. We have heard some examples—thankfully few, but they are equally unfortunate—of cases in which people were failed by their legal representatives. I recognise—and it is worth putting on the record—the changes that the Law Society of Scotland made in recent times and, indeed, the significant improvement to its complaints process, but in many respects it was too late, because the damage was done. Confidence was not restored and, given that lawyers continued to police themselves, one wondered whether we could ever reclaim the required degree of confidence. For me, the Executive's bill is very much about restoring confidence and ensuring that we have a system that people trust. I welcome the creation of an independent complaints commission—independent of the Executive and the Law Society—that will deal with complaints fairly and transparently and make decisions in which we can have faith. I want to focus on two issues in relation to the commission before I move on to the legal aid aspects of the bill, but before I do that I turn to my learned colleague Gordon Jackson and remind him of the females who did indeed come before the committee. He might recall the name of Caroline Flanagan, the president of the Law Society of Scotland. The last time I looked, she was female. Secondly, giving evidence on behalf of the Faculty of Advocates, no less, was Valerie Stacey. The last time I looked, she was the vice-dean, and female too. Let that refresh Gordon Jackson's memory. I move on to deal with the issue of levies. I accept the need for a general levy to contribute to the commission's running costs—it is appropriate—but the committee had genuine concerns about the complaints levy and the fact  that it would be applied irrespective of outcome. The committee strongly believes that the levy should apply only if the complaint is upheld. In other words, we propose a system where the polluter pays. I am pleased that the minister has acknowledged the committee's concerns and will lodge amendments at stage 2 so that the levy will be payable only when a complaint is upheld or there is a settlement. I turn to the compensation ceiling of £20,000, which is, of course, in addition to the refund of fees. I listened carefully to the debate. I am persuaded by the proposal to extend the definition of inadequate professional service to include negligence—I have no difficulty with that whatsoever—but I am unclear about the rationale for setting the maximum at £20,000. We have only just changed it—in April 2005—from £1,000 to £5,000. I understand that the Executive has spoken to the lead insurers under the master policy and noted the operation of the Financial Ombudsman Service, but I still think that the figure is arbitrary and that it does not reflect the position in Scotland. Undoubtedly, the debate will continue at stage 2. I am persuaded of the principle, but I am not convinced that we have arrived at the right figure.

It is very simple. I appreciate that the Tories might not get this, but access to justice and enabling people to get a degree of resolution without recourse to the courts are things that we in this part of the chamber are promoting. I turn to what is, for me, the most substantial part of the bill. It is fitting that Margaret Mitchell introduced her point, because the most substantial part is about improving access to justice. I am delighted by the announcements that the minister made today, which will make a practical difference in providing justice for all. The bill as drafted would create case-by-case funding for non-solicitors, which would result in means testing of clients and the bureaucracy of individual application forms and would, at the end of the day, have a marginal impact on increasing the availability of quality advice. However, the deputy minister has acknowledged the need to deliver a step change in access to justice. His promise to amend the bill at stage 2 to provide grant funding is welcome, as are his comments about publicly funded defence for civil cases as well as for criminal ones, which will tackle unmet need. Civil justice provision must be based on need, not demand; it should be client centred  rather than institution centred; and it must lead to greater empowerment for all those whom we were elected to represent. Those steps will tackle disadvantage through the provision of early and easy access to justice. The deputy minister set out a positive course of action, with a series of announcements to the Parliament. Unlike my colleague Gordon Jackson, I would be happy to rewrite my speech, provided the minister keeps on that course.

No sisters?

I join others in congratulating Pauline McNeill on securing a debate on a subject that I know has been dear to her heart. Although it seems an incredibly long time since deregulation took place, I remember the images that newspapers carried of the buses in Glasgow's Hope Street, where people could not only not see for the buses, but could not move because so many buses were on the same street simultaneously. Pauline McNeill is right to make us think back to then and to ask ourselves whether deregulation has served our communities well. We know that local bus services are vital to communities across Scotland in urban and rural areas alike. In some areas, buses are the only public transport available and often act as a lifeline connection to essential services such as hospitals. On balance, my community is not badly served by public transport. We have a great train service. We have a bus service, although it could do with improvement. We even have integration between the two services, as FirstBus services link directly with the First ScotRail timetable. However, it is clear from listening to members today that there is a problem. We should strive to have the best possible bus services and not simply settle for second best. Constituents regularly raise with me a number of areas for improvement, which are very similar to the concerns that other members have highlighted. On the issue of quality, buses in some areas are getting older. The most profitable routes are given the newer buses, but suburban routes can be essential, especially where the bus is the only option for public transport. On accessibility, the need for new low-floor buses is felt acutely by disabled people, parents with buggies and older people alike. Frequency, however, is the issue on which most of the problems arise. Are there enough buses serving the right routes or are the most profitable routes simply picked off? Do all the buses come at the same time? Do people need to wait for half an hour and then watch—usually, it is raining at the same time—as three of them come simultaneously?  Another issue is the availability of buses at night-time and weekends. Throughout Scotland, there are bus-free zones at night-time. In my local community in Bonhill, such a service was removed but thankfully—with subsidy from SPT, to which I am very obliged—subsequently reinstated. However, the service was provided again by the previous operator. Given that, again and again, the cost falls on the public sector, I am not sure whether that is cost-effective or represents value for the public purse. Pauline McNeill is right to say that the issue is not just about more money for subsidy. Money should come with obligations. We need to place obligations on bus operators to deliver services appropriately. In closing, on the basis that good things come in threes, I echo other members in making three suggestions to the minister. First, he should give people the right to be consulted and to have an input into route development. Secondly, he should give them a right to lodge an objection when routes are changed or reduced. Thirdly, he should give them the right to have a reasonable bus service. If that requires a degree of regulation or an alternative franchise model, as outlined by Bill Butler, I encourage the minister to consider that seriously, so that the bus service is indeed a service to all our communities.

The minister is aware of my continuing anger and frustration with Argyll and Bute Council, which is failing to meet the needs of elderly people in Helensburgh and Lomond. I welcome the council's very recent announcement that it has found extra money for care of the elderly—is it not amazing what can be achieved when one sets one's mind to it? That said, the money is not enough, particularly in view of the council's underspend last year of some £2 million on its funding from the Executive. The chamber will have to forgive me for being cynical, but the £700,000 that the council is putting in is exactly the sum that it will get from NHS resource transfer. Does the minister agree that this could well be a case of smoke and mirrors on the part of the council? Will he immediately send in a social work inspection team to ensure that older people in my constituency do not have to suffer any further?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention now?

That was divine intervention on my behalf. There is an issue of parliamentary consistency. The SNP voted for the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill scheme to be built in phases; there was no requirement for a compulsion section in that bill. Is the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill of less importance?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to improve the availability of care services for elderly people in Argyll and Bute. (S2O-10022)

I suggest that Argyll and Bute Council needs more help, because I am seriously concerned about the provision of elderly care services in the council's area. I have constituents who have been assessed as needing 24-hour care or day care but who have been told to wait because there is no money. No interim arrangements are in place and nothing is being provided for those people. The local authority is failing to meet delayed discharge targets—indeed it is the only council in Scotland whose figures are heading in the wrong direction. Will the minister confirm that last year the council spent 5 per cent below grant-aided expenditure—which puts it at about 29 th out of 32 councils—and will he urgently send in the Social Work Inspection Agency, so that it can examine the management of the service in Argyll and Bute in the interests of my constituents?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will improve road safety on the A82. (S2O-9928)

I thank the minister for that response and for the welcome work on the route accident reduction plan. There is a specific problem, though, for constituents of mine accessing the A82 from Barnhill, due to the volume and speed of traffic on the road. I would be grateful if the minister would agree to a meeting between me and Transport Scotland at the location to consider possible solutions. Will he also ensure that the A82, Scotland's main tourist route, remains a top priority for improvement in the national transport strategy and in the investment framework for trunk roads?

I have no doubt that the amendment in the name of Charlie Gordon has  provoked a stimulating and thoughtful debate. If the Parliament does not support his contention, I hope that the debate will continue, because the problem of knife carrying is endemic in Scotland. Most members have considered the seriousness of the issue in the speeches, but there is aye one, Presiding Officer. I refer to the astonishing and illiberal speech by Jeremy Purvis, which was big on rhetoric and small on reality. He is so convinced of his approach that he evidently must have brought amendments back to the chamber, but where are they? I do not see them. No evidence on Jeremy Purvis's proposal was given at stage 1. To be frank, several committee members think that his proposal was dreamed up on the back of an envelope. Stewart Maxwell is right: Jeremy Purvis's proposed amendments would mean that we considered rape to be a lesser crime. The issue is far too serious to play politics with.

I will not give way, because Mr Purvis would not take an intervention from me. There are courtesies in the chamber. Perhaps the Liberals' Jeremy Purvis should join the real world and consider the real experience of the communities that some of us represent.

I thank John Swinney for his helpful comments, which are not necessarily good for his career, but good for the debate. I hope that ministers will take away his practical suggestion to consider the numbers employed by the proposed independent police complaints commissioner. John Swinney's other comments have considerable merit. One can have an independent police complaints commissioner with a distinctive role within the ombudsman's office. The ombudsman already has a specialist role, operates in complex areas and deals with health,  housing, local government, police and a range of other public bodies. In lodging my amendments, I want to create a one-stop shop that is transparent and simple for the ordinary people we represent to understand and a single complaints body, independent of the police, that is easy to access. I recognise the emerging parliamentary consensus on the need to reconsider the number of commissioners. I accept that we need to do that in an holistic way. For that reason, I will withdraw amendment 139 in anticipation of future changes from the Parliament.  Amendment 139, by agreement, withdrawn.

I absolutely believe in the need to have an independent police complaints commissioner. Having a body that can satisfy the public that complaints against the police are being investigated thoroughly and independently is critical. The amendments that I have lodged do not seek to change that principle in any way. I acknowledge that the Executive has a genuine desire to adopt a rights-based, transparent approach to complaints, irrespective of the institution. However, the danger is that we are about to create more institutional clutter, which common sense says we should avoid. General concern is felt throughout the Parliament about the fact that the number of commissioners seems to have mushroomed and that, to all intents and purposes, some commissioners lack accountability. The Finance Committee is working to examine and review the number of commissioners, but the concern today is about the overlap between the proposed independent police complaints commissioner and the Scottish public services ombudsman. The committee took evidence on that at stage 1, and the matter was considered in the stage 1 debate in the chamber and at stage 2. I want to highlight three areas of substance for the minister. First, the police are already within the ombudsman's jurisdiction. The ombudsman can investigate a complaint of maladministration or service failure. Therefore, we are talking about clear duplication. It has been suggested that there will be protocols between various agencies and the proposed commissioner, but I simply note that such protocols probably already exist between those agencies and the ombudsman. We are in danger of recreating something that we already have. Secondly, I highlight the procedures that cover civilian staff who are employed by the police. Those staff are not officers and are subject to a separate disciplinary procedure. Their circumstances are more like those of staff whose work is already covered by the ombudsman. Thirdly, in these days of efficient government, organisations with similar back-office and service functions have opportunities to share.  I want to remind members of a little bit of the Parliament's history. We created the Scottish public services ombudsman in 2002 because we rightly wanted an open, accountable and easily understood complaints system that—most important of all—had the trust of the Scottish public. At that time, we merged the work of four ombudsmen to create a one-stop shop so that where people could complain would be clear, they would not be faced with institutional clutter and there would be no confusion about or barriers to making a complaint. The tragedy is that we sometimes forget the sensible approach that the Parliament has taken by creating more commissioners to deal with complaints. Our partnership agreement commits us to having an independent police complaints commissioner, and this suite of amendments does exactly that. We should not reinvent something that we already have. We were right in 2002 to introduce the clarity that is involved in having a one-stop shop for complaints in the Scottish public services ombudsman, and that approach is right now. It is efficient and would deliver an independent police complaints commission in Scotland. I move amendment 139.

Can the member comment on the modernised form of inhibition that might be used instead of the Executive's proposal in the bill?

We have heard much this afternoon about balance—striking a balance, maintaining a balance and a colourful illustration from Christine Grahame of the balance between the red corner and the blue corner.  Essentially, we are talking about the balance between debtors and creditors. I do not want to add to all those colourful descriptions, but I would like to share an anonymous quote: "The only person who sticks closer to you in adversity than a friend is a creditor." My concern is less about striking a balance and much more about protecting the most vulnerable in society—the can't pays rather than the won't pays. Like other members, I acknowledge the hard work of the Enterprise and Culture Committee. Diligence is an arcane and complex area of law and one that is, I confess, at times impenetrable, yet members of the committee have got to grips with it and made it easier for us lesser mortals to understand, and for that I thank them. I also commend the Executive, and the minister in particular, for listening to the cross-party group on tackling debt and to the credit unions, which raised valid concerns about protected trust deeds, and, I hope, for taking on board some of their concerns. I want to highlight four areas and to focus predominantly on one. I begin, as other members did, with land attachment. I do not support the Executive's proposals. It is quite draconian for a debtor to be able to lose their home for a debt of as little as £1,500. I echo Christine Grahame's point about the Law Society, which is not given to overly colourful or dramatic statements, in my experience. We should sit up and pay attention when the Law Society says: "Once people hear how land attachment is going to work, there will be a queue."—[ Official Report, Enterprise and Culture Committee , 21 March 2006; c 2853 .] I am genuinely concerned about that.

I understand that and I do not pretend that it is not a complex area, but I am persuaded by the committee's approach to the matter, which is essentially to say that, if the primary dwelling-house is exempted from sale, that will deal with those who are most vulnerable and who would feel the impact of that provision. I therefore ask the minister to consider that proposal in more detail, because it could prevent the threat of homelessness, never mind the actuality of homelessness. Secondly, I turn to bank arrestments. I welcome the Executive's positive proposal to have a minimum balance of £370 that cannot be touched, but I am concerned that benefits in general are not protected. I am thinking of housing benefit,  although there are other examples. Increasingly, benefits such as housing benefit are paid into bank accounts. If there was an arrestment, the fact that rent would not be paid to the landlord could lead to homelessness. I do not find credible the argument that the banks cannot identify or earmark funds in that way. I suggest that members look at their bank statement. Child benefit clearly has a separate identifier. I am certain that banks could earmark funds in that way. The question is whether they are willing to do it. I ask the minister to look again at the matter. Thirdly, I would like the minister to consider what we do to protect people who have no income and no assets. Like Donald Gorrie, I believe that we should not lose the recommendations of the working group and the opportunity afforded by the bill. There is a continuing debate about broadening the debt arrangement scheme to include many more low-income debtors. Simple measures such as freezing interest and the composition of debts would be extremely helpful. I urge the minister to consider those matters, as the committee has done. I will deal with the issue of credit unions and protected trust deeds, which Christine May has pursued on the committee. The issue was raised with me first by the Vale of Leven Credit Union and shortly thereafter by Dumbarton Credit Union. I will highlight some of the problems that the sharp increase in the use of protected trust deeds has caused. No credit union is large enough to support the continuous losses that are incurred through the non-recovery of loans that results from protected trust deeds. The system lumps credit unions together with massive creditors such as the Royal Bank of Scotland, HBOS, Visa and Mastercard, all of which are major global players that charge much higher fees and—some would argue—much higher interest rates than credit unions do. It is interesting to note that some trustees charge about £200 an hour to administer trust deeds and that their expenses are paid before creditors are paid a penny. There are also credibility issues. Although I am sure that such cases do not reflect common practice, I will share with members some examples that I find quite interesting. Some trust deeds allow, as a legitimate expense, £200 a month for a primary school child to have school lunches. I am interested to know what school the child attends. Another example is a trust deed that allows as a legitimate expense £100 a month for dog food—that dog must be taken care of very well. A final example is that cars of substantial value have been excluded entirely from a trust deed.  Credit unions suffer disproportionately from losses as a result of protected trust deeds. I will be helpful to the minister and suggest three possible solutions, which I have mentioned before. First, could we not treat credit unions as we treat the Student Loans Company, in which case the loan is exempt? We already have a derogation from European Union competition law that might enable the Executive to consider the issue differently. Secondly, small community-based credit unions could be ranked above the mass of creditors. Finally, if we were to extend the debt arrangement scheme to include more people, we could reduce the need for protected trust deeds in the first place.

There is much to be welcomed in the bill. I am not sure whether I can compete with Pauline McNeill's passion for planning, and I most definitely cannot compete with John Swinburne's passion for East Kilbride, but I believe that we have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to put in place a modern planning framework and to ensure that we connect people firmly with place.  It is critical that we get the bill right, because it will form the basis of how we develop sustainable and thriving communities, using the levers that are available to us to enable growth and a vibrant economy, enhance our environment and, perhaps most important, assist in regenerating communities and tackling poverty. I urge the Executive to use the bill as the central reference point from which to develop other, connected, policies on, for example, the supply of more affordable housing, the encouragement of renewable energy or the alignment of our considerable resources to national and regional development priorities. Having a national planning framework, up-to-date and relevant development plans and communities that are engaged in the process at an early stage are all positive aspects. I know that the minister will want to ensure that community engagement, which is absolutely right in theory, works in practice. Like many other members, I have seen some interesting examples of what some would call consultation even though it does not involve any discussion or listening and there is no real engagement at any level. Thankfully, I am talking about the few and not the many, but we need to send out a strong signal that what is required is not just consultation but real involvement and genuine participation. I also make a plea for consistent definitions of "community" and "local". That would certainly help my local community to understand its role. Equally, I am interested to know how ministers will monitor the effectiveness of community participation. Their continuing oversight will be welcome. I recognise that the Executive's approach founds on early engagement and that it therefore front loads community involvement. I do not disagree with that approach, but I think that there is a gap at the end of the process. Donald Gorrie and I do not often agree, but I think he is right. It is not an either/or choice. We need to make sure that we have both. The question for me, therefore, is whether the gap is filled by TPRA or, as I prefer to call it, a community right of appeal. I have no doubt that the communities that I represent in Helensburgh, Dumbarton and the Vale of Leven want a community right of appeal. Many of them have written to me to say exactly that. I am also aware that 86 per cent of those who responded to the Executive's consultation supported such a right. However, I do not want to get into an increasingly heated and polarised debate about whether we are for or against a community right of appeal and whether we are somehow for or against business as a consequence; I simply want to ensure that the Parliament gets the right system for the country.  That is why I believe we should have a community right of notification. Pauline McNeill has outlined the proposal, so I will add to what she said. At the moment, in certain circumstances, local authorities are required to notify proposals to ministers. For example, if a proposed development would affect a trunk road or special road or if it would increase the risk of flood damage, and in many more circumstances besides, the authority must notify its decision to ministers. The Executive is wisely expanding that list to include major and local developments that are significantly contrary to local plans, local authority interest cases and a number of other categories. Such decisions will need to be notified to ministers, who will then determine whether to call in the most contentious applications. Usually, that will be followed by a local inquiry.

Indeed, but if I may finish, the member will see where the ministers' duties would apply. However, before I move on from that point, I want to state that it would be useful to have the criteria for call-ins published so that the process is transparent and people know what is going on. The simplicity of the proposal that Sarah Boyack, Pauline McNeill and I have developed is that it would give communities exactly the same power, as the duty on ministers would also apply if they received a notification from a community. The benefit of the proposal is that ministers would get a clear view from both the local authority and the wider community at the same time and they would be able to make a more informed judgment on whether the planning decision should be called in. Our proposal would provide certainty both for business and for communities that there would be appropriate oversight from the Executive. The proposal would not adversely impact to any great degree on the legitimate desire to make the planning system function more quickly and more efficiently, nor would it require much additional resource. I welcome the tantalising comments from Euan Robson—indeed, I welcome all converts—and I would be happy to share with the Liberal Democrats the detailed proposals on which Sarah Boyack, Pauline McNeill and I have worked for six months now. This is a positive opportunity. I acknowledge the positive discussions that we have had with the Deputy Minister for  Communities. As ever, I am grateful to her for her thoughtful approach. I hope that ministers will use this opportunity to capture the essence of our proposed community right of notification. If they do, they will perform a service to democracy and fairness but, above all, they will ensure that we have a robust, progressive planning system for the 21 st century.

I join other members in congratulating my colleague Christine May on securing the debate on credit unions. She  has long supported credit unions, as have many other members. I will use this opportunity to talk about protected trust deeds—I hope members will forgive me for doing so—but first I will talk about financial exclusion. I will not rehearse the scale of the challenge that we face in ensuring that the poorest people in society have access to an adequate income, affordable credit and the full range of financial products that most people in our communities enjoy. Although more people have bank accounts than ever before, a significant number of people remain without financial products. Needless to say, individual indebtedness remains a persistent problem that we need to tackle because, as many members know, its impact on families is devastating. I am clear that by tackling financial exclusion, credit unions are part of the solution. They provide access to low-interest loans, help to improve financial literacy and provide a lifeline for many communities. I welcome the extension to the range of services that they can offer, which now includes insurance products, bank accounts and flexible loans. I congratulate the Executive and the Deputy Minister for Communities on their positive work on the issue, which has resulted in growth in the number of credit union members in Scotland. As members would expect, I pay particular tribute to Vale of Leven Credit Union and Dumbarton Credit Union, which provide a quality service to all sections of my local community. Vale of Leven Credit Union first highlighted the problems with protected trust deeds and was followed soon after by Dumbarton Credit Union, Dalmuir Credit Union, Baillieston Credit Union, Parkhead Credit Union and Capital Credit Union. My post box and, I am sure, that of other members has been full with correspondence on protected trust deeds. I remind members that the majority of credit unions are small mutual organisations that work in the community to help their members manage their debts. Surpluses are reinvested in the local community. I will highlight some of the real problems that the sharp increase in the use of protected trust deeds has caused. No credit union is large enough to support the continuous losses that are incurred through non-recovery of loans as a result of protected trust deeds. The system lumps credit unions together with massive creditors such as the Royal Bank of Scotland, HBOS, Visa and MasterCard, all of which are major global players that charge much higher fees than credit unions and—some would argue—much higher interest rates. It is interesting that some trustees charge about £200 an hour to administer trust deeds and that their expenses are paid before creditors see a penny. There are also credibility issues. For  example, some trust deeds allow as legitimate expenses £200 a month for one primary school child to have school lunches—I am interested in knowing what school that is—and £100 a month for dog food. That dog must be very well taken care of. Credit unions suffer disproportionately from losses as a result of protected trust deeds. I echo the call for the Deputy Minister for Communities to talk to the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. I offer three possible solutions. First, we could treat credit unions as we treat the Student Loans Company—in relation to which we have a derogation from European Union competition law—which might enable the Executive to consider the issue differently. Secondly, small community-based credit unions could be ranked above the massive creditors when funds are distributed from protected trust deeds. Finally, if we extended the debt arrangement scheme to include more people, we would reduce the need for protected trust deeds.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak briefly in this debate in support of the legislative consent motion on the UK Police and Justice Bill and the Justice 2 Committee's amendment, the wording of which the committee agreed unanimously. As the minister outlined far more clearly than I am about to do, the main provision that will impact on Scotland is the creation of the national policing improvement agency, which will have responsibility for providing services such as IT systems and training in England and Wales and which will continue to provide the Airwave system. We need to ensure that Scottish interests are adequately considered, and the committee welcomed the deputy minister's assurance that the agency will consult ACPOS before any action or decision is taken that might affect policing in Scotland. With that assurance, neither I nor the committee have any difficulty in supporting the minister's legislative consent motion. In the rest of my remarks, I will concentrate on the committee's amendment. The convener was right to say that we do not seek to replace text with which we entirely agree, but wish merely to add our concerns about elements of the Extradition Act 2003. For the benefit of members who might not have followed the matter closely, the Police and Justice Bill contains clauses that will amend the 2003 act. There are two concerns that exercise the committee. First, we believe that the extradition treaty is a one-way treaty: some three years on, it has not been ratified by the United States. As a consequence, if the US wishes to extradite anyone from the UK, only information—not evidence—is required. Those being threatened with extradition  will have no evidential hearing, no ability to rebut any information that is provided and no voice in the process. However, if the UK applies for the extradition of someone in the US, there will be an evidential hearing at which a defendant can challenge and rebut evidence. Why should the arrangements be different over here? It seems inherently unfair that different tests should apply and that UK nationals should be somehow disadvantaged in the process. At the very least, we should expect principles of equality between nations to be paramount in all that we do. Secondly, the committee is unclear about the status of an extradition request for someone living in Scotland against whom the Lord Advocate has decided not to proceed. The point merits a little explanation, particularly for non-lawyers like me. The Lord Advocate has ultimate discretion over whether a person accused of criminal conduct over which Scottish courts have jurisdiction is prosecuted in Scotland. We received welcome and clear confirmation of that point from the Minister for Justice. However, problems arise if the Lord Advocate decides not to prosecute a particular person or decides that there is insufficient evidence to take the case any further. That person, who has deliberately not been prosecuted in the Scottish courts, can be extradited to the US without—let me remind the chamber—an evidential hearing, without being able to rebut information that has been presented, and without any voice in the process. I understand that precedent governs extradition within the European Union. Under the European arrest warrants scheme, which was introduced in June 2002, a member state can refuse extradition and try the defendant locally. The UK might want to consider whether it should apply such a provision to all extraditions. It is not for us to interfere in Westminster's deliberations. However, given the distinctive nature of our justice system, it is legitimate for us to seek to protect the interests of people in Scotland. On that basis, I would be very grateful if the Minister for Justice would raise our concerns with her UK counterpart. I urge all members to support the legislative consent motion and the Justice 2 Committee's amendment.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Like Mike Rumbles, I was moved by some of the comments from our faith communities. However, does the member agree with comments from his Liberal colleague Alan Reid, MP for Argyll and Bute, who says that a replacement for Trident is vital?

rose—

Will the member take an intervention?

I am impressed with your time-keeping, Presiding Officer. Does the member recognise the very real issues about employment at Faslane? What does she propose to do about them?

Only four days separate them. One is considered to be more mature and reflective; the other is considered less well developed and always in a hurry. I am not describing siblings or even members in this chamber—I am contrasting motions that have been lodged by the Greens. One was lodged by Mark Ballard on 20 January; the other was lodged by Chris Ballance on 24 January. Both of them cover the subject of Trident. The fundamental difference is that Mark Ballard's motion calls for "the fullest possible public debate", whereas the motion in the name of Chris Ballance wants us to decide now. So, what is the Greens' position? Or do they have several? I do not necessarily mean that as a criticism. There are lots of conflicting views within individual parties, and rightly so. Indeed, many members have not made up their minds.

In a second. What is true is that the decision on whether to replace Trident will be momentous, and I agree with Chris Ballance that it is one of the critical economic and strategic decisions that the UK faces.

I say to Mark Ballard—who has taken up a substantial amount of my time—that I always study his motions with interest.

Mark Ballard's motion was the right one. I want a full debate. I believe that there is the maturity in our democratic process to enable that debate to take place constructively. I welcome the early input from the Catholic church and the Church of Scotland, which both have a long-standing opposition to nuclear weapons. I welcome the input of trade unions, which have campaigned in the Labour Party against nuclear weapons. Indeed, the Scottish Labour Party conference has adopted a consistent anti-nuclear position. I do not dismiss any of that, but I also want to know the views of communities throughout Scotland, including those in the vicinity of Faslane. There are questions that we need to have answered and options that we should explore fully. Does Trident need to be replaced? Is the current system obsolete? What will the international context be in 20 to 30 years' time, and what will be the consequences of our actions? People have heard me speak before about the economic impact of Faslane, and I make no apology for doing so again. The 7,000 direct jobs and 4,000 further jobs in the supply chain represent one quarter of the total workforce in the Dumbarton constituency. That is a staggering number of jobs in what is considered to be a deprived area. In the past, I have been accused of using that as some kind of an excuse for keeping nuclear weapons. Far from it—those are the facts; they might be uncomfortable, but they are very real. The hard  politics is about having the maturity to get beyond the rhetoric and accept our responsibility to the people who work in the defence industry; that comprises 31,000 jobs at Faslane, Rosyth and across Scotland. I hope that the Greens reject the Scottish National Party's "facile amendment"; Bill Butler's wording was spot on. I hope that the Greens realise that the Notting Hill nats would pull us out of NATO, tell us that they have the answers to the questions about the likely economic impact of that action, and—wait for it—base the Scottish navy at Faslane. Meanwhile, Alex Salmond is busy saying that the SNP would base the Scottish navy at Rosyth. Which is it to be? Perhaps the Scottish navy will be so big that it can be based at two different ports. Just in case we were in any doubt about the size of the Scottish navy, it will be seven frigates with 100 staff. What will the SNP do about the other 31,000 jobs that depend on defence? I respect all views that are expressed in this chamber, but I will continue to argue that if we want to rid the UK of nuclear weapons, we will have to mitigate the consequences of so doing. Real action, not rhetoric, and having the fullest possible debate will give us time to consider all aspects of the issue. We all want peace and a nuclear-free world. I know of no sane person who wants nuclear weapons to be used. The difference lies in how we try to achieve that. I believe that the Labour Party has a good record. Nuclear Lance missiles are gone. Maritime nuclear capability on surface ships is gone. Air-launched nuclear weapons are gone. Trident is our only nuclear weapons system and it now has a third fewer warheads. We place high priority on arms control and non-proliferation and we would all agree that the two principal ways of achieving those are through the nuclear non-proliferation treaty and the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty. We are unequivocally committed to those. From the words of the Prime Minister and the Secretary of State for Defence, I am clear that no decision has been taken about the replacement of Trident. I do not want them to make that decision until they have heard what people think. We have an opportunity to influence that decision. Mark Ballard's motion acknowledged the central importance of having "the fullest possible public debate"; I agree with that. Whether it is the Greens' green paper or the Liberals' white paper is not the issue for me; the issue is whether we reach out and engage with the people who matter most—ordinary people in our communities. I move amendment S2M-3866.4, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert:  "notes that in 2005 the UK Government reaffirmed its commitment to all its obligations under the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 1967; notes the commitment of all three major UK parties to retain an independent nuclear deterrent; notes the comments of the UK Government that no decisions on replacing Trident have yet been taken; believes there should be the fullest possible public debate on any decision to replace the Trident nuclear weapons system, considering all possible options including non-replacement; notes the significant reductions in the United Kingdom's nuclear weapons arsenal; is committed to the goal of the global elimination of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons, and wishes to see the United Kingdom continue to work both bilaterally and through the United Nations to urge states not yet party to non-proliferation instruments to become so, to remain committed to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and to make further progress toward significant reductions in the nuclear arsenals of the major nuclear powers."

Like many members in the chamber today, I speak in support of the general principles of the bill. I do not think that any of us could have put it any better than Mr Singh did during time for reflection when he spoke about rights being an essential prerequisite of democracy. I will shock Patrick Harvie by agreeing with him that human rights should be central to what we consider to be a modern Scotland. However, I will now depart from my agreement with Patrick Harvie. I genuinely believe that there are concerns about the detail, and I am delighted with the minister's commitment to reflect further on that at stage 2. I say to Gordon Jackson that being concerned about the detail does not mean that I am against embedding a human rights system in Scotland. I turn to the Labour Party's and this Parliament's record on human rights. We have a very good record of building a society based on equality and respect, the cornerstone of which is the delivery of social justice. Whether it has been about challenging disability discrimination, closing the  pay gap or tackling racism, we have been at the forefront of the thinking. It is now acknowledged that the UK has the most comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation in Europe; our commitment to an equal and inclusive society is also enshrined in the Human Rights Act 1998. I welcome the further proposals that are contained in the Equality Act 2006, such as the establishment of the UK commission and the appointment of a specific commissioner for Scotland along with a specific committee that will cover Scottish interests. I recognise that the Scottish commissioner and the Scotland committee will cover equality issues on a reserved and devolved basis. However, I am also clear that we will have to think carefully about the role and function of the Scottish human rights commission in relation to the UK commission and the other public bodies identified by the committee, such as the public services ombudsman, the commissioner for children and young people and Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons for Scotland, to name but a few. Like Mary Mulligan, I am concerned about overlap. For me, the key questions concern the added value that we will get from the new commission, whether its function could be carried out by another agency and what works for the people whom I represent who will benefit from the body. I believe that the Justice 1 Committee is to be congratulated on its stage 1 report, which was interesting because it pursued exactly those questions. Widening the debate just a little, I want to mention that, as part of its consideration of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, the Justice 2 Committee has recently considered how an independent police complaints commissioner should be established. I believe that we need an independent police complaints system just as I believe in promoting human rights, but I also believe that the architecture of how we deliver such things should exercise our interest. Pauline McNeill was right to say that the detail is important. We have a plethora of commissioners with different functions, different governance arrangements and different levels of financial accountability. All our commissioners do valuable jobs—I do not take that from them—but there is a genuine concern that we are in danger of creating institutional clutter. The challenge is to capture the laudable policy intention in a way that avoids overlap and is clear to the people who need help most. I remind members that, when we created the Scottish public services ombudsman in 2002, we did so because we wanted a complaints system that was open, accountable and easily  understood. More important, we wanted a system that would have the trust of the Scottish public. The Scottish public services ombudsman was designed to be a one-stop shop that would replace four separate ombudsmen. That was—I say this with the benefit of hindsight—absolutely the right thing to do at the time. It strikes me that we need to consider whether we require more commissioners to cover different issues or whether we could take an imaginative approach by using the public services ombudsman as a model and providing for a body that both proactively considers rights and responds to complaints. In that regard, Alice Brown's submission to the committee was instructive, as it confirms that the ombudsman's role is not simply to take up complaints but to make connections. She stated: "Human rights are fundamental to the concept of good public administration. Although the legislation governing the SPSO's remit makes no direct reference to human rights, some of the complaints we deal with are in fact issues of breaches of human rights"—

I will do so once I have finished the quotation. The submission continues: "maladministration may involve more general inconsistencies with human rights concepts, for example when a public authority fails to give adequate information regarding rights of objection or appeal."

I accept that, but I think that we have an opportunity to consider how we can get more from the existing regime by taking what is partly a reactive service and making it more proactive. That would be a desirable objective for the Executive. In conclusion, if it was right to consider a one-stop-shop approach in 2002, we should consider whether such an approach would not also be right today. I agree that the gap that the committee identified exists and I believe that we need a body that promotes human rights to others. Gordon Jackson is right that consideration of human rights should be embedded within our system, but I reiterate that we can perfectly legitimately consider  whether a commission is the right vehicle for that without being against the desire to embed human rights in Scotland. I have not often been associated with Phil Gallie and I have no intention of being so now. My concern is to ensure that the body that promotes human rights works well. I want us to have a human rights regime that is powerful. I will support the general principles of the bill, but I hope that we can improve it at stage 2.

To ask the First Minister what input HM Treasury has to the spending commitments of the Scottish Executive. (S2F-2249)

Does the First Minister acknowledge that the increase in the Scottish budget from £15 billion in 1999 to £25 billion last year represents a massive 61 per cent cash increase, which is the highest percentage growth in our post-war history? That has been delivered by a Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer for spending on Scottish priorities. Does the First Minister agree that there is no substance to the story that the Treasury will determine how we spend our money and that it is just so much froth from the overworked and fevered imaginations of members of the Opposition?

Subject to determination.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in resolving the local government pensions dispute. (S2O-9542)

I am conscious that that issue was substantially discussed this morning. While pensions policy is reserved, I am delighted that the Executive is committed to negotiations to reach an amicable solution. Will the minister consider the principle of protection of the rights of existing local government pensioners?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I will take great delight in moving the motion in my name. As I said earlier, it is approximately 50 years since trams ran in the streets of Edinburgh and, with the Parliament's consent, I hope that after today the situation will start to change. Today represents the culmination of 27 months of hard work since the bill was introduced on 29 January 2003. Since the Parliament debated the preliminary stage report in March 2005, the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Committee has undertaken around 110 hours of scrutiny and evidence taking, which culminated in the publication of our 77-page report on 1 March this year. We have covered topics from badgers, bats and budgerigars to slipstreaming, bogies and dynamic kinematic envelopes—private bills are interesting creatures. I advise my colleagues to beware party whips asking small favours. Scott Barrie, who has now left the room, has a lot to answer for, because he promised me that the process would take a mere nine months. I now know more about trams than I could ever have imagined possible. I thank my colleagues on the committee—Phil Gallie, Helen Eadie and Rob Gibson—who have worked long and hard in scrutinising the bill. At the start of the process, we agreed to be rigorous and fair in our scrutiny. Members have been dedicated in that pursuit, regularly meeting all day until 7 in the evening. Our consideration stage report provides a comprehensive analysis of the many detailed, technical and sometimes hotly debated issues that objectors raised. I thank the staff from the private bills unit who were involved—Jane Sutherland, Carol Mitchell, James Burton and David Cullum—who are sitting in the room next door. They, along with the legal and technical advisers and the broadcasting and official report, staff stuck with us throughout the process and gave us valuable and professional advice and support. I put on record the committee's thanks to others who participated in our scrutiny of the bill, including the promoter's witnesses and the objectors. From the beginning, the committee acknowledged the valuable role of objectors in our  work. I thank all those who provided written and oral evidence during consideration stage. Ultimately, our role was to uphold or dismiss the issues that were raised in each objection. Our decision on each and every objection was justified and fair, and was based on the detailed evidence that we read and listened to in the past year. All the evidence contributed in some way to the bill that is before us now. I must ask the Parliament roundly to reject Margaret Smith's amendment. As my colleague Helen Eadie will explain in great detail, the committee took considerable evidence on whether the trams should stop directly outside the Western general hospital. We reject the proposal because we believe that we have secured a measure that may well prove better in the long run—a feeder bus that will not only serve the front entrance of the hospital, but stop within the hospital grounds, where patients go.

We have a written undertaking between the promoter and the committee, which is on the record and will be enforced. Further, NHS Lothian will have to be involved in any subsequent adjustments to the feeder bus service. A robust commitment has been given. The solution addresses objectors' concerns and those of NHS Lothian. I confess to being perplexed as to why Margaret Smith believes that, given the size of the Western general campus, a tram stop outside the hospital that does not serve the many internal hospital buildings is a better option. At no time in the history of the project has any Liberal Democrat member of the City of Edinburgh Council proposed such a stop, and nor does it have the support of the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications. I am disappointed that Margaret Smith seeks to ambush a much-needed project. For members who have so far managed to avoid any exposure to the bill, I will briefly recap its purpose and history. Through the bill, the promoter seeks to construct and operate a tram running in a loop from St Andrew Square, along Leith Walk to Leith, west to Granton, south to Haymarket and then back to St Andrew Square along Princes Street. On 2 March 2005, the Parliament agreed to the general principles of the bill and agreed that it should proceed as a private bill. At the start of March 2006, at the end of phase one of consideration stage, the committee reported its decisions on the objections. During phase two of consideration stage, the committee amended the bill.  During last week's debate on the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill, members rightly commented on the funding for the tram lines. That issue exercised our committee, too. While my colleagues on the committee will address the many other issues that we have tackled, I will spend my time addressing the issue of funding. During preliminary stage, the committee acknowledged that the bill seeks to acquire for the promoter the power to construct and operate a tram along the proposed route, but that it does not indicate how that should happen and when it should happen by. The committee heard evidence that, should both tram bills be passed by Parliament, the promoter would consider other ways of operating the tram, including a route from Leith to the airport. The committee commented on that issue in paragraphs 153 to 158 of its preliminary stage report. The committee undertook detailed scrutiny of the estimate of funding and expenses provided by the promoter. While the committee accepted that the information was what could reasonably be expected at that point in the process, it sought from the promoter during consideration stage updated information on a range of funding issues. At the end of evidence taking in January 2006, the promoter agreed that it would phase the construction and operation of line 1 to address the funding available for the project. That decision, taken so late in the committee's consideration of the bill, was unhelpful and caused some dismay to members and, of course, to objectors. I shall focus finally on the phasing. Of more broad concern to the committee was the ability of the line 1 tram route to realise the policy objectives that the committee examined in detail during preliminary stage. The committee accepted that the tram was an integral part of the Edinburgh waterfront development, which spans from Leith waterfront to Granton. That development in turn was identified to contribute 55 per cent of the patronage for line 1. The harbour development is set to incorporate a population the size of Bathgate. If the strategic objective is to be realised, we must ensure that the waterfront section proceeds. The committee welcomes the minister's decision to index link the £375 million contribution to the tram project, and it is reassured that the final decisions on Scottish Executive funding will be made by Scottish ministers only following receipt of a robust final business case, which I understand will happen over the summer. The committee acknowledges that tram line 1 can bring many benefits to Edinburgh. As well as aiding economic growth, reducing congestion and encouraging a shift to public transport, the tram will bring social inclusion benefits. On balance, it is  the committee's view that those benefits are of such a magnitude that they outweigh the individual impacts that some objectors believe may remain after mitigation. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill be passed.

On this occasion, I thought that I would regale Parliament with a little poetry. I am not sure that the poet Alvarez would agree with the sentiment that the night be extended, and I am afraid that the promoter does not agree, either. Let me share with members what Alvarez thought about the night: "There is something ... not quite right about night life, something shadowy in every sense. However efficiently artificial light annihilates the difference between night and day, it never wholly eliminates the primitive suspicion that night people are up to no good." Margaret Smith, however, wants to extend the night time. It might assist members if I provide a little background on the genesis of the times in the current policy. Around the early 1990s, a consensus emerged on the period that should be  treated as night when noise is being assessed. In the United Kingdom, it was agreed to use 23:00 to 07:00 hours, because that is the core rest period. PAN 56 and BS6472 for vibration use that convention. The Mitchell committee—which I had hoped to tell Parliament about earlier, but did not have time to—recommended that the hours of 23:00 to 07:00 be used. The noise insulation regulations for road traffic noise predate the adoption of that definition. Conventionally, the day period for road traffic noise was 06:00 to midnight and there was no night-time period. It is important that members are clear that different time limits for the significant noise impact and noise insulation triggers are set out in the noise and vibration policy, which I will now summarise. For significant noise impact, night time is taken to fall between 23:00 and 07:00; for noise insulation, it is taken to fall between 00:00 and 06:00; and for vibration impacts, it is taken to fall between 23:00 and 07:00. When the Government made the Noise Insulation (Railways and Other Guided Transport Systems) Regulations 1996 (SI 1996/428), which apply in England and Wales, it wanted to ensure consistency with the regulations for road traffic, so the midnight to 06:00 hours definition of night was used. The regulations also cover the remaining day period, but with higher limits. As I have shown, the definition of night time for significant noise impact for noise and vibration to which the committee has agreed is as recommended in the Mitchell committee report, PAN 56 and BS6472. In addition, for noise insulation the noise and vibration policy mirrors the regulations that apply in England and Wales. In my view, there appears to be no sensible reason to depart from the guidance that I have outlined. I therefore recommend that Margaret Smith withdraws amendment 14.

Not at all.

At consideration stage, we undertook to amend the bill as detailed in our second report, in the sections entitled "Roseburn Railway Corridor—Flora and Fauna" and "Roseburn Railway Corridor—Health and Safety". Section 63C was added to the bill as a result of our amendment 87. Given that the Roseburn railway corridor is a designated urban wildlife site, we were determined that the environmental impacts be mitigated as far as possible. Although we accepted that the exact effects cannot be identified until the detailed final designs are prepared, we agreed with the objectors that mitigation is paramount. The promoter's landscape and habitat management plan is a helpful starting point in considering mitigation. Section 63C sets the minimum requirements in that regard. It not only establishes the minimum standards of mitigation to be achieved, but details who should be consulted. It also establishes the minimum standards that must be met in any subsequent version of the landscape and habitat management plan and ensures that the standards are enforceable. Section 63C requires the promoter to consult Scottish Natural Heritage and the emergency services on the evolution of the landscape and habitat management plan. Once final designs are available, we expect that it will be necessary to revise it further. A multi-agency approach, together with the required involvement of residents, will ensure that landscape and habitat issues are treated sympathetically. Section 63C also ensures that other aspects of construction and operation along the Roseburn railway corridor, such as emergency access, security and drainage, will be incorporated in decisions on changes to the landscape and habitat management plan. That means that such matters will be considered along with any changes to the Roseburn corridor landscape and habitat and it ensures that, as a witness at consideration stage wrote:  "An appropriate urban fit will be achieved by addressing the existing volume of space in a holistic way". However, the committee did not just sit back after consideration stage. On reflection, we decided that we could do even better, and exchanges between the promoter and our eagle-eyed legal advisers and clerks led to the amendments that we are considering today. Amendments 19 to 33 are largely technical. They will tighten the drafting and give the planning authority specific authority to approve and enforce. I will spare members the experience of being taken through the amendments in the group one by one, and content myself with commenting briefly on amendments 31, 19 and 20. Amendment 31 will give the planning authority power to enforce the requirements of the landscape and habitat management plan when enforcing planning conditions. Amendments 19 and 20 follow from amendment 32 and achieve the same purpose, by which I mean that they will ensure that the documents that identify the minimum standard to be met by the code of construction practice and the noise and vibration policy are clearly defined. I move amendment 19.

No.  Amendment 19 agreed to.  Amendments 16 to 18 not moved.  Amendment 20 moved—[Jackie Baillie]—and agreed to.

Does the member acknowledge that the committee took a range of advice from people other than the promoter? We felt that it was important that we had independent advice on which to frame our questioning.

The committee took many hours of evidence on noise before reaching its conclusions. Given that we acknowledge that the topic is extremely complex, I hope that members will afford me some leeway in trying to condense the committee's consideration in a few minutes for members in the chamber today. I was not deliberately trying to trip members up by asking technical questions about noise, although I was perhaps using it as a device to illustrate that we have taken considerable time to understand the  complexities of the subject. I am grateful to Sarah Boyack and Tavish Scott for recognising that. I will provide the chamber with a little lesson on noise—although members have probably already had that lesson from the Presiding Officer. The terms "sound" and "noise" tend to be used interchangeably, but noise can be defined as an unwanted sound. Sound is a normal and desirable part of life, but when noise, for example from industry, construction, transportation or—dare I say it—unwanted comment in the chamber, is imposed on people, it can lead to disturbance, annoyance and other undesirable effects. It is relatively straightforward to measure sound physically with a sound level meter. However, it is much more difficult to measure perceived loudness and the effects that that might cause. Noise levels do not add up according to simple linear arithmetic. For example, adding two equal noise sources results in a combined noise level that is only 3dB higher than individual levels. I will illustrate that to members with an example that I hope they will all remember. They will remember the wonderful bagpipe players we all used to enjoy in our other home when we were trying to work. One bagpipe player would create a certain level of noise, but if there were two, the level would increase by only 3dB. If there were four bagpipe players, only 6dB extra would register. If there were eight players, perhaps 9dB more would register, which is less than double the noise created by one bagpipe player and less than one would expect. A relatively large change in sound energy is needed before it is perceived by our ear to be louder or quieter. It is generally accepted that an increase of 10dB is perceived to be a doubling of noise and a decrease of 10dB is perceived to be a halving of noise. I will now explain how noise is measured and explained—[ Interruption. ] I ask members to please listen.

If Christine Grahame was listening earlier to my little lesson on noise, she would know that noise is an unwanted sound. However, for some people, one bagpipe player might make a pleasurable sound. I hope that that answers the member's question. Noise metrics are used to measure the variation of noise over time. Two commonly used measures about which we have heard are L Aeq and L Amax .  L Aeq is called the continuous equivalent sound level. It represents a varying noise level by calculating the constant noise level that would have the same sound energy content over the  measurement period. As L Aeq is a logarithmic average and not an arithmetic one, it has been found to be a good indicator of the effects of a noise that comprises a series of varying signals over a period, exactly as one would expect from railway noise. L Amax is a measure of the maximum noise level. For railway noise, it is the highest level experienced when the vehicle passes, usually occurring directly in front of the receptor location. L Amax is a useful metric when considering sleep disturbance, so it is used in conjunction with L Aeq to assess the impact from railway noise.  Three sets of guidance are commonly utilised to determine acceptable noise levels to protect against sleep disturbance, but none of them applies specifically to railway noise. There is no statutory requirement to mitigate noise from railways in Scotland, but the promoter produced a noise and vibration policy, dated March 2005, to set out its approach to mitigating noise. The policy was amended to address the committee's concerns and it was subsequently incorporated in the bill at section 63C, which ensures that the policy must be complied with. Among other purposes, the policy seek to ensure that, through the design of the track and track bed, and the procurement of modern tram systems, all reasonable, practical measures are taken to avoid significant noise impacts. Where significant noise still arises, the policy proposes a tiered approach to mitigation, with noise barriers to be provided to attenuate noise in the first instance. Once that mitigation is in place, should noise levels still exceed the thresholds, noise insulation will be made available. Let me turn now to the content and effect of the amendments in group 5. I will say a little bit about the process because the subject of noise and vibration is highly technical and the committee was conscious of the need to get it right, which was why we took months over it. As I said earlier, we commissioned a report from independent experts because of the complexity of the matter and the conflicting written evidence that we received. We wanted our own, independent report from experts in the field to inform our approach to oral evidence on noise and vibration. The report proved particularly helpful in our testing of the oral evidence, particularly that from the promoter's experts, which has come in for criticism today. It enabled us to ensure that we fully understood the issues when we wrote our report. With respect, I say that the members who are moving amendments today have not had the benefit of that knowledge.  I have considerably more to say, Presiding Officer, but you are indicating that I should wind up. I will home in on one matter. Sarah Boyack rightly focused on the 45dB limit that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton proposes. She said that that limit was so low that if it were applied to new railways, it would mean that in future railways could be built only in tunnels. If the suggested noise limits were adopted, we would never be able to build a road again either, unless it was in a tunnel. I urge members therefore to support amendments 10 and 11 but to reject all others in group 5.

Can the member explain why she uses the definition of L Amax slow rather than L Amax fast?

Will the member give way?

Thank you. Does the member agree that expert advice suggests that L Aeq is a good indicator of noise, given that it measures fluctuating railway noise over time as a logarithmic average? Why has the member not used that?

I am not surprised that Phil Gallie was tempted to call you "Speaker", Presiding Officer—he knows that that area of policy is reserved, but perhaps he thought that he was in another place. Does Phil Gallie agree that the primary purpose of amendment 8 is to set a speed limit? If that is the case, the matter is reserved. I would expect somebody with his credentials to recognise that.

I believe that, in another place, David Cameron was accused of "flip-flopping"; Phil Gallie appears to have caught the same disease. I point out that the committee was unanimous on the proposed speed limit and that Lord James's amendment 8 raises a matter that is clearly not within Parliament's competence.

No. It is important that I explain as simply as I can why amendment 8 is not within Parliament's competence. The setting of speed limits was a matter of concern upon which the committee heard a fair amount of evidence. As a consequence of that evidence, we took advice from HM railways inspectorate, which is now part of the Health and Safety Executive. HMRI confirmed that it is responsible for approving safety on tramways and helpfully set out the  criteria that apply. If members require it, I can narrate the lengthy list of matters that it takes into account. I will spare the Parliament from that. HMRI has advised us that, in practice, there is on-going dialogue between it and tramway operators as part of the approval process that is set out in the Railways and Other Transport Systems (Approval of Works, Plant and Equipment) Regulations 1994. Her Majesty's railway inspectorate and tramway operators tend to reach consensus on maximum speed limits. However, there is a final regulatory backstop under which HMRI has powers to impose maximum speed limits. Section 45(1) of the Transport and Works Act 1992—which I know members have read avidly—enables the Health and Safety Executive to give to any person who carries on an undertaking that includes the provision of transport services on a tramway a direction that imposes maximum speed limits at which vehicles that are used on the system may travel. Generally speaking, section 117 of the Railways Act 1993 brings section 45 of the Transport and Works Act 1992 within the ambit of the health and safety regime that is operable under part 1 of the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974. In terms of section H2 of part II of schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998, part I of the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 is a reserved matter. Put simply, the setting of maximum speed limits for the operation of tramways is not within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament. It is a matter for Westminster. Because of that advice, we accepted that amending the bill to set a speed limit would serve no purpose. If we did so, the measure could be struck down as being outwith Parliament's competence. Naturally, we did not let the matter lie—we discuss speed issues in paragraphs 422 to 437 of our report. I commend those paragraphs to the member, and, in particular, our conclusion at paragraph 434, which states: "The Committee would recommend the promoter considers reducing the maximum requested speed limits operating for tram Line One along the length of the Roseburn Railway Corridor". We note that a speed reduction from 46mph to 40mph—the level that is suggested in amendment 8—would increase run time by a mere two seconds, so we commend our conclusions to the promoter, as well. We believe that the committee has already—quite cleverly—made the required point. It captures the spirit of Lord James's amendment, but his amendment is not legislatively competent, so I ask him to seek to withdraw it.

In speaking to amendment 1, I record that it is approximately 50 years ago that trams were last seen on the streets of Edinburgh. After today, I hope that they will be seen again. Under Section 31, if land is acquired under the bill and the landowner has other contiguous or adjacent land that increases in value because of the tram, the compensation for the lost land will be reduced by any increase in the value of the other land. The principle is known as betterment. Just as the effect of betterment will be taken into account in respect of compensation that is payable in relation to land that is acquired under the bill, section 31 also provides for the effect of betterment to be taken into account in respect of compensation that is payable as a result of reduction in property values during the construction works. Amendments 1 and 2 will clarify the drafting of section 31 to make its purpose clearer, but will not change its meaning or effect. I move amendment 1.

The Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill Committee expressed serious concerns at consideration stage about the width of the powers that will be conferred by section 36 and so subsequently amended the section. However, after further discussions with the clerks to the committee and our legal adviser, I am convinced of the need for further amendments to section 36 to improve even further the rights of affected parties. The promoter has agreed to such amendments' being lodged. As drafted, section 36 would allow the authorised undertaker to apply to the sheriff for the correction of any inaccuracy in the parliamentary plans or the book of reference, relative to their description of any land, or of the ownership or occupation of any land. The authorised undertaker can do that only if it gives at least 10 days' notice to the owner or occupier of the land that is the subject of the error. If the sheriff agrees that the inaccuracy arose from a mistake, the sheriff must certify the fact accordingly. The sheriff would have no discretion in the matter. It would then be lawful for the authorised undertaker to take the land or, as the case may be, to take a right over the land in question and to execute the works in accordance with the certificate. The proposed new subsections make it clear that where a person has been given notice under section 36(1), they can give to the sheriff and the authorised undertaker a written counter-notice to the effect that they dispute that there is an inaccuracy that may be amended under section 36. That must be done within 10 days of the original notice. Where such a counter-notice is given, the sheriff must ensure that a hearing is held before making a decision on the application. Although we all expect it to be unlikely that there will be such errors in the documents, particularly in such a serious situation in which the promoter requires compulsorily to acquire land, it is important that the section strike a fair balance in enabling the sheriff to act in the light of all relevant facts. Amendments 3 to 6 will build in better safeguards for people who may be affected by  section 36 and will better ensure that their human rights will not be breached. Amendment 6 is a minor to section 36, to provide a definition of the term "Partner Libraries". I move amendment 3.  Amendment 3 agreed to.  Amendments 4, 5 and 6 moved—[Jackie Baillie]—and agreed to.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made with the development of a new Vale of Leven medical centre and a new Garelochhead medical centre. (S2O-9363)

The minister will be aware of the concerns that I and my local community have expressed about the fact that NHS Argyll and Clyde had agreed the capital for both projects but had somehow neglected to agree the revenue for them. Will he take this opportunity to make it absolutely explicit that both boards must proceed with those projects, not least because the developments are very much in line with the Executive policy of delivering health services as locally as possible?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any concerns about the impact of trust deeds on credit unions. (S2O-9208)

The minister will be aware that as credit unions are community-based mutual organisations, they are disproportionately affected by losses through protected trust deeds, whose use has increased dramatically in recent years. I know that he is consulting on protected trust deeds; that is welcome. Will he agree to meet credit unions to discuss their concerns and to consider how protection can be afforded to those important community organisations, which are part of the solution to debt management, not the problem?

Members throughout the chamber have covered many different aspects of the bill. It would be fair to say that there is, with one exception, reasonable cross-party support for the bill and its twin objectives of enhancing the effectiveness of the police and improving safety in our communities. I do not want to rehearse all the bill's provisions, because others have done that far more effectively than I can. Rather, I want to focus on two specific areas: the independent police complaints commissioner and tackling knife crime, which is an increasing challenge on our streets and in communities across Scotland. Let me start with the police complaints commissioner. I acknowledge the Executive's efforts to restore public confidence in the police with the establishment of a new, independent commissioner who will be responsible for non-criminal complaints about the police. To avoid overlaps, the commissioner will need to have an effective protocol with the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, which investigates allegations of criminal conduct by police officers. I am concerned about overlaps, particularly the commissioner's overlap with the Scottish public services ombudsman. I welcome the Executive's intention to lodge amendments at stage 2 to ensure that there is clarity about the commissioner's responsibilities. However, I want to address three particular concerns that the ombudsman raised with the Justice 2 Committee. First, the police are already within the ombudsman's jurisdiction. Although the ombudsman cannot investigate criminal matters, they can investigate any complaint of maladministration or service failure against the police. That existing capability creates the real possibility of duplication and confusion with the jurisdiction of the police complaints commissioner.  Secondly, there is concern about the procedures that relate to civilian staff who are employed by the police. They form a crucial part of the police service, but they are employees, unlike police officers, who are office holders and, as such, are subject to specific disciplinary measures that do not apply to civilian staff. Unlike police officers, therefore, the status of police civilian staff and, indeed, some of their functions equate much more closely to those of staff and bodies that are within the ombudsman's remit. Thirdly, clear opportunities exist for the efficient sharing of services between the ombudsman and the independent police complaints commissioner. I hope that we can look into those opportunities carefully. I want to widen the debate slightly. We now have a plethora of commissioners in Scotland. They all do different and—yes—valuable jobs. However, in our genuine desire for a transparent and rights-based approach, I sometimes wonder whether we are in danger of creating institutional clutter. When we created the Scottish public services ombudsman in 2002, we did so because we wanted a complaints system that was open, accountable and easily understood, and that had the trust of the Scottish public. It was to be a one-stop shop, replacing four separate ombudsmen. That was absolutely the right thing to do. It strikes me that having the ombudsman gives us the opportunity to consider two questions: is there a need for yet more complaints commissioners to sit on different issues; and can we take an imaginative look at how the ombudsman service can consider rights issues proactively, as well as consider complaints? If it was right to create a one-stop shop in 2002 because it was open, accountable and easily understood, it would, perhaps, be right to do so again. I ask ministers to reflect on the matter—and not only in the context of the bill. I will turn quickly to the question of tackling knife crime. I do not want to repeat all the evidence that the Justice 2 Committee heard on the extent of knife crime in Scotland, because Ken Macintosh and Jeremy Purvis covered that very well; nor do I want to repeat the powerful evidence of medical professionals who said that the scale of the problem might be even greater than we fear, because every day and every night many incidents after which people end up in accident and emergency units go unreported. I want to share this information with members: the problem does not affect only our most hard-pressed communities. A variety of knives were removed from people visiting this very Parliament in the past year. Members might imagine that it  would be just a handful of knives, but they would be wrong. The true figure is in the high hundreds, and perhaps even approaches the thousands. I therefore welcome any initiative that tackles knife crime—including the Executive's welcome proposal to double the sentence for knife crime on indictment. That will have a deterrent effect if we also ensure that we have consistent prosecution and sentencing policies. Pauline McNeill is right to say that, although the Executive's proposal will not be enough on its own, it signals a tough approach to knife crime. I confess to being slightly confused by the position of the Scottish Socialist Party, because Carolyn Leckie did not address the issues fully. The SSP voted against increasing sentences for knife crime. Do SSP members think that there is a problem? Perhaps they do not. Their most recognisable politician—one Tommy Sheridan esquire—has called for mandatory sentencing on knife crime, but that is not SSP policy, as Carolyn Leckie made clear. The SSP does not believe in zero tolerance of knife crime. One of Tommy Sheridan's colleagues has been quoted as saying that his proposal was "ill-thought-out". Even that august organ, the Scottish Socialist Voice , said that his position is not an appropriate one for the SSP. However, I dismiss the splits and intrigues of the SSP as mere diversions. The party has no answers to the serious problem of knife crime, and no answers for our hard-pressed communities. I will finish on this point: Detective Chief Superintendent Carnochan said that the reason we should pass the bill is that "The Parliament will not pass many pieces of legislation that will save a life, but this bill has the potential to do that."—[ Official Report , Justice 2 Committee , 22 November 2005; c 1854.] I urge members to support the bill.

I welcome this opportunity to raise awareness of the thistle travel card scheme. Before I do so, I welcome to Parliament representatives from Enable Scotland, which led the development of the card. Equally, I welcome Joan Mulroy from the Dumbarton advocacy group, members of which—members who have learning disabilities—first raised the issue with me at constituency level. Last, but by no means least, I welcome John Feehan, who is a member of Enable's advisory committee. As well as having shaped the thistle travel card scheme, he continues to play a valuable role on the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland. Deputy Presiding Officer, I also acknowledge your keen interest in the issue. I remind members that Trish Godman is a member of the cross-party group on learning disability. Unusually, she will be silent on the issue tonight because she is presiding over the meeting, but on other occasions she is vocal in her support of people who have learning disabilities. That is equally true of many colleagues who could not stay for the debate, but who have asked me to mention their commitment and said that they will be happy to raise awareness of the scheme locally. Those members include Margaret Jamieson, Cathie Craigie, Janis Hughes, Susan Deacon, Johann Lamont and many more. I will give some background information on how the thistle travel card scheme came about, how it has progressed and what I want the Executive to do next. The beauty of the thistle travel card lies in its simplicity. It is free, it is easy to use and it is  designed to help people who might face difficulties in using public transport. It tells the bus driver, the ticket collector and other transport staff that the card-holder might need just a little bit of extra help, perhaps because they have a disability or an illness or perhaps just because of age, which will affect us all. The things that people most often need help with are knowing which bus to get on and where to get off, counting out the right fare, understanding timetables and understanding travel announcements—which can be a challenge to us all. The thistle travel card scheme started in 1997, when Enable's advisory committee established that people who have learning disabilities were having problems accessing public transport without the assistance of a friend or carer. The committee launched a pilot transport project to examine the problem and come up with imaginative solutions. In the first phase of the project, a survey was carried out among people who have learning disabilities throughout Scotland. The overwhelming evidence was that the problems relate mainly to communication. The second phase involved the trial of a system to alert transport operators to individuals' needs and to provide information on how to deal with those needs. Support was secured from two of the major bus companies in Scotland, which operated a pilot scheme. The scheme was operated by FirstBus in West Lothian and by Stagecoach Western in Ayr and Kilmarnock. Not surprisingly, they found that the scheme had the potential to make a considerable impact on the confidence and freedom of a large number of people. The scheme gained the support of the bus drivers and staff at FirstBus and Stagecoach, who welcomed the initiative because it helped them to offer an enhanced customer service. The scheme got the thumbs-up all round. It was recognised that the thistle travel card had potential not only for people who have learning disabilities but for others. A number of organisations thought likewise—among others the Carers National Association, Down's Syndrome Scotland and Capability Scotland. I am pleased to say that the idea was supported by the Executive and the thistle travel card scheme was launched in September 2002 by the then Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, Lewis Macdonald. Some 200,000 cards were distributed throughout Scotland and 8,000 copies of the staff guidelines were supplied to 42 transport providers. In March 2004, a reprint of 80,000 cards and thistle logo stickers was needed to help to promote the scheme. Local authorities have helped to distribute the card widely. It has been targeted at health centres, day centres, sheltered employment projects and travel offices. Information and  guidance packs were issued to all transport staff who are responsible for customer care and who are in daily contact with the public so that they would know what difficulties might arise and about the easy ways in which those difficulties can be overcome. The scheme is practical and low maintenance and—surprise, surprise—it works. What more can we ask for? I will tell the minister what I would like the Executive to do. First, I would like the Executive to work with, and actively to encourage, transport providers to provide training to their staff on the thistle travel card. We know that there are problems relating to transport staff not recognising the card. Information was originally sent to train companies, but it has never really been taken up by them, so the focus has been mainly on bus services. The scheme's success relies heavily on the support of transport providers, some of which have been supportive and have told us that they have embraced the scheme, but there are still frequent reports of bus drivers' not knowing what the card is when a person shows one to them. That is a general problem rather than a problem with any particular bus company. We acknowledge that transport providers face complex issues in training their staff, but I know that Enable and other organisations would be willing to work alongside them to address the problem. The issue is partly a training and marketing issue, but resources—which would have to come from the Executive—are needed. Secondly, the Executive must ensure that the scheme is extended and is truly comprehensive. At the very least, trains must be covered but, ideally, taxis should also be covered. Thirdly, we must evaluate the scheme. There was a proposal to evaluate it in 2002 at a minor cost of £19,000, but no funding has been secured for that. Evaluation would help us to identify the barriers that transport providers face in implementing the scheme and how we can work to overcome them. It would also help us to find out exactly how people are using the card and to find out about the help that they need in order that they can use public transport. The minister believes in evidence-based policy making; I therefore wonder whether the Executive would agree to fund such an evaluation. Finally, if the scheme works—as it clearly does—will the Executive raise awareness of it and help to promote it much more widely? The thistle travel card has undoubtedly been successful among transport users, who have said that they feel more confident about making independent journeys. Even if people do not use the card, knowing that they can use it if they need to gives them confidence. The scheme's simplicity—which requires merely that the holder  show the card—has been popular. The card is easy to use and to carry. The widening of the scheme to include a variety of groups means that it works for people with a wide range of needs—people with learning disabilities, elderly travellers, people with memory difficulties and people with physical disabilities. Transport providers also like the scheme and some of them have included information about the travel card in their staff induction and disability awareness training. Thistle logo stickers are displayed on FirstBus vehicles—FirstBus likes the scheme's simplicity and its help in providing an improved service. In conclusion, I urge the minister to support the thistle travel card, which will encourage greater use of public transport and give greater independence to a range of people for whom travel might occasionally prove to be a little difficult, and I hope that he will signal the Executive's commitment to maximising its potential.

The minister will be aware of my interest in industrial museums, and in particular in the Scottish Maritime Museum with the Denny tank in Dumbarton. Would the minister care to amplify her comment that industrial museums will receive increased funding? Is that likely to include access to capital and to curatorial expertise, and will it ensure that there are stable streams of revenue support going to industrial museums with items of international significance, so that they are secured for the long term?

Does the member recognise that we have heard a whole series of commitments to service provision north of the river? I hope that he can find it in his heart to welcome that as a positive step.

I start by acknowledging that the minister was absolutely right in deciding to scrap NHS Argyll and Clyde. For many of us who suffered the consequences of the board's failure to plan and manage services effectively, the robust action that he took is very welcome. I recognise that the decision was not easy. However, when one considers the challenging geography of the area, the anticipated financial deficit of £80 million, which would have impacted on patient care, and the nonsense that was the board's clinical strategy, one starts to see the necessity for such drastic action. I remind the chamber of the madness of NHS Argyll and Clyde's proposal for the delivery of services to my constituents. At times, it felt as if people were incidental to the board's planning—we really did not matter at all. People were told, "Just you travel for two and a half hours on public transport to get to the RAH in Paisley"—incidentally, they would bypass five Glasgow hospitals en route. However, it was not only the small number of people who needed to access specialist services who were told that; many people from my area were told to travel that distance to access basic services that should have been delivered in their local community. I turn to the future. I am pleased that people from Dumbarton and the Vale of Leven will now be part of NHS Greater Glasgow. That not only makes sense but is a proposal that enjoys considerable local support. However, it will come as no surprise to the minister that I am deeply disappointed in his decision on the boundaries for Helensburgh and Lomond. Bluntly, I think that the minister is wrong, as do the overwhelming majority of my constituents. It is worth noting that an interesting divide was generated in the responses to my consultation and that of the minister. The vested interests—namely the health board, general practitioners and local authorities—wanted option 1; boundaries mattered to them. However, when we asked the people—the ordinary folk who receive the service—they clearly wanted option 2; they wanted NHS Greater Glasgow, not NHS Highland. A staggering 80 per cent of people across the area favoured option 2, but when one delves down into the figures one can see that 90 per cent of people in Helensburgh itself and 94 per cent of people in the  Garelochhead area favoured that option. That view was supported by front-line staff, who provide the health care in our communities. However, the minister has heard all of that from me several times before, and although I still believe that he is wrong, nothing—but nothing—can be as bad as being part of NHS Argyll and Clyde. Let me move on to a more fundamental issue of concern. In May 2005, the minister stood up in the chamber and said that the consultation was about protecting services for patients, not about boundaries. Well, hear, hear. I acknowledge that our debate about boundaries has perhaps been a proxy for our concerns about services, but in turn I want to know that he really means business about protecting services for patients. The essential prerequisites will, again, not come as a surprise to him. I have raised them many times before, not least when we met in Helensburgh this morning. I am grateful to him for listening and for applying his considerable talent to meeting those very concerns. First, I asked specifically for the retention of the Helensburgh Victoria infirmary and the Jeannie Deans unit. There is no local provision that could currently substitute for those facilities, and NHS Argyll and Clyde, in its rush to implement its clinical strategy, intended to close them without adequate replacements. This morning, the minister promised their retention until we can provide and demonstrate something better locally, and I am grateful for that. Secondly, and of equal importance, I asked for a clear commitment to making integrated care happen at the Vale of Leven hospital. So far, Andy Kerr and Professor David Kerr have been encouraging. Now is the time for action, not words. The Vale of Leven hospital must be sustained. NHS Greater Glasgow must support the model of integrated care that is being developed—I point out to Frances Curran that it will include in-patient beds. I am particularly grateful to the minister for having committed to a pilot on integrated care, which will stabilise services and deliver lessons from which all of Scotland can learn. Thirdly, I asked for a written undertaking by both boards to be given to the minister and to the local community, covering patient flows, planning and finance. All of that is essential. We have had assurances before, and in the context of Argyll and Clyde they were found to be worthless. Because of that, the annual plan of the joint locality planning group should be sent to the minister for sign-off and not left to the boards. Our contract is clearly between the minister and the people in my constituency. This morning, he agreed with that. Fourthly, we need to be clear about current and future patient flows. Current patient flows from  Helensburgh and Lomond come to the Vale of Leven and to NHS Greater Glasgow. Indeed, much of the patient flow from Argyll comes that way too, as my colleague Duncan McNeil has said. I therefore do not envisage that there will be any patient flow for secondary services to anywhere other than Glasgow. Effectively, that will be the default position. This morning, the minister agreed work to underpin that. Equally, I expect that the default position will be for patients from that area to travel not to the RAH in Paisley, but to Gartnavel and the Golden Jubilee, if the service cannot be provided at the Vale itself. The minister has told NHS Greater Glasgow to review Argyll and Clyde's clinical strategy, and it has promised the delivery of services north of the river from 2007. Again, I am grateful for that. Finally, I shall put it simply to the minister. If he can deliver on all of that, with the resources to back it up, boundaries will indeed become a secondary consideration. At the end of the day, what we want are services—in Helensburgh, at the Victoria infirmary and the Jeannie Deans unit, and in the Vale of Leven hospital with integrated care. For special services I ask him, please, to give us Glasgow rather than Paisley, because we can actually get there. He has shown us before that he means business. He has shown leadership in tackling the problem. I ask him to keep doing so.

Is the member aware of the minister's announcement at question time that a pilot to develop integrated care will be introduced at the Vale of Leven hospital in January? Surely that will stabilise services at the hospital for the future.

Will the member take an intervention?

I made an offer to NHS Argyll and Clyde to go and argue with ministers that the board should have five years, rather than three, to achieve recovery. NHS Argyll and Clyde refused that offer, so the fault is the board's.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will set out the transition arrangements for the transfer of responsibility from NHS Argyll and Clyde to NHS Greater Glasgow and NHS Highland. (S2O-8373)

The minister will be aware that many people are not happy with the decision on boundaries. However, the real debate is about services. He will know that local people are concerned about the range of services available at the Vale of Leven hospital. Both he and Professor Kerr have encouraged the proposals for integrated care at the Vale of Leven, so will he agree that now is the time to go further, beyond the warm  words, to robust action? Will he repeat the welcome commitment made to my constituents this morning about the Vale of Leven hospital—a commitment that will effectively stabilise services and from which all Scotland can learn?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will make a decision on the proposed byelaws for Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park. (S2O-8186)

The minister will be aware that my view, whatever byelaws are ultimately agreed, is that the key issues will be enforcement and the need to ensure that a robust regime is in place. I am grateful to the minister for the additional £30,000 for additional enforcement, but will she agree to continue that funding beyond 31 March and to meet Sylvia Jackson and me to discuss the proposed byelaws?

I will try to be equally disciplined. I share the analysis of the potential problem. We need to address security of supply, affordability, self-sufficiency, energy efficiency—all of that. However, the means of doing so suggested by the SNP is once again that we should haul up the ladder, close the doors, go  it alone and effectively say, "Could the last person out please switch the light off." SNP policies lack credibility if every one is proposed through the constitutional prism. Remarkably, I agree with Shiona Baird's comments that the substance of what we do on energy policy is much more important than which body does it. I will not spend a lot of time analysing the problem; others have done so before me. We can all trade the statistics about the increasing cost of oil, the reducing level of traditional supplies, our increasing dependence on imported energy and the gradual decline—that we will need to face—of supplies from the North sea. Businesses and domestic consumers can see that as energy prices rise.

No. None of Bruce Crawford's fellow party members took an intervention from me, so I will not take one from him. I turn to the subject of fuel poverty. My starting point is to acknowledge the Executive's target to produce 40 per cent of our energy from renewable resources. Whether that is wind, wave, biomass or other emerging technologies, it is all critically important as part of a sustainable and balanced energy policy. It is nonsense for members to say in the chamber that they support renewable energy, and yet to give in continuously to local pressure and block wind farm development out there. That is dishonest and it exposes the inconsistencies inherent in the SNP, not just here, but among its Westminster colleagues. I agree with John Home Robertson: we need to focus our attention on the 60 per cent of energy that will potentially be missing in the future. Like Elaine Murray, I do not believe that we should exclude any potential future source of energy and that includes nuclear. The status quo is not an option; we need new, secure and affordable supplies. We also need to look at the other side of the coin—we need to look at energy efficiency and approach the problem from the other end. At present, members assume that the supply of energy has to increase to meet ever rising demands. We need to consider that we already consume too much energy—a point that Shiona Baird made—and that the aim should be to cut back to make our energy use much more effective and efficient. In that regard, this Administration has raised housing standards to improve energy efficiency. For example, as members across the chamber have recognised, our central heating and  warm deal programmes have insulated and heated thousands of homes across Scotland. I should also point out that, since the central heating programme was introduced, nine out of 10 pensioners in Scotland have been lifted out of fuel poverty, with each household saving more than £300 per year. Because of the actions of this Labour Executive working—however much it might pain the SNP to hear it—in partnership with a Labour Government at Westminster, thousands of pensioners throughout Scotland do not need to choose between heating and eating. People without a central heating system get one and, thanks to Gordon Brown, every pensioner household receives £200 every single winter. However, we must not rest there.

No. I am pleased that ministers are thinking about how to expand the scheme and hope that they reflect on the speeches that have been made. Christine Grahame and Frances Curran know that fuel poverty is about income, physical improvements, energy efficiency and the cost of fuel. In recent weeks—and, in some cases, days—Scottish Gas, Scottish Power and Scottish and Southern Energy prices have gone up. A 5 per cent rise in the price of power automatically puts 30,000 households into fuel poverty. My colleague John Home Robertson is right to say that we cannot tackle fuel poverty by energy efficiency measures alone. However, we cannot resolve the problem simply by being independent—the SNP's answer for everything—or by following the SSP's suggestion that everything should be renationalised. Both proposals are complete nonsense, all the more so because neither addresses the fundamental problem of how to deal with decreasing supply and increasing costs. We need a mature debate on how we address the potential energy gap, because we have to come up with affordable and sustainable solutions that ensure energy supplies for future generations and tackle fuel poverty.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

The purpose of the amendment is purely practical. Section 5 deals with preliminary notices issued by ministers where community justice authorities are perceived to be failing. For the provision to be meaningful, CJAs must have the opportunity to consider and respond to the minister's notice. As the bill stands, ministers could impose any deadline for a response if they wished to do so. That is not necessarily practical, particularly for CJAs that cover large geographical areas, such as the proposed northern CJA about which we have just heard. In such circumstances, no meaningful political endorsement or ownership of the CJA's response could be achieved. One would have to question the value of the bill's preliminary notice provision in that context. The amendment specifies a minimum period of 14 days in which CJAs would be allowed to consider and agree their formal response. I move amendment 6.

I stand corrected about the section to which the amendment applies. The minister will not be surprised that I am much more interested in the substance of what he said. I am content with his response that the bill as drafted allows for the necessary flexibility to enable ministers to insist that urgent action be taken and, equally, to allow CJAs to respond in good time. On that basis, I seek agreement to withdraw my amendment.  Amendment 6, by agreement, withdrawn.  [Amendment 7 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.]

As the minister is aware, I have consistently held the view that removing the Erskine bridge tolls will ease congestion. However, we must set that measure in the context of wider improvements in the road network. Does he therefore agree that, in addition to the Erskine bridge, another investment priority  should be the A82, which is of course the gateway to Scotland's first national park?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making in implementing the recommendations from the report of the working group on debt relief. (S2O-7928)

The minister is aware that the working group identified a category of people who have no income or assets and are, therefore, not covered by the existing debt arrangement scheme.  Will he therefore urgently commission research to scope the size of that group? Will he encourage his colleagues in the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department to use the forthcoming bill on bankruptcy and diligence to plug that gap and help the poorest people in our community who are in debt?

I thank the ministers for their statements. I am reassured by the comments of the Minister for Health and Community Care that plans have been submitted by NHS boards directly to the Executive. However, I am curious to know how robust those plans are and, indeed, whether they are being tested.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made with its consultation on redrawing national health service boundaries in Argyll and Clyde. (S2O-7856)

I commend the minister and his team for the consultation, especially the public events in Helensburgh and Dumbarton, both of which I attended. Does he agree that the views of ordinary people are of primary importance? In that context, will he note the overwhelming public opinion that Helensburgh and Lomond should be covered by Greater Glasgow NHS Board?

The minister should take the advice of Trish Godman, Des McNulty and me, because he knows that congestion on the Kingston bridge and in the Clyde tunnel costs the west of Scotland economy something like £19 million a year in lost time. Does he agree with the majority of respondents to his review—not just MSPs—that the removal of tolls on the Erskine bridge is fully justified for economic and environmental reasons? That fact is acknowledged by his own consultants. With that growing consensus, the question is when, not if.

To ask the First Minister how the new proposals on bail and remand will ensure greater public safety. (S2F-1839)

I welcome the new measures, but key to the successful implementation of any justice reform is its application by the judiciary. Will the First Minister indicate the effect of the measures on the current practice that is followed by judges and sheriffs in granting bail? Will he also indicate whether guidance on arriving at bail decisions will be issued to the judiciary?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to address some of the key aspects of the Justice 2 Committee's inquiry into youth justice. I open by echoing the minister's comments that only a minority of young people offend and that the vast majority of Scotland's young people make a positive contribution to our communities and to society as a whole. Indeed, our young people are a great source of optimism for the future; they are talented and enthusiastic participants in much of what is good about Scotland. As my committee colleagues have said, children and young people are more likely than anyone else to be the victims of crime and antisocial behaviour and so are equally concerned about those issues. However, we need to recognise that a minority of young people do not respond to the existing measures of the youth justice or criminal  justice systems and that an even smaller minority—less than 1 per cent—are disruptive and sometimes even dangerous. We cannot get away from that fact. Although those persistent offenders are small in number, they have an excessively negative impact on our communities. It is for that reason that a wide variety of resources must be targeted at tackling the problem, for the sake not just of those young people, but of the communities in which they live. We know that many of the young people who end up in the criminal justice system are among the most disadvantaged in our society and that they come from some of our poorest communities. Invariably, they are the children who are deemed to be in need. For that reason, we are absolutely right about and should be proud of the approach that we have adopted in Scotland, which is to take an integrated approach to the linked issues of juvenile care and justice. I am not sure whether to take as a compliment Kenny MacAskill's comment that the committee report is "worthy but dull". There is nothing dull about trying to tackle the complexity of youth offending in order to improve outcomes or about trying to prevent young people from ending up in the criminal justice system in the first place. Perhaps what he said was just an unfortunate choice of words. The committee considered the framework of youth justice services in Scotland in order to see what arrangements were in place in the planning and delivery of services. We then asked whether the services were working effectively, what was working well and where the gaps were. We were well assisted by a variety of witnesses, who are far too numerous to mention, and by our special adviser, Fergus McNeill. I add my thanks to those that other members have given. I will focus briefly on multi-agency working before moving on to highlight a couple of gaps in provision. In so doing, I give recognition to the considerable work of the Executive in the area. Like my colleague Maureen Macmillan, I was struck by what Bill Whyte of the criminal justice social work development centre for Scotland said: "more has probably been done in the past three years than had been done in the previous 20 years."—[ Official Report , 11 January 2005, c 1257.] We should acknowledge that, although youth justice is a challenging and complex area, in which quite a lot has already been done, more can always be done to reduce the level of youth offending. Given the multiple causes that lead to offending behaviour, it is only common sense to say that multiple agencies should be required to work together in order to tackle it. The convener and I  paid a visit—it was less fraught in transport terms—to Hamilton to consider multi-agency working and to look specifically at the youth court pilot that began in June 2003. One of the conclusions of the interim evaluation report on the Hamilton pilot was that offenders are being dealt with more quickly and that there is positive evidence of multi-agency working—we found that, too. However, even with that successful example of agencies working together, we became aware that local authorities are not taking corporate responsibility for young offenders as seriously as we would want them to. The committee found that, invariably, youth justice strategies are driven largely by social work despite the fact that, as Maureen Macmillan highlighted, we know that education is often a key factor in reducing offending, given that most young offenders have educational difficulties. We saw that education services did not even begin to understand the importance of their role in youth justice or to have the flexibility to deliver what was needed. Clear, explicit guidance is needed on the role of education services in youth justice. I welcome the minister's acceptance of the need to place a stronger and more effective statutory duty on local authorities as a whole. We were also told that agencies are struggling to share data effectively, as they are concerned about legal constraints. We would welcome some kind of statutory duty being placed on or clarification provided to those agencies in relation to data sharing. I will deal quickly with the gaps in addiction services and mental health services. We know that half of young offenders have an alcohol or drug problem, yet we heard that there is considerable variation throughout Scotland in the availability of addiction services for young offenders. If those young people cannot access such services and their problem is not addressed, the likelihood is that they will reoffend. There is also a huge problem with the lack of child and adolescent mental health services. Although there may not be a direct link between mental health problems and youth offending, we know that mental health treatment is essential in dealing with some of the behaviours that are exhibited by those who go on to offend and reoffend. All those issues are important at a strategic level, but, in closing, I emphasise that there is lots of innovative work on the ground, as the minister touched on. For example, the pulse project in my constituency in West Dunbartonshire is, yes, about diverting young people who are at risk of touching the criminal justice system, but it is ultimately about preventing offending behaviour for a new generation.

The Executive is to be warmly commended for its central heating programme and has been so by pensioners in my constituency. Coupled with the winter fuel allowance of £200 per year from Gordon Brown, that means that pensioners can for once effectively heat their homes. However, genuine concern has been expressed—

Genuine concern has been expressed about the recent dramatic price rises from Scottish Gas. Aside from suggesting that Scottish Gas should not pass on the full cost of the rise to pensioners, will the minister seek an explicit commitment that the scheme that the company puts in place to protect vulnerable and frail elderly people will be simple to operate?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will monitor any proposals or decisions by NHS Argyll and Clyde in the period prior to its formal dissolution on 31 March 2006. (S2O-7501)

I thank the minister for his encouraging response, because he may be aware of growing disquiet that decisions are being taken  by NHS Argyll and Clyde on a range of services with unseemly haste and, more worryingly, without consulting neighbouring health boards, local authorities and local communities. Will the minister send a strong signal that NHS Argyll and Clyde must not bulldoze proposals through in the period up to its formal dissolution, given the strong local view that the board is discredited?

Like many others, I welcome Nicol Stephen to his new post. He is not here at the moment, but I took the opportunity to remind him as he left the chamber that I expect his interest in infrastructure to continue. I will say more about that later. Without doubt, and as highlighted by some of my colleagues, one of Labour's greatest achievements since being elected to Westminster in 1997 and to Holyrood in 1999 has been to create the conditions for a stable, strong and growing economy. I need only consider my own constituency to know the truth of that. There, and indeed across Scotland, youth unemployment is down—often by a staggering 70 per cent. Long-term unemployment is down by more than 50 per cent in many areas. The numbers in work are up and at an all-time high, and are among the highest in Europe. Mortgages are at their lowest level for more than 40 years. Like many members of the Opposition, I am always interested in statistics and comparisons. However, although "it is better there than it is here" is a mantra that we always hear, I believe and my constituents believe, because of the evidence that we see every day, that Scotland has a strong and growing economy. For many people in our communities, that growth has been characterised by their access to employment, sometimes for the first time; for others, it has been characterised by their having more disposable income. Yes, we have further to go. I am not complacent; I do not think that we should rest on our record.  However, unlike the SNP, we do not just carp about the problem and argue for more spending without any idea of how we will pay for it. Also, we did not sleep through the legislation giving low-paid workers a minimum wage. We need to develop a strong economy to deliver a strong society. I agree with much of what Christine Grahame said; I have long believed that support for growing our economy and achieving social justice are but different sides of the same coin. In that spirit, and with such an outcome in mind, I welcome the reduction in the business rate poundage and the further reduction for companies engaged in research and development. Those reductions have already been warmly welcomed by businesses in my part of the world—in particular by the small businesses, which sometimes operate at marginal profit levels. The local business profile in my patch is mainly made up of small-scale employers. Those employers often employ fewer than 25 members of staff; indeed, 75 per cent of them employ fewer than 10 members of staff. So the announcement is significant: as well as making Scotland more competitive, it will enable employers to invest, ensure stability and create growth. One of the key employment sectors in my constituency is tourism. We are fortunate to have the international brand that is Loch Lomond in Scotland's first national park. I am pleased to hear of the legislation that will provide a secure foundation for VisitScotland. I have no doubt that, by bringing together local, national and international marketing efforts, we can truly maximise the very real resonance that Scotland has in many parts of the world and so welcome back the extensive Scottish diaspora and many new visitors too. The De Vere Cameron House Hotel on the banks of Loch Lomond and the prestigious Loch Lomond Golf Club, which are two of the largest tourism-related employers in our patch, are increasing staffing levels at a rate that is higher than the national average. The marketing effort is working. Scottish Enterprise Dunbartonshire is keen to push the boundaries further. It is working on destination:Loch Lomond, a project that aims to ensure that we maximise the economic benefits of the national park, not only for the one or two larger businesses that I mentioned but for all businesses in the patch. I hope that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning will be supportive of the initiative. From his previous transport portfolio, the minister will know that I am eager to improve the infrastructure for the increasing tourism interest. The minister is not in the chamber to hear what I have to say, but I will ensure that I tell him. I will  remind him of the strategic importance of the A82—the key tourism road in the west of Scotland—which is badly in need of investment and improvement. I trust that he will use his influence with Tavish Scott, the new Minister for Transport and Telecommunications, to ensure that the right infrastructure is put in place to support our growing economy. Neither minister will be surprised if I mention another transport project. Like the First Minister, I believe passionately in Scottish success. To do that, we need to be ambitious—ambitious for our people, communities, businesses and country. The First Minister clearly stated that there would be no limit on the ambition of the coalition and that, where appropriate, we would exceed the terms of the partnership agreement. I agree with him. Let me offer the Deputy First Minister a suggestion; it is an idea that is shared by my colleagues Trish Godman and Des McNulty, all the local authorities in the west of Scotland including West Dunbartonshire Council, Renfrewshire Council, Argyll and Bute Council and Glasgow City Council. Indeed, it is shared by Scottish Enterprise Dunbartonshire, the Dunbartonshire chamber of commerce—in short, it is shared by everybody in my local area. The suggestion is a simple one: to scrap the tolls on the Erskine bridge. We need no more talk, minister; let us have some action. We want action for the one-person business that spends £3,000 a year on bridge tolls; action for the more substantial global business that spends £70,000 per year on bridge tolls; and action for the unemployed person who cannot afford the cost of travel in order to get to employment.

I will leave it to members from the respective areas to make that point. The member will forgive me if I press ahead with my point on the Erskine bridge. What follows thereafter is a matter for the Executive. I look forward to the Executive removing barriers to employment and those that hold back local businesses. I also look forward to it making a concerted and focused effort to help the economy of the west of Scotland. Scrapping the tolls on the Erskine bridge would also help to ease congestion on the main road crossings on the Clyde. Come on, minister; let us just scrap the tolls. If I may, Deputy Presiding Officer, I will look to the future and tell the chamber briefly about the encouraging dynamic global entrepreneurs  programme, which is supported by the Executive. The EDGE programme brought together 48 students from Dunbartonshire schools, the University of Glasgow and Columbia University in New York. It was a tremendous experience; the young people came together to learn about business and entrepreneurship through business growth consultation. In coming together, they leaned much more than simple entrepreneurship; they learned how to be global citizens. The results were positive, not only for the American students but for the students from Scotland. They emerged confident, dynamic people who will possibly be the entrepreneurs of the future. They deserve our support. By investing in people like them—not only in my constituency but across Scotland—we invest in Scottish success in the future.

I congratulate Paul Martin on securing the debate and I associate myself entirely with his remarks and the sentiments that are expressed in the motion. I am sure that members will forgive me for being parochial in my comments, as one of the Clydesdale branches that are due for closure is in Alexandria in my constituency. Members might ask themselves why it is closing. Is it because it is a quiet branch, as Nora Radcliffe suggested, and nobody ever goes in? Assumptions are made that that must be so—even Jim Mather assumed that—but members would be entirely wrong in thinking that, because it is a busy branch. Many people use the branch; the footfall—to use the jargon—is high. I know that because I have seen it and because Amicus representatives whom I met today confirmed it for me. My understanding is that the National Australia Bank is closing the Alexandria branch because its customers are not considered to be high-value customers—although I would be delighted if the bank wanted to contradict me at some point. Put simply, my constituents do not earn enough. The National Australia Bank wants to serve better-off customers, because higher-income earners with more money represent less risk. Loyalty does not matter in all of this. What is the arbitrary income level at which the bank will cut people off? I am told that it is £18,000. Perhaps I am wrong and it is higher than that—I would love to know. The scandal is that many of the bank's own staff at its branches do not earn that much. It is not a question of the bank failing in its corporate social responsibility—which I believe it has. It is a much more fundamental matter. I think  that the bank is in danger of failing its customers and forgetting about the people who have sustained it over the years, both as customers and as staff. No cognisance has been taken of the economic and social impact of the bank's decision. No acknowledgement has been made of the fact that it will probably have a disproportionate impact on vulnerable people and on older people in particular. Paul Martin is right about this. I have not seen any consultation on the matter and I have not seen anybody talking to representatives of the local community in Alexandria. The unfortunate message that we must take from the Clydesdale Bank closures is that if someone does not earn £18,000 or more, the bank does not want their business. People are assured that they need not worry, however, because they can have ATMs, internet banking and call centres. Frankly, I think that those are not acceptable replacements, as they are not easily accessed by vulnerable people. Des McNulty mentioned our good colleague John McFall MP. As chair of the Treasury Committee at Westminster, he has exposed the problems of ATMs that charge people for accessing their own money. The Which? report that was prepared as evidence to that committee stated: "free ATMs in lower value areas are highly at risk of conversion to charging status". That means a double penalty. Bank branches will be taken away from customers, because they do not earn enough for the bank's liking. Then, they get to use an ATM, but the bank charges them for the privilege of getting their own money. Although I welcome the intention of working with post offices, I point out, as did Paul Martin, that it has not been that long since we were debating their closure here in the chamber. The four major Scottish clearing banks have a positive history of working with the Executive to implement its financial inclusion strategy, which includes developing basic bank accounts and making financial products accessible to all. That strategy is truly welcome. The Clydesdale Bank's decision flies in the face of that good work. What matters to the National Australia Bank and the Clydesdale Bank? Is it financial inclusion or is it the size of their profit margins? I hope that they will reflect on those questions and on the signal that they wish to send to communities and, in light of that, reassess their programme of closures.

I depart from my scripted speech to congratulate Nicol Stephen on his election as leader of the Liberal Democrats. I will certainly enjoy watching his colleagues attempts to outstrip each other in the effusiveness of their praise for him as he contemplates his ministerial team. It will not be lost on him that Jeremy Purvis was first out of the traps. I start my speech proper by welcoming the Executive's consultation on the proposals for reform of the legal aid system. Many of my colleagues across the parties have already acknowledged that there are substantial weaknesses in the existing system, which have been identified by research, by members' experiences as lawyers or, indeed, by our experiences as MSPs as we try to assist constituents in gaining access to legal aid. Some of the weaknesses that the Executive rightly seeks to address include the lack of strategic vision and the lack of co-ordination in the provision of publicly funded legal advice, information and representation; the genuine variation in the levels and quality of that provision; the differential access that we have all experienced; the very low income cut-off point of something like £9,570, which excludes huge numbers of people from accessing legal aid; and the decreasing numbers of solicitors who engage in legal aid work. In addressing those difficulties, I am sure that ministers will be mindful of the view from Labour and other benches that although we want an effective, efficient and modernised justice system, we want it above all to be accessible and fair. We need a system that ensures that the people who need the law will not be excluded from using it because of prohibitive cost, lack of knowledge or lack of available help.  It was once said to me by a lawyer in this place that the people who can access legal representation are either very well off or on very low incomes that qualify them for legal aid. Our existing system of financial assistance can indeed be harsh on those who are just outside the eligibility criteria. The number of grants for civil legal aid has been falling steadily for more than 10 years, which might suggest that people are not getting the services that they need because of a lack of funds. I support the proposal to restructure financial eligibility and I welcome in particular the proposal to consider tapering support and raising the maximum income threshold to above the £9,570 that I mentioned earlier. That will ensure that people who are on moderate incomes are not excluded from pursuing justice.

That is certainly one way of tackling the problem. However, I prefer to ensure that the system is sufficiently accessible to all. Instead of engaging in a direct debate with the public over differing legal rates, we should ensure that they get a service that is of the best possible quality when they need it. Although I believe that changing the eligibility criteria will make a key difference to many of my constituents, it will do so only if sufficient solicitors are available to undertake legal aid work. Although I broadly support all the Executive's suggestions for improving matters—such as improving the cash flow of legal aid firms, assisting the repayment of student loans for trainees in legal aid traineeships and so on—I accept that we probably need a more fundamental review. However, I do not share the desire to set up a commission, because the consultation already offers us the opportunity to have a fundamental review if we are so minded.

It is not beyond the wit of members to focus on the short and the long terms in the consultation. One short-term solution is to give SLAB more flexible powers either to employ solicitors directly  or to contract private practitioners to provide legal aid services. I think that I am right in saying that part V of the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986 enables SLAB to employ solicitors directly, but the power is not really used in a civil context. However, it has been used in a number of pilots including an asylum and immigration project in Glasgow which, although it was most welcome, was introduced a little while after it was most needed. I also understand from Maureen Macmillan that, in Inverness, a solicitor has worked with Citizens Advice Scotland in providing advice indirectly on problems so that clients can be better prepared when they go on to see solicitors. I also welcome the minister's comments on the Public Defence Solicitors Office. The experience of the five-year pilot in Edinburgh has been positive enough for the service to be extended to Glasgow and Inverness. Needless to say, I am very keen that everyone should benefit from it. I wonder whether, in any specific plans to extend the pilot, ministers will be mindful of the need to start with the most disadvantaged areas. I echo the concerns that were expressed by Maureen Macmillan and Kenny MacAskill about access to justice for women who have experienced domestic abuse. I would be grateful if the minister would urge SLAB to examine the matter urgently. Indeed, on a wider issue, I encourage SLAB to use its existing powers imaginatively to ensure that all people, particularly the most vulnerable people, have access to legal services. As far as prevention is concerned, early identification and resolution of legal problems will ensure that problems do not escalate and thereby have greater financial and social costs for the individual and society. Like other members, I believe that better co-ordination between agencies to provide advice on welfare rights and consumer and debt issues, to tackle homelessness and to extend the services that community law centres provide so effectively might offer a useful way forward. I say to the minister that whatever changes are made, we should always be guided by the need to ensure that our legal system is accessible and fair to all.

The minister will acknowledge that the central heating programme is probably the most effective measure that the Executive has taken to reduce fuel poverty among older people. Like others, I ask her whether she will consider extending the programme to include replacing inefficient or partial systems for all pensioners, rather than just obsolete systems for the over-80s. Will she also consider including for the first time people with a disability whose condition is such that they would benefit from central heating?

To ask the First Minister how the plans to modernise children's services will help Scotland's most vulnerable children. (S2F-1756)

Like other members, I add my tribute to the Deputy First Minister and wish him well for the future. Indeed, many members look forward to welcoming him to the back benches. Does the Deputy First Minister agree that key to supporting our most vulnerable children is the need for all agencies—local authority, police, health or voluntary sector—to join up in a way that better enables us to focus directly on the interests of children and not on those of the agencies and which ensures an effective and integrated range of interventions? Will he assure me that those same principles will underpin the current review of the children's hearings system?

At the outset of the debate, I thank my colleagues for their support and welcome the number of members who have remained in the chamber at the end of what has been an incredibly long parliamentary week. More than half of all MSPs from all parties in the chamber have signed the motion before us this evening and many of them have gone out of their way to express regret that they are unable to attend this evening. It is now five years since the publication of "The same as you? A review of services for people with learning disabilities" and I cannot praise the Scottish Executive highly enough for its development because it is a landmark policy framework for people with learning disabilities. For the first time, people with learning disabilities, their families, carers and service providers were given the opportunity to raise awareness of their needs at a national level and to identify ways to make their lives better. At the heart of "The same as you?" is the aim of ensuring that people with learning disabilities enjoy the same rights and opportunities as everyone else. "The same as you?" made 29 recommendations that were to be implemented over a decade. It outlined the vision of flexible and responsive services based on the need of the individual person, and on developing such things as personal life plans, local area co-ordinators, direct payments, employment opportunities, and much  more besides. Much has been achieved but, equally, there is still much more to do. By having this debate, we have a chance to renew the momentum behind the challenge of bringing about full implementation of the report. Only by implementing all the recommendations will we be able to meet the needs and aspirations of people with learning disabilities. Next week is learning disability week. The Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability will have a display in the garden lobby, which I encourage members to visit. The theme for the week—which will be "It's Our Community Too"—seeks to highlight the barriers that prevent people with learning disabilities from playing their full part in the community. Whether those occur in shops, in the street or in accessing health care, education or employment, such stereotypes and ignorance prevent people from realising their potential and leading a normal life. The challenge for us as policy makers is not so much to help the individual to adapt to the community as to change the community and society to adapt to the individual. The Executive rightly set up a national implementation group to take forward all the recommendations in "The same as you?" I welcome the importance that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care has attached to the issue by signalling that she will chair that group. I am sure that, like me, she is well aware of how important it is to monitor the success of changes and the consistency with which those are applied throughout Scotland. It is essential to assess clearly what is happening at the local level, as some people's experiences do not match the expectations of high standards that the Parliament and Executive have. The first recommendation in "The same as you?" was that each local authority and health board should draw up a partnership in practice agreement to give effect on the ground to the policies that were contained in the report. Some agreements are excellent and were drawn up with the involvement of those with learning disabilities, but we are not there yet for all agreements. I ask the minister to ensure that partnership in practice agreements throughout Scotland meet the same standard. Local area co-ordinators are, in my view, the real agents for change on the ground. The local area co-ordinators whom I have seen in action in West Dunbartonshire and Helensburgh in my constituency provide direct support to people with learning disabilities and their families. That support is tailored to the needs of the individual. The local area co-ordinator acts as an interface with what can at times be a confusing plethora of service providers. I have heard local area co-ordinators described as "the glue that makes the  system work" and as people's "best friends". They are very much on the side of the person with the learning disability and they offer a person-centred approach. They are also easily accessible, as people do not have to undergo a lengthy assessment process. Also, whereas previous support tended to look at people with learning disabilities as an homogeneous group, local area co-ordinators recognise that people with learning disabilities have differing needs. As some areas of Scotland still do not have local area co-ordinators, many people miss out on the flexible and tailored support that they provide. Some people with learning disabilities are still outside the reach of public services. Of the estimated 120,000 people with learning disabilities in Scotland, just over 22,000 are known to local authorities. Evidently, a great deal still needs to be accomplished in raising awareness and in reaching out to those who are marginalised. That need can be seen in the provision of health services to people with learning disabilities, too many of whom still find it difficult to access primary health care. At the moment, health care staff do not receive appropriate training in dealing with people with learning disabilities. Combined with the fact that such patients often find it difficult to describe their symptoms, that situation creates a gap in the level of care that is provided. We need to concentrate on training front-line staff so that we generate a greater understanding of the needs of people with learning disabilities. It is not rocket science. If we actively talked to people with learning disabilities about how services might be developed, we might find that relatively small changes can make a huge difference. On that point about talking to people with learning disabilities, I commend the Enable publication "Making Consultation Work", which was launched today by the Deputy Minister for Communities. That shows that consideration of learning disabilities is indeed mainstreamed across the Executive in a number of different policy areas. Finally, there are still huge barriers in employment and we need to change attitudes towards people with learning disabilities. Raising awareness must be about building respect and challenging negative perceptions. The stereotypes that surround learning disabilities prevent people from gaining employment. We know that an estimated one in 20 adults with a learning disability is currently in paid employment. That is the tip of the iceberg, given that 65 per cent of adults with a learning disability tell us that they want to work. As members know, in many areas of Scotland, the labour market is so tight that vacancies remain unfilled. That suggest to me an opportunity.  Developing employment options must be a priority for the future. I welcome the commitment that Allan Wilson, the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, made earlier this afternoon to ensure that all the recommendations in "Working for a change?" are fully implemented. I believe that "The same as you?" provides a positive framework for action. So far, important steps have been taken to implement the recommendations. I urge the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care to step up the pace. I know that she shares my view that we need to maintain a momentum over the next five years and beyond in order to make "The same as you?" a reality for everyone in Scotland who is affected by learning disabilities.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making in implementing "Working for a change?" to help people with a learning disability to access employment. (S2O-7101)

"Working for a change?" was completed in 2003 and made 10 recommendations about improving access to employment for people with learning disabilities, one of which charged ministers in the Scottish Executive Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department with chairing a national steering group to push forward implementation. Although I am aware that the minister is developing an employability strategy, which might encompass some of the report's recommendations, I am keen that he should ensure that the recommendations are fully implemented. Will he give a commitment to do that?

Will the member take an intervention?

Like many other members, I welcome the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Bill. I believe that, by bringing a renewed focus to tackling offending and improving co-ordination, the bill will provide a sound basis for reducing the number of people who are convicted of a further offence. It is worth reminding ourselves of the scale of the problem that we face. In Scotland, between 1995 and 2000, of those who were released from custodial sentences, up to 66 per cent—that is two thirds—were reconvicted within two years. It is because of that scale that I am, frankly, astonished that Annabel Goldie and Colin Fox are opposed to the bill. In answer to Mr Stevenson's oblique question, I suspect that Mr Fox is away starting a revolution, while Miss Goldie is undoubtedly trying to quell one in the Tory ranks—what strange bedfellows! However, although structural change in the absence of policy substance is never the answer, I think—unlike Annabel Goldie and Colin Fox—that community justice authorities have a key contribution to make, largely because they are set in a much wider package of reform, with ministers clearly taking a strategic approach to tackling reoffending across the criminal justice system. Although it is acknowledged that the proposed structural reforms will not, in and of themselves, reduce reoffending, they will provide us with solid foundations on which to build. I, for one, am persuaded by comments that were  made by one of the committee's witnesses, who said that, although existing criminal justice relationships may indeed work well, "It is probably too important to be left to chance ... many of the good relationships that exist are based on good will and a willingness to work together professionally. If good will does not exist and there is no requirement to form a relationship and to agree on targets, objectives and areas to work in partnership, the chances are that it might not happen."—[ Official Report, Justice 2 Committee , 19 April 2005 ; c 153 7-8.] Let us not, as the Tories would do, take any chances. Community justice authorities will ensure that we do not simply rely on good will to promote some Tory notion of flexibility. Perhaps Miss Goldie has forgotten last year's national consultation on reducing reoffending. I shall remind her of it. A general consensus emerged about the key weaknesses in the existing system. At that time, we were told that there were no shared objectives, no strategic direction, little communication, lack of communication between criminal justice service providers and inconsistency in the quality and range of offenders services across Scotland. That is not to diminish the work that is undertaken by some criminal justice social work partnerships. I know that the partnership that covers my patch in Dunbartonshire is excellent, but the picture is not the same across Scotland. We need better consistency, better co-ordination and better quality in some areas. If the Tories' desire is to listen, I would welcome an acknowledgement that the status quo is not working.

If Margaret Mitchell had spent any time on the Justice 2 Committee listening to the evidence, she would not have made that comment. The Tories on the Justice 2 Committee have ended up doing what they all do so well. It reminds me of the behaviour of a small child. Basically, they know only one word, which they repeat several times, and that word is "no". We have yet to find out what the Tories actually think. I would welcome further interventions if I thought that we would hear the Tories setting out their proposals, but I suspect that they will remain sedentary. I want to focus on two issues that were raised with the committee, the first of which concerns the ministerial powers of direction and intervention. I  confess to the chamber that there was genuine confusion in the committee. We thought that we knew the difference between the power of direction and the power of intervention, and who the powers were aimed at, but we were confused. We were not alone; there is still uncertainty among stakeholders. I know that the minister intends that the power of direction will apply only, as set out in section 2(10), to community justice authorities, but sections 5 and 6 give ministers a power of direction to require action in the event of failure, either by a community justice authority or by a local authority. It is fair to say that there is concern among local authorities about the scope and intention of those powers. Although I welcome the reassurance that the minister gave to the committee, I urge her further to clarify the matter. In particular, sections 5 and 6 refer to the exercise of power if there has been failure and it would be useful to know what circumstances would constitute failure. The minister indicated that any power of direction would be exercised following guidance. I assume that section 2(10)(b) will need to be amended to enable the Scottish ministers to provide wider guidance and I hope that such an amendment will be lodged at stage 2. I ask the minister to consider two other matters before stage 3. First, will she consider ensuring that the power can be used only following an order that is subject to affirmative resolution by the Parliament? Such an approach would provide greater transparency and opportunity for scrutiny. Secondly, will she consider the possibility of including in the bill reasonable limits on the use of the power, in relation to the power's scope and purpose and the time and nature of any intervention? I acknowledge that that would be difficult, but such a measure would reassure stakeholders of the minister's intentions. Finally, I echo Bill Butler and say a few words about the interface between the Scottish Prison Service and the community justice authorities.

I accept that it is difficult for the Scottish Prison Service to work with 32 individual local authorities, but the service will need to make a considerable effort to engage meaningfully with CJAs. The SPS is a single national system, but CJAs will inevitably be much more local. The committee was astonished to hear that basic information was often not exchanged, despite positive work in link centres. We heard of examples in which the police and local authorities were unaware that prisoners had been released into the community, so it should come as no surprise to the minister that the committee believes that there is considerable scope for  improving the collection and sharing of basic information. I look forward to considering some of those points with the minister at stage 2. In the meantime, I urge the Parliament to support the general principles of the bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making on the review of the Arbuthnott formula for allocating funding to NHS boards. (S2O-7040)

It will come as no surprise to the minister that many of us want the Arbuthnott formula revised to take proper account of deprivation. Will the minister acknowledge that there is a well established link between poverty and ill health? Will he also acknowledge that for many communities in the west of Scotland there needs to be additional recognition of the cost of poverty to the NHS and that sooner rather than later that should be reflected in the funding provided for health boards?

I welcome every opportunity to debate health matters and I came to the debate genuinely interested in whether the Tories had any insights to offer on the Kerr report. Their first offering was to complain that we were not going to debate it soon enough. Given that they said little on the substance of the report, today's debate was a wonderful opportunity for them to lay out their policies. So what did we hear? Mr McLetchie—who is still absent—talked about reform and choice. I have no problem with either of those concepts, but all we heard from him was a tired, recycled agenda, which was rejected at the ballot box a mere month ago. Yes, there would be choice, but it would be  choice for the few who have access to substantial sums of money and who statistically enjoy better health anyway because of the level of their incomes. People could get the patient passport, which sounds good but would not cover the full cost of treatment. What would happen to somebody who does not have thousands of pounds salted away? To be precise, nothing. The Tories made no mention of people on lower incomes or of the link between poverty and health inequality. Moreover, there was not one word on those matters in their manifesto, because they do not understand them and do not really believe in the ethos of the NHS. The rejection of the Tories at the ballot box is now the subject of intense media speculation. The Tories are riven by internal dissent and questions of who is up and who is down. I will offer them some free impartial advice, which I am sure that they will not take. Some members might recall the Clash, a popular beat combo from the late 1970s and the early 1980s. One of their songs could have been written for the Tories; it has the lyric: "Should I stay or should I go now?" First, we had James Gray as shadow Secretary of State for Scotland. He is gone. He lasted all of a week and was savaged, we are told, by Brian Taylor—surely not that nice man Brian Taylor. Secondly, there was Margaret Goodman, who was deputy chair of the Scottish Tories. She, too, has gone and her parting advice was "keep topping up the formaldehyde". Who will be next? Will it be Michael Howard, David McLetchie or Brian Monteith? Brian Monteith in particular might want to consider the song's next line—

As ever, you are extremely perceptive, Presiding Officer. I will give members the next line of the song, because it is worth hearing. It runs: "If I stay there will be trouble". Brian Monteith should take that as a warning and get out now. Unlike the Tories, I welcome the values that underpin Professor Kerr's report. Those values are at the heart of our NHS, which is about being fair to all and personal to each. Duncan McNeil is  absolutely right that the patients' interests must be firmly at the centre of our national health service. That ethos was not evident in NHS Argyll and Clyde, where boundaries mattered much more than geography and patient flow. That is not a criticism of front-line staff who, throughout the piece, continued to deliver excellent care for our local community. I welcome the deputy minister's initial comments on the provision of emergency services, which build on that commitment to us all. I also welcome the support from her and the minister for the integrated model of care that clinicians are developing at the Vale of Leven hospital. That model will provide access to safe and sustainable services on a 24/7 basis that fits with the framework that Professor Kerr has laid out. It also fits well with the principle of delivering services as locally as possible and as specialist as necessary. However, there must be complete transparency in determining what services should be concentrated, which should happen only where a clear clinical benefit has been demonstrated and patients have been involved in the dialogue. I commend the framework that Professor Kerr sets out, which will deliver that transparency. Annabel Goldie's comments about NHS Argyll and Clyde were disappointing. Her support for keeping the trusts is completely misjudged. The Tories created the conditions for the problems that we are now experiencing in Argyll and Clyde. If Annabel Goldie had seen the internal bickering and systems failure, which were all too evident, even she would not stick to the Tory ideological nonsense that has never served patients well. I look forward to having a real debate in the autumn, not this shadow-boxing in which the Tories trot out their tired policies. Those polices were rejected by all at the ballot box. How many times do the Tories need to be told?

For the sake of accuracy, does the member accept that NHS Argyll and Clyde has not taken a decision on the acute part of its clinical strategy and that that is set aside?

To ask the Scottish Executive, following publication of the report from Professor David Kerr, how it will ensure that health services are delivered as locally as possible. (S2O-6958)

The minister will, of course, be aware that Professor Kerr's report helpfully states that any "concentration of health services on fewer sites should be informed by" clear and unambiguous evidence of actual clinical benefit. How will the minister ensure that the views of patients and communities are heard?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that there are economic and environmental benefits to removing the tolls on the Erskine bridge. (S2O-6865)

I look forward to contributing to that consultation. The minister will be aware of research that his department has carried out that points to the clear conclusion that removing the tolls from the Erskine bridge will have a positive environmental benefit throughout the west of Scotland by alleviating congestion on the Kingston bridge and in the Clyde tunnel, which is estimated to cost our economy £19 million each year. I know that the minister wants to improve our economy and our environment, so when will he remove the tolls?

In 25 years' time, there will be more people of retirement age in Scotland than there will be children. The biggest growth will be in the number of people who are over 80, who I am sure will be assisted by the prescription of a glass of whisky every evening. I begin with that fact because we know that, generally speaking, the older someone is, the more likely they are to suffer from ill health and to end up in hospital. To allow an elderly person to end up in hospital is often the default response; it is not what older people want, it should not be what we want and it is perhaps not what they need. Whenever they are asked, older people tell us that they want to remain in their own homes and be cared for in their own homes for as long as possible. The challenge for us in this chamber is to find alternatives to unnecessary hospital admissions, so that older people can be cared for in or, at least much nearer to, their own home. I turn to the issue of care in hospital. Members—not only on the Labour benches but across the chamber—have long believed that older people  should be treated with dignity and respect. We should never condone negative age discrimination—direct or indirect—in the NHS. I want to sound a note of caution, however, and agree with comments that Richard Baker made. We need to set the debate in the context of all the positive work that goes on in the NHS. We must be careful not to convey the impression that the NHS is somehow rife with negative age discrimination. I am sure that the SNP would not want to do that—it is simply not true. As the minister said, there is no systemic failure in the NHS. There are many people in our health service who care—daily and well—for our older people. That said, we must always respond, and respond robustly, to the genuine concerns of relatives and friends. Those concerns point to a need to raise standards of care, particularly standards that focus on nutrition and personal hygiene. I agree with many in the chamber that those care needs are essential to recovery; they are not an add-on luxury. It is for that reason that the Executive has moved to put in place a number of different measures. I refer to the clinical standards for our older people in acute care, which have at their core the dignity and rights of older people. I refer also to the NHS QIS 2004 review of older people in acute care and to wider national care standards. Through those measures, we will ensure that the very highest standards of care are delivered to our older people. We need to ensure that the rigorous and professional service standards that are set for our hospitals and care homes are met. I acknowledge that they are being exceeded in many places across Scotland. I turn to the wider question of care for older people. As the minister said, in 2002, an expert group on health care for older people set out to ensure that they have the health and care services that they need. The group looked beyond hospital care to a much wider set of health care policies that support active aging. Professor Kerr's report, which was published yesterday, specifically looks at older people and how we can tailor health services in Scotland better to meet their needs. His key conclusion is that the more local the provision, the better it is. Ideally, supporting patients at home will prevent avoidable hospital admissions. In his initial response, the Minister for Health and Community Care committed the Executive to providing just such a service: personal, proactive and co-ordinated care in local communities. Labour is committed to a better life for older people in Scotland, both now and in the future. We are committed to supporting older people to live healthy, independent lives. A key part of all of that  is a recognition that age discrimination is a problem not just in the health service but for wider society. We need to send out a signal that all of us should value older people and that all of us want to support them in continuing to make the substantial contribution to Scottish society that they have made for many years.

I welcome the values that are set out in Professor Kerr's report, which place the focus firmly on the patient. I have two quick questions for the minister. In the context of emergency care, does he acknowledge that the model of integrated care that clinicians are developing at the Vale of Leven hospital is exactly the kind of sustainable and collaborative model that fits with the thrust of Professor Kerr's report? Secondly, will he confirm that the commitment to having generalist physicians applies not just to rural hospitals but to hospitals in outlying urban areas?

On behalf of the 24,000 people in my constituency who petitioned the Parliament, I whole-heartedly welcome the minister's statement and commend his actions. He has clearly listened to our concerns and has demonstrated that he is prepared to take strong action to protect patients' interests. I have two very quick questions. First, will he send a strong signal that he expects patients from the Helensburgh and Lomond areas to be cared for by NHS Greater Glasgow? After all, that is what they and their local authority, Argyll and Bute Council, want and, frankly, it is only common sense. Secondly, will the minister lend his support to the innovative model of integrated care that is being developed by general practitioners, clinicians and nurses at the Vale of Leven hospital, which creates a safe and sustainable future for the hospital by breaking down divisions between primary and acute care?

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive when, in this calendar year, it expects to consider revised byelaws for Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park. (S2O-6503)

The minister is aware of my concerns about the use of jet-skis on Loch Lomond, particularly in the light of the decision of the Lake District National Park Authority to ban jet-skis from Lake Windermere. Given that a decision will not be taken until the end of the year, what assistance will the Scottish Executive provide for interim enforcement measures?

Although I thank Andrew Arbuckle for bringing the motion to the chamber, I regret that I cannot support the proposition that it contains. I agree with Tricia Marwick that, although the aspiration of using only Scottish grain might be commendable, the suggested method—regulation—is not the best way in which to proceed. I always welcome the opportunity to talk about the whisky industry, not least because of its importance to the Scottish economy. It is worth reminding ourselves, as the Scotch Whisky Association, Allied Distillers and Diageo have done, that the industry accounts for more than 40,000 jobs and spends £700 million with local suppliers. We should also remember that whisky is Scotland's second-largest export and the fifth-largest export in the United Kingdom. The industry is critical to my constituency, with Allied Distillers employing 800 people at Kilmalid.

I have just started, so I will make some progress first. The central proposition in Andrew Arbuckle's motion is that protected geographical indicator status should apply to Scotch whisky and only Scottish grain should be used in the final product. On that basis, let me focus my comments on three areas: PGI status; the use of Scottish grain; and the weather, which is the subject of conversation the length and breadth of Scotland. As I understand it, PGI status is usually applied to agricultural products and foodstuffs, not to wines or spirits. Interestingly, PGI status would not of itself require the use of Scottish cereals, which Andrew Arbuckle clearly desires. More important, it would be a dilution of the existing protection of Scotch whisky at an international level. Indeed, that is acknowledged by the European Community, which has separate legislation applying to the spirits industry. The SWA says: "The legal protection of Scotch whisky is a top priority for the SWA and its members. Our success in this field not only protects consumers, but also benefits distillers and the  farmers who provide our cereal needs. It would be bizarre if the Scottish Parliament sought to reduce the legal status of Scotch." The prospect of using only Scottish grain in whisky is superficially attractive, but in reality it could be disastrous for the industry. It is worth noting that 90 per cent of barley requirements are sourced in Scotland. Other cereals, such as wheat and maize, are also used in grain whisky, but, as I understand it, insufficient amounts of those cereals are grown in Scotland to meet both distilling and other market requirements. A better way forward, surely—

As it is clear that Andrew Arbuckle is a farmer, he is at a considerable advantage in regard to the tonnage of barley grown. However, I put it to him that a better way of proceeding is through partnership, because I know that Scotch whisky distillers strive to use Scottish cereals wherever possible. After all, the source is closer to their production points and so easier to access. However, the reputation of Scotch whisky is established on the basis that the production process takes place in Scotland. In effect, the motion could restrict the current supply of whisky, never mind hampering future growth. In expressing its concern to me, Allied Distillers asked how it could provide Scotch whisky to new and developing markets and thereby drive growth in the Scottish economy if it did not have enough cereal. Of course, we are currently successful in accessing new markets in the far east, India and eastern Europe. Is Mr Arbuckle suggesting that we should do anything to hamper that growth or to damage the industry? That is the question. Finally, let me turn to the weather. I am sure that all politicians would dearly love to promise sunshine such as we are enjoying today on a year-round basis. Alas, we cannot guarantee it. If we could, I suspect that we would be re-elected in perpetuity—a frightening thought. Let us be sensible. Scotland is a wet country. Sometimes it is far too wet and that can have an impact on our cereal crops. In those circumstances, the motion would place intolerable restrictions on the whisky industry and, ultimately, might cause it harm and cost jobs. I therefore urge the Executive and the Parliament to reject the terms of the motion.

Will the member comment on the collapse of the French brandy industry after vines were attacked by disease and producers were unable to source grapes elsewhere? In fact, Scotch whisky took advantage of that collapse.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to increase the rights of private sector tenants. (S2O-6375)

The minister will be aware that some private sector tenants live in properties that are desperately in need of improvement; I am thinking in particular of tenemental properties in Dumbarton and Helensburgh in my constituency. What mechanisms are in place to encourage private sector landlords to invest in their properties so that all of us, irrespective of tenure, can enjoy 21 st century housing?

I would not expect the First Minister to comment on speculation about the break-up of Argyll and Clyde NHS Board, although many of my constituents would welcome that action from the Minister for Health and Community Care. Will the First Minister affirm that we will always put the needs of patients very much at the top of the agenda? Equally, will  he affirm the importance of the Vale of Leven and Gartnavel hospitals to delivering services for my constituents in the future?

Will the member explain how seven frigates and 100 jobs will take care of the 10,600 people who currently work at Faslane?

Will the member give way?

This is slightly reminiscent of groundhog day—another SNP debate, another reserved issue. The people of Scotland will soon begin to wonder whether there is any point in having SNP MPs at Westminster, as today's debate demonstrates that they are incapable of making the case there. I turn to the substance of the debate. It is fair to say that many activists in the Labour movement, including me, have campaigned over the years for nuclear disarmament. World peace and a nuclear-free world are aspirations that we all share. We may differ on how to achieve those aims, but I know of no sane person, inside or outside the chamber, who wants to see nuclear weapons used anywhere in the world.  The Labour Government has clearly demonstrated its commitment to Britain's obligations under the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. Together with France, Britain was one of the first two nations to ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Practical action has also been taken. There has been a reduction in the number of warheads, which is down by a third. All air-launched nuclear weapons have been removed. That is action, not rhetoric, and the SNP would do well to learn from it. I make clear that there are no plans for Trident to be replaced and that no decision has been made on any possible successor system. I quote from the recent defence review white paper, "Delivering Security in a Changing World", which states: "The Government's policy on nuclear weapons remains as set out in the SDR"— the strategic defence review. The paper continues: "We are committed to working towards a safer world in which there is no requirement for nuclear weapons". I stress the word "no". It pains me to have to make this point yet again, but if the SNP is a serious, grown-up party, it needs to recognise that responsible politicians must think through the consequences of their actions. In that context, I want to talk about Faslane.

No. Specifically, I want to talk about an EKOS Consulting report that was commissioned a few years ago. The report showed that 7,000 people are employed at the base, 4,000 of whom are civilians. However, there is more. Some 3,700 indirect jobs result from supplier linkages and income multipliers. The base is one of the largest single-site employers in Scotland, and by far the largest source of jobs in the local economy. If we consider that West Dunbartonshire is among the most disadvantaged areas in Scotland, and that Faslane provides a quarter of the employment in the area, the SNP's attitude is nothing short of scandalous. Have the nationalists thought about what will happen to the workers and their families, or are they, too, destined for the scrap heap? A couple of years ago, I found that the SNP's policy website was blank on this matter. It had nothing to say, except that the matter was under review. I confess that I am not sure whether today's offering is any better. Perhaps, as Ronan Keating would say, the SNP says it best when it says nothing at all. We remain in the dark about the SNP's policy on these matters. Does it want to be in or out of  NATO? Do we need to wait for the vagaries of an SNP conference for such a decision? In any case, we need not worry: apparently, when Trident is scrapped, the Scottish navy and customs and excise will be based at Faslane. At least, that is what the former SNP MSP Lloyd Quinan said. What a relief that news was to the workers. However, geography is not one of the SNP's strong points—Faslane is, of course, on the west coast—and Mr Quinan had obviously not checked with the boss before he made his statement. At the same time, Alex Salmond was on his feet, telling people in Rosyth—which is on the east coast—not to worry, because the self-same navy would be based there. Do members want to know how big that navy will be? I will tell them: it will consist of seven frigates and the workforce involved will number 100. Is my maths wrong? If not, the SNP needs to tell us what it will do for the other 10,600 people who work at Faslane. Until the SNP can properly answer that question, it should not waste my time and the chamber's time. I urge Parliament to reject the motion.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. I want to clarify the role of the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill Committee. As members will be aware, the process of consideration for private bills is contained within one committee, with no role for secondary committees. Our committee employed Arup, which is an expert in the field, to provide us with a robust and independent analysis of the promoter's business case, which was subjected to rigorous scrutiny by the committee. In reality, that process provides much more detail than the financial memoranda that the Finance Committee ordinarily receives. In fact, my colleague Des McNulty agrees that that scrutiny has been robust and I note that, in the opinion of our expert advisers, the promoter's financial information is as robust as could reasonably be expected at this stage. The committee will of course return to the business case before the conclusion of stage 3. It is the case that the terms of any financial resolution are a matter for the Executive and I am sure that the Executive will want to consider the funds that it has agreed to commit. That said, I very much support the need to review the private bills process. In that context, I also support the contention that there might be a need for consistent scrutiny across bills whose provisions might make substantial claims on the consolidated fund.

Will the minister actively encourage NHS Greater Glasgow and Argyll and Clyde NHS Board to work together? When we add the statistics for A and E attendance in my constituency to the statistics for the north-west corridor of Glasgow, it becomes clear that the argument for a third A and E unit at Gartnavel hospital is entirely justified.

I will be pleased to move the motion in my name on behalf of the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill Committee. Last week, the Parliament agreed to proceed with the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill; now, in a situation slightly reminiscent of "Groundhog Day", we debate whether to proceed with the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill, a private bill that is promoted by the City of Edinburgh Council. The bill, I might add, has the unenviable record of having the highest number of objections that have been lodged against a private bill so far. The last time we looked, there were 206 objections. With the bill, the promoter seeks to construct and operate a tramline, running in a loop from St Andrew Square, along Leith Walk to Leith, west to Granton, south to Haymarket and then back to St Andrew Square along Princes Street. From the start of the preliminary stage, we recognised the valuable contribution that objectors could make to our consideration and, as a result, we endeavoured to seek the views of objectors wherever possible. I put on record my and the committee's thanks to the objectors who provided written and oral evidence. For the uninitiated, the private bill process can seem daunting and highly technical. Over the past few months, we have had to grapple with technical issues such as the role of prior approvals and the finer points of mode-choice modelling. I now know more about highway and public transport modelling than I would ever have thought would be possible or, indeed, desirable. That would not have been achievable without the support of the committee's advisers from Bond Pearce, Casella Stanger and Arup, who are all experts in their respective fields. They provided us with robust and independent analysis of the proposals that we were considering. I would also like to thank the promoter for its professional responses to the committee's requests for additional evidence, of which there were many. Finally, I thank the clerks to the committee and my fellow committee members for their hard work and diligence. We began our consideration of the bill in June 2004 and completed our deliberations only on 17 February with the publication of our preliminary  stage report. The committee had three key roles to play in the preliminary stage: to report on the bill's general principles; to report on whether the bill should proceed as a private bill; and to give preliminary consideration to all 206 objections. I will try to provide the Parliament with a whistle-stop tour of the committee's performance of those three key functions. I will stop at key junctions to provide further insight into the committee's recommendations, before arriving safely and—I hope—on time at the committee's main conclusion. The committee gave preliminary consideration to 206 objections. In doing that, we had to decide whether the objector had demonstrated that it was clear that their interests would be adversely affected by the bill. Of the total number of objections, 203 passed that first hurdle and will be the subject of detailed scrutiny at the consideration stage, when we will consider issues such as the environmental impact of the tramline on the Roseburn corridor; suggested alternative routes, such as that which would allow trams to stop at the Western general hospital; and the particular sensitivity of a route that will run through a world heritage site. The 100 objections to the whole of the bill raised a number of valid concerns about matters such as project cost, viability of bus services, traffic congestion and visual impact, as well as a number of broad European convention on human rights issues. Although we rejected those objections, we considered many of them at length during our scrutiny of the bill's general principles. Objectors were invited to give evidence directly to the committee. That was very valuable. Following its examination of the evidence, the committee is satisfied that the promoter has demonstrated why a private bill is necessary. We are also content that the accompanying documents satisfy the technical criteria of standing orders and will allow for proper scrutiny of the bill at the consideration stage. That said, there were two areas of concern that merit further comment. First, we continue to have concerns about the enforceability of the environmental statement and the draft design manual in the event that the bill is passed by the Parliament, so we have agreed to return to the issue at the consideration stage. Secondly, the promoter's approach to consultation was a matter of substantial concern to the committee. We received evidence from numerous objectors who felt that their opportunity to contribute to the debate in a meaningful way was limited because the promoter sought their views when it had already decided on the majority of the proposed route alignment. Although we acknowledge that the promoter employed many methods to engage  with the public, we feel that the chance to get buy-in to the project from local communities has been missed. In short, for some people the process was more of an exercise in being given information than a consultation, which involves being listened to, with a view to changes being made. That said, we recognise that standing orders do not provide guidance to potential private bill promoters on the spirit of the consultation in which they should engage. As that point has featured in previous private bill committee reports, we agreed to refer the matter to the Procedures Committee, to establish whether further guidance can be provided through changes to standing orders. During our consideration of the bill's general principles, we were mindful of the National Audit Office's recent report, which was extremely helpful in providing an analysis of light rail projects in England and—more important—assessing whether they had delivered the benefits that had been predicted.

From our consideration of all the evidence, on balance we agreed with the NAO that trams could provide a fast, frequent and reliable service—I am speeding up, Presiding Officer—and that they enjoy a better public image. However, like the NAO report, trams do not operate on steam and we have less confidence in their ability to deliver a number of other significant benefits. We therefore examined the general principles of line 1 in the light of those areas of concern and focused on four key areas—economic development and regeneration, congestion, social policy and environmental issues—with which I know that my colleagues will deal further. We continue to have reservations about the scale of the benefits that might result from the proposed project. Central to those reservations are our concerns about patronage—in essence, whether the trams will be used to the level that the promoter predicts and deliver the level of benefit that will make the project good value for money. On the subject of money, I assure members that the committee will return to the financial case. At this stage, the financial information is as robust as could reasonably be expected, but more questions need to be answered before the committee will be content that it stacks up. It is clear that there will be substantial work for the committee to do at consideration stage, when it will also take evidence from objectors on how the detail of the bill affects them. That said, we recommend that the Edinburgh Tram (Line One)  Bill proceed as a private bill and that the general principles be agreed to. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill and that the Bill should proceed as a Private Bill.

The minister will be aware of my concerns about Argyll and Bute Council's decision to reduce the scope of its programme to replace schools. In particular, I am concerned that the council is not tackling schools that are most in need of refurbishment. I illustrate that point briefly by referring to Arrochar Primary School, the fabric of which is in serious disrepair; indeed, it is considered to be the worst in the area. Will the minister therefore confirm that his priority is for the worst schools to be dealt with first, which is the purpose for which £80 million was allocated to Argyll and Bute Council?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the formula for allocating funding to local government and other bodies in order to give greater weight to deprivation. (S2O-5465)

I am sure that the minister will also welcome representations from back-bench MSPs; after all, he will be aware of the additional costs of tackling deprivation, which can clearly be identified in social work, education and health spending. Does he agree that, in order to deal with the depth and complexity of the problems, we need to ensure that adequate resources go to the front line? If so, will he consider allocating the £12 million in Treasury consequentials to the 10 most deprived local authorities in Scotland?

Does the member agree that the modern Scottish way is, in fact, the Labour way?

I join other members in welcoming the Fire (Scotland) Bill and record my thanks to the clerks of the Justice 2 Committee, everyone who gave evidence, the bill team and ministers. Although the process has been complex and has sometimes resulted in arguments, it has been worth it just to hear the consensus that has emerged. Even the SNP—or  at least Stewart Maxwell—now accepts that a third way is desirable and should be supported.

No. The previous piece of legislation on the fire service was passed almost 60 years ago in 1947. As it is quite clear that the service has changed dramatically and that its range of responsibilities is diverse, it is appropriate that we reflect the new realities that firefighters face. I join other members in paying tribute to the men and women who work in the fire service and who sometimes risk their lives to protect us in our homes and communities. They deserve our thanks. The bill seeks to give the fire service flexibility in how it deploys its resources and in finding out how it can best serve our communities. For a start, it sets out a range of core functions that better reflect current duties including, for the first time, dealing with road traffic accidents and offshore firefighting. Let me spend a minute on the subject of offshore firefighting. Considerable work has been undertaken at UK level on what is called the sea of change project to ensure that fires that happen on vessels at sea can be dealt with appropriately. Given the extensive coastline that we enjoy, it is only common sense that we make provision for firefighting at sea. However, I understand that some concerns have been expressed, principally about no-fault insurance liability cover for firefighters who are involved in events that happen on a vessel that, for example, might be owned in one country but registered in another. I trust that the minister will continue his dialogue with the trade unions to resolve those matters. I want to raise another concern that I have discussed previously with the minister. For the benefit of members, let me explain that section 67(2) of the bill will make it an offence for an employee to fail to co-operate with his employer in carrying out his duties in terms of part 3. The duty to co-operate is set out in paragraph (b) in section 52. The Executive's helpful amendments at stage 2 put it beyond any doubt that section 67(2) would not apply in the event of strike action. However, it is unclear whether official industrial action short of strike, such as working to rule or a go slow, would be similarly exempt. Will the minister confirm that section 67(2) is not intended to apply to an employee who does not so co-operate by reason of otherwise lawful industrial action, including industrial action short of strike? In my concluding minute or two—

Thank you, Presiding Officer.  In my concluding minute, I want to deal with what I consider to be the essence of the bill, which is the greater emphasis that it places on fire prevention and community fire safety. In the tragic event of a fire, especially those that break out at night, the fire service—no matter how fast it is—often arrives too late and fatalities result. Therefore, we should see enormous benefit from the greater emphasis that the bill will place on prevention. Risk assessment must be used as a key tool by building on the risk-based approach that is contained in the Fire Precautions (Workplace) Regulations 1997, which require employers to identify risks and to take steps to remove or reduce them. In that way, the bill will affect virtually all those who are responsible for non-domestic premises, including shops, offices, educational establishments and care homes. We all want to see a modern 21 st century fire service with a framework that recognises and values our firefighters, provides flexibility to develop the service in the interest of our communities and has prevention of fire at its heart. The bill will provide an essential foundation on which we can build.

Do you agree with his remarks about a third way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to improve communication with victims in the justice system. (S2O-5336)

I, too, welcome the Lord Advocate's announcement that victims and relatives will be given reasons for the decisions that are taken by the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service in the circumstances outlined. The minister will be aware that I have constituents whose experience of the justice system is sometimes less than satisfactory, who have not been given reasons for charges being dropped and who have no idea of the outcome of the case and are therefore unable to move on. The change in policy will make a significant difference. Will the minister indicate the criteria that will inform and guide fiscals and the likely timescale for implementation?

Like my colleague, I welcome the £3 million investment in Dumbarton sheriff court, which is making a real difference. I am sure that the Lord Advocate will agree that partnership working is essential to improving service delivery. At the national level, the fiscal service is working with Scottish Women's Aid on training for new prosecutors on the range of issues that they are likely to encounter. Will he  encourage similar partnership working at a local level and suggest that fiscals should attend domestic abuse partnership groups such as the one in West Dunbartonshire, as that dialogue will result in improved service delivery?

I, too, recall the Lord Advocate's words from 2001. More important, I recall his explicit recognition that very much at the heart of the reform of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service was the need to win the confidence of the people of Scotland and to ensure that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service would be independent and fair and would work consistently in the public interest. I am bemused by the fact that Opposition members do not consider the issue worthy of debate. I would have thought that reviewing how our legal system operates is a key part of tackling crime and delivering justice. We need to be assured that there is the capacity and the quality in our legal system to ensure efficient and effective prosecutions. As I do not mix in the same social circles as Annabel Goldie but lead quite a sheltered life, I am not quite sure what a social salon is. However, Annabel Goldie should know that the quality of the guests whom one invites to one's social salon is what counts, and I note that the Conservatives are down to two members in the chamber and that their chief has left the building. Much has been achieved in modernising and improving the service, and this debate provides a good opportunity for us to build on those improvements and to enhance further the reputation of our prosecution service. I will pick out a couple of specific areas for comment. I acknowledge, as members would expect me to—I am a parochial politician, too—the welcome and significant capital investment that has been made in the courts throughout Scotland. Indeed, £3 million has been spent to refurbish Dumbarton sheriff court. That has made a huge difference to court staff and to the public, and it has made physical access to the court much easier. It has also made a huge difference to the experience of vulnerable witnesses, who are now catered for in more appropriate and better surroundings. Additionally, there has been an economic benefit to Dumbarton because, by retaining the court in the area, we have encouraged several legal firms to remain and become established in the town. I thank the Lord Advocate for that. I also thank the Lord Advocate for his explicit recognition of the contribution of staff in the fiscal's office, which is key to the provision of a modern and effective service. An additional 100 or so legal staff are now employed there who are able to deal with more and increasingly complex cases. However, we need to ensure that those staff are deployed at the front line, directly in local offices, and not all together in the Crown Office. I would welcome some assurance on that point.  It will come as no surprise to the Lord Advocate that I raise the matter of FOS—the new future office system IT package. I have raised concerns about the glitches in the practical operation of the system before, especially when it was rolled out in Glasgow, which has probably the busiest office in Scotland. Those glitches led to delays in case marking, which was in complete contrast to the purpose of the system, which was to speed up marking. I understand that FOS has improved considerably, but I would be grateful if the Lord Advocate or the Solicitor General could give me an update on current timescales for case marking, which I gather are significantly improved. I will focus my remaining comments on the Lord Advocate's announcement on giving reasons for decisions to victims and their relatives. Essentially, that is about communication. In listening to constituents' first-hand experiences of the prosecution service, I have observed that the same issues arise over and over again. Victims and witnesses are often unaware of the court procedures that they face. Some complain that the charges in court are altered without their knowing why, while many never receive an explanation of why a decision has been made and encounter difficulties when they try to learn of the progress or outcome of their cases. Put simply, we need to become better at talking to people. We need a much more open, responsive and accessible service. We all acknowledge—indeed, Linda Fabiani made the point—that the process of appearing in court as a victim or a witness is stressful. For some people, the experience can be truly traumatic. Their lack of communication with the prosecution service means that they are left feeling helpless and even more vulnerable. That is not how any of us would want people to be treated in this day and age. Complaints to the Crown Office about how cases have been handled are often a cry for help from people who have been left out of the information loop. The expansion of the victim information and advice service throughout Scotland undoubtedly will help victims by giving them general information about the criminal justice system and acting as an important tool in the provision of information about the progress of individual cases. Nevertheless, I have already noted some gaps, which I will illustrate. In the past two months, constituents have told me that no reason was given for part of a charge being deleted; that no explanation was given of a decision that was arrived at; that there was difficulty in accessing information about the progress or outcome of a case; and that there was a lack of support following a case—indeed, the correspondence from the fiscal's office precluded any further involvement of the victim information and advice  service. All those issues require attention. We need to ensure that support and advice is available to people after their case is closed, and we must give reasons why charges are dropped midway through a case. That will avoid the Crown Office becoming clogged with complaints and information requests that relate to the outcomes of court cases from people who are trying to come to terms with the meaning of decisions. Therefore, the Lord Advocate is absolutely spot on with his announcement today, which I welcome. We need to give the reasons behind our decisions. People understanding why something has happened is essential to justice being done. We need a prosecution service in which people in Scotland can have confidence—a service that is framed by openness, consistency and fairness. I believe not only that we have put the building blocks in place, but that we have made considerable progress towards ensuring that what we have in Scotland is exactly that. I hope that the momentum is maintained, so that we will continue to have access to a first-class justice system for all our communities.

I seem to recollect that the Tories introduced a number of  bad laws, not least of which was the one that brought the poll tax to Scotland, so I take what Annabel Goldie has just said with a pinch of salt. I add my thanks to the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform, his officials, the Justice 1 Committee and the committee clerks for getting us to this point. Despite the fact that it is relatively short, the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Bill has a degree of complexity, as was clearly reflected in the committee's deliberations. I will not attempt to repeat the minister's eloquent explanation of the purpose or nuances of the bill. Let me instead paint a picture of what I hope the bill will prevent from happening in my constituency and in constituencies throughout the country. The firefighters at Dumbarton fire station tell me that, in responding to 999 calls to put out what can be serious domestic fires in parts of my constituency, their vehicles have been stoned; they have had a variety of missiles hurled at them, which have not just shattered windows and damaged the vehicles, but caused injury to the firefighters, delaying them in attending emergencies. Ultimately, it has delayed the firefighters in doing their job, which is about saving lives. I hope that the staff nurse working at the accident and emergency department of the Vale of Leven hospital will never again have to contact me to say that she was assaulted as she attended to a patient. The patient was drunk and violent and left her with substantial physical injuries—never mind the emotional injuries—which meant that she could not return to work. I welcome the recognition that the bill now gives to services such as the Loch Lomond rescue boat. That service is provided on a voluntary basis by men and women from my constituency and Sylvia Jackson's constituency. It is an essential emergency service that is engaged in saving lives and its volunteers deserve the same level of protection as others who are specified in the bill. I thank the minister and the committee for their support in that regard. Nothing justifies any attack on any emergency worker, especially those who are directly engaged in emergencies and in saving lives. Unlike the Tories, I very much welcome the bill. The Tories have once again demonstrated to the rest of us in the Parliament and to the people of Scotland just how out of touch they are. Although I have no doubt that the penalties that are contained in the bill will have a deterrent effect, I am clear that the legislation must sit in a much wider package of measures. Therefore, I particularly welcome the Executive's intention to bring forward such measures, including the public awareness campaign, improved training for  managers and staff and more education for children and young people about the unacceptability of antisocial behaviour directed at emergency workers. We need practically to reinforce the bill's message that attacks on public service workers are completely unacceptable and will not be tolerated. I commend the minister and the Executive for introducing the bill.

I welcome the minister's comments. In briefly providing members with some background to amendments 5 and 6, I hope that I will be forgiven for being ever-so-slightly parochial. The Loch Lomond rescue boat service, which is staffed by volunteers, operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 52 weeks a year. Quite simply, its objective is to save lives. However, the bill as introduced did not explicitly cover inland water rescue services. I agree with Pauline McNeill that we do not want to end up with a lengthy list of particular groups of workers, but the Loch Lomond rescue boat volunteers should be included, given that they are emergency workers who work in emergency circumstances. We had quite a debate at stage 2, during which the minister helpfully sought to address that omission by amending the bill. Although the committee was generally supportive of his approach, we had lingering doubts as to whether we had achieved our aim. I shall not subject members to the finer arguments that were put by Stewart Stevenson on the role of the RNLI and on the differences between different bodies of water—he can be relied on to go over the arguments again. Suffice it to say that amendments 5 and 6 are an attempt to put the matter beyond doubt. The amendments would include within the scope of the bill rescue boat services that operate in clearly defined emergency circumstances. In providing protection to crew members of any rescue vessel that responds to emergency circumstances on any body of water, the amendments are consistent with the overall approach of the bill. I thank the minister for indicating the Executive's support for amendments 5 and 6, which I hope Parliament will support.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive's strategy in respect of national parks is achieving its aims. (S2F-1287)

The First Minister will be aware of the concerns that have been highlighted in The Herald about the noise and pollution that jet-skis cause on Loch Lomond. My colleague Sylvia Jackson and I have raised the matter with the national park authority and in the Parliament before. There is a genuine fear that when Lake Windermere bans jet-skis in March 2005, the problem will simply be transferred to Loch Lomond, which has even been advertised as an alternative location. The national park authority will  not even start its consultation on possible byelaws until some six months later. Will the First Minister ensure that appropriate byelaws that seek to protect the natural beauty of Loch Lomond for the enjoyment of generations to come are introduced quickly?

I welcome the minister's commitment to protect patients' interests in NHS Argyll and Clyde. However, does he agree that, despite efforts to reduce financial deficits, the projected deficit for NHS Argyll and Clyde for 2007 is £100 million? Does he agree that that perhaps points to an underlying structural problem, which could be resolved in part by the break-up of NHS Argyll and Clyde?

Is it also not indeed the case that the member could have reflected that very point in paragraph 90? The fact that he did not dissent from it is not really a defence.

It is clear that the overriding priority of the bill is to improve fire safety and to improve prevention of fires. That is welcome when we remember that Scotland has the highest number of fatal and non-fatal casualties per head of population in the United Kingdom. As has been mentioned, the existing legislation dates back to 1947, but the fire service has not stood still—it has evolved and kept pace with change. It is clear that the duties that the service carries out now go well beyond simply putting out fires. It is therefore appropriate that, more than 50 years on, that fact be given statutory underpinning and recognition. In the time that is available to me, I want to pick out a few points. I welcome the minister's comments about fire control rooms. Although the matter is not contained in the bill, the committee and Parliament today have noted concerns from brigades, local authorities and trade unions that a reduction in the number of control rooms would not only be undesirable but might have an impact on safety. The test is to decide what is appropriate and what, ultimately, will improve or contribute to improving fire safety. Further discussions with stakeholders will be essential if we are to come to the right solutions. I am therefore pleased that the minister is committed to doing more work on that. I welcome sections 7 to 10 of the bill, which set out the principal functions of the fire service, including not only firefighting but promotion of fire safety. The flexibility to add to those functions as and when required will be helpful because I do not think that any of us want to wait another 50 years to recognise what the service is doing today. We all know that resources and priorities are largely determined by legislative requirements. We heard evidence that urban search and rescue and offshore firefighting should have been included in the bill. I confess to a particular interest as I represent a constituency on the west coast of Scotland that has substantial coastal areas. The offshore firefighting situation has long been problematic. The 1947 act does not allow fire authorities to act outside their immediate coastal areas and because local authorities have not been empowered to act at sea, it has been difficult to obtain a clear definition of where each authority's  area ends. The UK sea of change project seeks to address that situation. We hope that all offshore firefighting capabilities within the Scottish fire and rescue service can be defined by April of next year. It would be helpful if that could be done in the bill and I welcome the minister's commitment to lodge an amendment at stage 2. However, I ask the minister to reflect further on urban search and rescue. The Chief Fire Officers Association and others have emphasised the need for urban search and rescue to be specified in the bill because of the increasing significance of new dimensions work, such as dealing with terrorist attacks. Provision must be made so that existing fire services can make the changes to equipment and training that will be needed to meet the new requirements in urban search and rescue. I want to talk about the Scottish Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council. At the committee, there was broad consensus that the advisory council should be replaced. Wherever people stood on the matter—whether they thought that the advisory council was a very good thing or a very bad thing—they offered the committee suggestions on alternative structures and models. That suggested to me that there exists an acceptance that the advisory council is perhaps past its sell-by date. Although I agree that structures should not be defined in the bill—we need flexibility to respond to evolving situations—it would be helpful for ministers to enshrine in principle some kind of advisory body without specifying its form. I ask ministers to reflect further on that. The Justice 2 Committee believed it to be essential that the Executive at the very least consult on the nature of the replacement before the bill completes its passage.

I listened carefully to what Stewart Maxwell just said, and to Kenny MacAskill's opening comments. The position that they have taken is not the one that Mr Maxwell adopted in committee. I am therefore interested to hear that Mr Maxwell takes that position now. If he considers point 90 in the committee's report, which contains our recommendation on the issue, he will see that the Scottish National Party offered no dissent. The FBU and the STUC expressed substantial concerns about part 3 of the bill; specifically, section 65, which deals with the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974, and section 67, which deals  with offences and penalties. Their concerns are based on the fact that the sections might be used against a firefighter who was taking legitimate industrial action. Other committee members touched on those concerns. I and—I suspect—most committee members would have real problems if the genuine concerns that have been expressed to us were not fully addressed. The minister has already provided detailed assurance, but Maureen Macmillan was absolutely right to say that the issue is about lawyers eyeballing each other over accurate interpretation of particular phrases in legislation. Dialogue must continue until we have a shared understanding. Otherwise, the alternative and less helpful route will involve amendments at stage 2. I want to make passing reference to Colin Fox. His leadership speech was a tour de force; no one here could doubt his commitment to the fire service. However, it is a shame that he failed to attend many of the committee meetings at which the detailed work was done to represent the interests of the people who work in the fire service. I look forward to his "radical" amendments and hope that he realises the need to come to committee to speak to them.

The member protests too much. Again, I say to him that I look forward to his "radical" amendments. I trust that he will appear in Parliament to speak to them. I join colleagues in paying tribute to the men and women in our fire service who often risk their lives to save ours. The bill recognises what they do each and every day on our behalf in our communities. I commend to Parliament the general principles of the Fire (Scotland) Bill.

First, I join in the congratulations to the Executive on the progress that it has made in tackling domestic abuse. This policy area is a clear example of the difference that a post-devolution Scotland can make to people's lives. Thanks to the Executive, more women feel confident about reporting their experiences to the police and seeking help from organisations such as Scottish Women's Aid. As policy makers, we like to talk about taking a comprehensive, strategic approach to domestic abuse, but we should also ask what we mean when we do so. Taking a comprehensive, strategic approach means prevention, protection, increased support for children and young people, additional legal protection for victims and—of course—provision with more choice and better-quality refuge provision. Even with the progress that has been made in the area, domestic abuse continues to go unreported. However, not reporting abuse—for whatever reason—does not make it go away. It is imperative that we emphasise that people who are experiencing domestic abuse should seek help. All the services and provision in the world cannot help if the problem remains a secret one. As Maureen Macmillan rightly said, the ultimate goal is to get better at prevention. We need to get  better at challenging the attitudes and culture among some in our society. Domestic abuse is never justified and it must never be tolerated. Although we can acknowledge the comments that Donald Gorrie and Mike Rumbles made, I hope that they acknowledge that the starting point is where the problem is most acute. Over 90 per cent of the people who are abused are women—the issue of domestic abuse is one of gender and inequality. I also agree with the comments that Elaine Smith made on family law. In the remaining time that is allowed to me, I want to highlight an emerging area of concern. Despite the welcome victim information service, some women's experience is that no information is given to them or that they are wrongly informed about their rights and about why and when things will happen in the justice system. Essentially, the problem appears to be that once the abuse has been reported to the police, the victim is left out of the loop when the case gets to the Procurator Fiscal Service and into court. I will quickly illustrate the problem. A husband who was the subject of an impending abuse case continued to harass and threaten his wife and children while he was out on bail. His wife reported the harassment to the police only to be told that, as there was no hard evidence to support her statement, nothing could be done. She was given wrong information, however, as her husband should have been brought in for questioning. The experience left the woman and her child with the message that in some way her abuser was above the law. The case gets worse. When her husband was finally brought to trial, she had no idea what was happening in the trial, as nobody explained the court procedures. She discovered that her husband had left the building, as his not guilty plea had been accepted. The woman was left feeling extremely let down by the system that was supposed to protect her. We cannot allow the victims of domestic abuse to be further victimised by a lack of information and to end up mistrusting the very system that was put in place to protect them. In another case, substantial assault charges were dropped and a lesser charge of breach of the peace was accepted without any information being given to the woman who was the victim of the case. Although I welcome the pilot domestic abuse court in Glasgow, the positive experience in that court is not one that is shared elsewhere in the country. I would be grateful if ministers would discuss the issue further with the Lord Advocate. The Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive must send out a clear message to the women and their children who are victims of domestic abuse that  domestic abuse is never acceptable and that the people who perpetrate it will be prosecuted.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to improve access to justice for adults with incapacity. (S2O-3878)

I welcome the minister's commitments in relation to the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, particularly on free legal aid being made available for welfare guardianship proceedings under the act. He will be aware that organisations such as Enable welcome that change and are eager to see it implemented. Will he give a likely timescale for implementation? Will he continue to work with all stakeholders, including Enable, in developing the detail further?

I draw the First Minister's attention to real and continuing problems with road safety on the A82. This weekend saw another tragic death—in this case, that of a young man aged 19. The A82 is a notorious accident black spot. The route is critical, not just for the local community but for tourism. I acknowledge that the Executive has taken action through a route accident reduction plan, but accidents and deaths continue to happen and it is clear that more needs to be done. Will the First Minister review the plan and take further action to reduce accidents and prevent unnecessary deaths?

I am sure that the minister will commend those local authorities that have worked hard to maximise the size of the funding pot for supporting people, but does he agree that, in any change in funding allocation, we should always, as a priority, seek to protect the services that are delivered to our most vulnerable people? Given the scale of some of the funding reductions, will he ensure that local authorities, specifically West Dunbartonshire Council and Argyll and Bute Council, receive assistance from transitional funds to mitigate any reduction in their overall funding package?

On that point, I welcome the inclusion of the Coast Guard and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution in the list of emergency workers. Does the minister agree with the committee that inland rescue boat services such as the Loch Lomond Rescue Boat are also of value?

I thank the minister for his comments on NHS Argyll and Clyde. I invite him to go one step further: will he insist that NHS Argyll and Clyde revise its clinical strategy to ensure that cross-boundary working—not just with Greater Glasgow NHS Board but with Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board—becomes a reality?

I welcome the minister's commitment to wait until the national framework is in place before he takes any decision on NHS Argyll and Clyde. However, does he acknowledge that, although the volume of protest is not of the essence, the fact that 23,000 people have signed a petition saying no and that 5,000 people from my area have written to the health board saying no is an indication that this particular health board thinks more about boundaries than about the people it serves? Will he send it back to think again?

I join colleagues in congratulating Bill Butler on securing the debate. While it gives us an opportunity to be wonderfully parochial, it is important that we recognise the work of citizens advice bureaux and Citizens Advice Scotland. Let me start by paying tribute to Dumbarton CAB, which serves a catchment area that includes communities that experience disadvantage, with higher than average levels of unemployment. That shows, because in the last year the CAB dealt with  almost 10,000 cases, ranging from benefit inquiries to consumer issues. An increasingly significant area of work is debt. Let us consider the scale of that for a minute, because that is where I want to focus my comments. Dumbarton CAB dealt with 952 debt cases totalling more than £1 million. That is significant. In that context, let me pay tribute to Citizens Advice Scotland for its social policy work, because it is based on the experience of clients—it is not just theoretical—it is practical, it is real, and it helps to inform our actions in Government. CAS also makes a valuable contribution to the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on tackling debt. A key part of the social policy work of CAS is its 2004 report "On the cards", which resulted from a detailed survey of debt clients throughout the country. I say to Mary Scanlon that she is wrong: debt has a disproportionate effect on poor communities. They are predominantly communities with low incomes, and they do not have the disposable assets of others to deal with their debts. That is backed up by the survey. Half of the people who were surveyed had a monthly household income of less than £800. A quarter of them had incomes of less than £400. Two in five debt clients mention low income as the most significant reason for their debt. A fifth of debt clients are lone parents, and of those two thirds have credit card debts.

Thank you for that reminder, Presiding Officer. I will come swiftly to what I think we need to do. There is an issue for us as a Parliament—and for our colleagues at Westminster—to encourage responsible lending and to examine access to alternative, affordable sources of credit, such as credit unions, but also to challenge the mainstream institutions. We need to broaden access to the debt arrangement scheme to those with limited disposable incomes. I welcome the Executive-sponsored research group that is starting to examine that. Access to free, independent and confidential advice for all is essential. CABx have a pivotal role in our communities and, like other members, I commend the staff and volunteers for all their work.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I thank the minister for that very positive comment. The clearest evidence that health boards are paying only lip service to regional planning, even though the minister asked them to be attentive to it, is provided by what is going on in NHS Argyll and Clyde. It takes two and a half hours to get to the hospital in Paisley and five hospitals in Glasgow are bypassed en route. Will the minister therefore reject proposals that do not demonstrate regional planning and are clearly not in the interests of patients?

A Scotland of ambition and enterprise and one that is characterised by fairness, tolerance and respect—those were the values and the vision that the First Minister set out and which should underpin all that we do in the Parliament. Like many other members, I welcome the legislative programme, with its focus on protecting the vulnerable and giving people new rights and the continuing focus on modernising our justice system. However, legislation is only a small part of what we do—our policy priorities and where we spend our money are equally important. Irrespective of the mechanism, we were all elected with similar aspirations for devolution: the desire to make a difference, to transform the experience of people in our communities and, for Labour members, to close the opportunity gap and deliver social justice. All those ambitions remain today. Although a lot has been made of the fact that we are a small country, we are big on ambition and potential. The fact that we are small can be a positive asset: it is easier to harness delivery mechanisms, we have an opportunity to get things done quicker and it is easier to take risks and test out what works best. We need to be ambitious about what can be achieved, particularly in the cause of social justice. I have long believed that a strong economy and a strong society are different sides of exactly the same coin. To tackle poverty and implement the progressive values for which Labour members stand, we need to create the conditions for sustained economic growth. A vibrant economy offers us a clear and effective means of achieving social justice, but we need to be more explicit in our aim of targeting communities and vulnerable individuals. I ask the Executive to continue its efforts—in all portfolios, not just communities—and do more to close the opportunity gap. That work should be the hallmark of this Government. I see that the lights in the chamber have gone off—the lights have often gone off on me—but I intend to carry on in full flow, as long as you can hear me, Presiding Officer. Not seeing me is probably a benefit. I will mention education and enterprise and reflect the reality of what is going on in my local community. In primary education, attainment levels have risen in West Dunbartonshire and Argyll and Bute, not least due to the Executive's efforts. That situation will be enhanced by the  additional hundreds of millions of pounds that are being directed towards the creation of new schools. However, the picture is not the same in secondary education. Too many of our young people leave school with no qualifications and few skills and, in some cases, unable to read or write. Their ability to make progress is severely hampered and their opportunities are not realised. Our ability to thrive as an economy will hinge on the skills and knowledge of our people—all of our people. Let me echo what Cathie Craigie said yesterday. If the Executive does only one thing and merely tackles only the inherent problem of literacy and numeracy, we can build on that. We also need to improve economic performance, particularly in disadvantaged areas. In the constituency of Dumbarton, for example, the numbers of unemployed have reduced dramatically—there has been a 60 or 70 per cent reduction in youth unemployment—but the pace of change is slower. It takes more effort and we remain above the Scottish average. The number of business start-ups is another indication of buoyancy in an economy but, in Dumbarton, there are significant falls in the numbers of businesses being created. We rely on too few employers to sustain our local economic base. We need to do more to make communities sustainable in the constituency of Dumbarton. We need to create not only competitive people but competitive places. I would like the Executive to do two things. It should remove economic barriers that hamper the flow of people and businesses by abolishing tolls on the Erskine bridge. I know that that is supported by at least two of the Presiding Officers and by my colleague Des McNulty. Secondly, I would like the Executive to provide a new focus to the place by considering establishing a lower Clyde initiative that would start at the Erskine bridge and stretch up to the Gare loch. That would allow us to focus on what needs to be done to ensure that that area has a competitive future. On health, I believe that the minister understands the concerns that have been expressed in this chamber and which will probably be reflected this afternoon. I also believe that the minister will be helpful and will reflect on those concerns. Let me explain to the chamber the scale of nonsense that local people face in my community as a consequence of NHS Argyll and Clyde's proposals for service change. They face the centralisation not only of specialist services but of virtually all services. They face travelling for two-and-a-half hours by public transport to get across the Clyde to Paisley, bypassing five hospitals en route. They will pass the Golden Jubilee hospital, Gartnavel, the Western infirmary, the Royal infirmary and the Southern general hospital to get to the Royal Alexandra hospital. That is a complete nonsense in urban Scotland.  People face a local service that is not patient centred and they face a health board that is accountable neither to them nor to me. In short, I want Scotland to have one NHS, with people and their needs and interests at the centre. Health boards need to be clear that that is the message that we are sending them.

Like others, I start by congratulating Frances Curran on securing what I consider to be an extremely important debate. There is no doubt in my mind that there is considerable anger and dismay at the proposals emanating from Argyll and Clyde NHS Board in its clinical strategy review. I share that anger. Many people have found the attitude of Argyll and Clyde NHS Board to be breathtakingly arrogant. Let me explain why. In so doing, I will acknowledge that, yes, if one was drawing boundaries for health boards from scratch, one would not choose to create the present Argyll and Clyde boundary. There are relatively few economic, social or transport links between the communities that make up the Argyll and Clyde NHS Board area. I accept that the geography is extremely challenging. However, those points must not be used as excuses for a lack of imagination and a lack of responsiveness to people's needs. Argyll and Clyde NHS Board's proposals are, I believe, an insult to the intelligence of the people in my local community and the communities of many other members. We will leave no stone unturned in opposing the proposals. We will do so in partnership with many local organisations, such as the Vale of Leven hospital services forum, community councils, Save Our Services, local authorities and the local press. I will deal first with the proposed closures of Dumbarton joint hospital and Helensburgh Victoria infirmary, especially in relation to provision for the care of the elderly. No discussions took place with either local authority in advance and no discussions took place with any of the relatives, who found out about the proposals through the local press officer. Some 18 months ago, elderly people were all reassessed and a number of them were relocated in the community. It would therefore appear that some elderly people with medical needs remain in those facilities. Surely they are not candidates for community care. In any case, what a way to treat elderly people! What about the range of out-patient services that are currently delivered from Dumbarton joint hospital and Helensburgh Victoria infirmary? The strategy is silent on what will happen to them. That runs entirely contrary to the minister's response at question time today, which was about providing local services. Is he aware that substantial capital funds have been invested in the services of both those hospitals? That perhaps suggests that Argyll and Clyde NHS Board is incapable of forward planning. Let me now deal with the proposals for acute medicine. We have been given options. Did members know that? Well, they should not kid  themselves, because the options are not options at all. Under the first option, we are offered an intermediate hospital at the Vale of Leven, with major services provided at the RAH in Paisley. Stewart Maxwell is right to ask what on earth an intermediate hospital is. Health professionals struggle to come up with a consistent definition. Most say that such a hospital is GP led. Is the minister aware that a third of GPs in the area are set to retire in the next five years? The net effect of that will be to remove more services from the local area—not specialist services, but basic services. Again, that runs contrary to the minister's expressed view. I will deal briefly with the Glasgow option. I am talking not about Gartnavel, which is 20 minutes down the road, but about the Southern general hospital or Glasgow royal infirmary—as will be discovered, the option of Gartnavel is tucked away as a footnote. That is reason enough to withdraw the consultation document, of which it was famously said by a health board official in response to criticism: "It's not flawed; it's just not absolutely clear." It is absolutely clear that 88 per cent of health professionals and local people who were surveyed by me and John McFall want a north-of-the-river solution. I will be clear about that solution. The starting point is maximising the services that are delivered from the Vale of Leven hospital and giving us access to Gartnavel hospital or the Golden Jubilee national hospital for services that cannot be delivered at the Vale of Leven. That is not simply a superficial option; it is a real option. The issue is quite simple: it is about providing a service that is 20 minutes down the road or one that is two and a half hours away in Paisley. There is no contest. Paisley is a tolled bridge too far.

As a member of the Justice 2 Committee, I, too, have had an interesting experience with the Scottish Prison Service. In the light of that, does the First Minister agree that the framework document covering the relationship between the Scottish Prison Service and the Executive needs to be the subject of a fundamental review, which must go beyond contractual arrangements and consider wider governance issues?

Would that not better characterise 18 years of Conservative rule?

They were men, of course.

I welcome the minister's announcement about the toll bridges review group. Along with Trish Godman and Des  McNulty, I hope that he will encourage the group to consider closely the Erskine bridge—another of Scotland's most discredited toll regimes. The minister will be aware that the tolls were introduced for the sole purpose of paying for the construction of the bridge some three decades ago. He will also be aware that we have now paid for the bridge not once, not twice, but five times over. Unlike other bridges, it is one that the Executive owns. Can we look forward to early action being taken on removing the tolls from the Erskine bridge?

Yes or no?

Like other members, I congratulate Des McNulty on securing the debate. In all the years that I have known Des, he has long championed the cause of those who  have asbestos-related illnesses—as have many MPs who have been mentioned this evening. All are to be commended for their tenacity in pursuing the issue. As Margaret Ewing has said, it is estimated that around 1,800 people have died from asbestos-related illnesses in Scotland. That is an incredible number. Clydebank is recognised as the cancer capital of Europe because of the devastating impact that asbestos has had on the town—a tragic legacy from the days of shipbuilding. As has been mentioned, West Dunbartonshire has the highest death rate from asbestos poisoning in the UK. We cannot take any pride at all in any of those statistics. As Des McNulty said, from the mid-1950s to the mid-1980s, asbestos was a common component in building materials. That means that, for many buildings, asbestos can and will be a problem for us in the future with the slightest disturbance. As many members will be aware, the danger of asbestos lies in the fact that it is made of microscopic particles that become airborne when they are disturbed. It is worth reminding ourselves of the ease with which such particles can enter people's lungs. That was highlighted for me by the astonishing stories of women who became infected through washing the clothes of shipyard workers. A particularly tragic consequence of asbestos inhalation is mesothelioma, which is a painful disease that is largely resilient to surgery. An astonishing fact that I had not known was that it can take as long as 50 years for the cancer to develop. Doctors have warned that, because of the length of the incubation period, the number of cases has still to peak. On what can be done to help those who are affected by this ticking health care time bomb, I think that the motion's call for an integrated strategy of care gets to the root of the matter. Those who have developed asbestos-related illnesses need counselling and the families of such victims need support. However, that should be provided alongside specialist palliative care. Des McNulty is absolutely right that early diagnosis of the disease is vital. Early screening and more information is needed to help that process. At the moment, support groups such as the Clydebank Asbestos Group play a vital role in raising awareness of asbestos-related illnesses, in supporting victims and their families and in helping sufferers to obtain compensation. The impact of such groups has already been outlined by other members, so I do not propose to add to what has been said on that. I echo Trish Godman's sentiments on the positive role that trade unions have played, which I  am sure will continue. Like her, I support the need for COSLA, health care professionals and the whole health service to work together alongside the Scottish Executive in providing practical help and assistance. We need to ensure the wide availability of information about where asbestos can be found, what its effects are and how those who are suffering from asbestos-related illnesses can be helped. An integrated strategy is our best chance of helping the lives of both present and future sufferers. I have no hesitation in supporting the motion. Like others, I urge the Executive to do all in its power to effect change.

rose—

I am conscious of the time, so I will try to be brief. It is widely acknowledged in Parliament that, for the past 33 years, the children's hearings system has served us well. It has provided Scotland's children with a unique support system that places the child at its centre. Like other members, I reject any implication from other quarters that criticism of children's panels is implied simply by the fact that the Executive is holding a review. However, it is equally to be acknowledged that there is a need for the system to be made fit for purpose, recognising the fact that there have been lots of changes over the past 33 years. Not least, children's rights have developed and expanded; we have the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child; and a Scottish commissioner for children and young people has recently been established. It is not just about legislative or institutional change, however; families have changed, too. We have heard about examples of lone parents and grandparents being principal carers, and we have heard about parents who are habitual drug abusers. Therefore, it makes sense to review the children's hearings system now to ensure that it is as efficient and effective as possible in facing those challenges. As the minister said, the Scottish children's hearings system is internationally renowned for its holistic approach to children's needs, which I believe is essential in a system that deals with many different types of children in many different types of circumstances. We know that the process of referral to a children's hearing often uncovers issues in the child's background—such as living with domestic abuse or living with parents who have a drug or alcohol addiction—that manifest themselves in behavioural problems such as missing school or, at the other extreme, committing offences. Consideration of all the factors before making a recommendation makes for much more effective interventions. It is clear that to deal with only one aspect of the underlying problems that affect a child is an approach that is doomed to failure. That is why I echo the minister's view that we need all agencies to co-operate in achieving the desired outcome. That must involve not only social work departments but other agencies both within local authorities and beyond. Like others, I pay tribute to panel members. The hearings system would be unable to deliver such a high standard of support without the dedication of its members, who are ordinary people who have volunteered to help children in their communities. Having attended some children's panel meetings in West Dunbartonshire, I have been privileged to see that commitment in action. In my brief time  there, it became apparent how important it is to have local volunteers to deal with local cases. Such extra knowledge of a child's surroundings and of the services that are available locally enhances the panel's understanding of a case and of the disposals that are available. Panel members, who are committed volunteers, are a key strength of the system. We should also listen to what panel members say. Knowledge of what works and what does not work is clearly important in informing the Executive's consultation. Panel members will highlight areas for improvement. The panel members to whom I spoke expressed their frustration at the limited amount of disposals that were available to them. Some said that, even in cases in which they thought secure accommodation or supervision by a social worker under a supervision order was needed, they were not always able to recommend those options because they knew that such services were not in place. It is important to remember that the hearings system does not exist in isolation. Important though it is, it is but one step in a process that tries to change a child's life for the better. Therefore, in addition to considering how to improve the system itself, we need to consider ways of improving the services that surround it. Johann Lamont's comments offered an interesting critique of the services that lead to and from children's panels. Perhaps those issues need to be addressed urgently. If gaps in services are evident and hearings' recommendations cannot be met, that will clearly diminish the work that the panels do. Having a well-resourced system with the full range of disposals will make such an outcome less likely. Fast-track hearings were piloted in Dundee, Ayrshire, East Lothian and the Borders because it was acknowledged that the hearings system has been less effective in dealing with persistent offenders. The aim of the fast-track hearings was to deal with the hard core of offenders—the 8 per cent of under-16 offenders who commit five or more offences—who are responsible for one third of youth crime in Scotland. The pilots used a variety of different methods that were appropriate to that group of people. Indeed, many panel members have also expressed support for using the principles of restorative justice. Perhaps further consideration should be given to that when people reflect on the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. The Executive has estimated that the time between offence and referral to a programme could be one third quicker than it is under the current system. It is extremely valuable to have a system that is quick and efficient because early intervention is undoubtedly the best way to  prevent more serious offences from being committed in the future. The lessons that have been learned from the fast-track pilots should be applied more widely because their results were positive. I will mention two final issues, the first of which is evaluation. The establishment of another way in which to evaluate the work of the children's hearings system could also help to reduce the chances of children encountering further problems. At present, once the panel believes that a supervision requirement is no longer needed, communication between the panel and the child stops. Evaluating the impact of the supervision requirement after that point might benefit the child in the future and prevent them from being referred back to the panel. Lastly, should panels be able to intervene with the parents if, in the interests of the child, such intervention is desirable? The way that that question is posed seems almost to suggest that parents are somehow not involved in the situation. They are, however. Parents attend the hearings with their children. They are not only party to what is going on; they are essential partners in the process. That said, I can envisage circumstances in which panels would want to encourage or compel parents to do the right thing. On balance, provided that the focus remains on the child, I would have considerable sympathy with that suggestion. I believe that the principles on which the children's hearings system was founded hold true today. Its approach is child centred and holistic and its strength lies in the fact that panel members are volunteers and members of their communities. They should continue to be a major tool in dealing with care and support of children as well as in protecting our communities, but we should never close our minds to the potential for improvement or to new and different ways of making provision. We must build on the work of the hearings system and ensure that whatever we put in place serves our future generations as well.

I entirely understand that point and concur with it. However, I suggest that there is a role for the Scottish Executive in encouraging the efforts of local organisations and encouraging others to respond positively to calls for funding. On behalf of Sylvia Jackson and on my own account, I would like to issue the minister with an invitation to take a trip out to Luss, where the rescue boat is based, to see at first hand the valuable work that is done.

I start by welcoming Archie McKenzie, who is the chair of the Loch Lomond rescue boat service, to the public gallery this evening. [ Applause. ] He is instrumental in helping to provide a truly unique and valuable service. The service is run entirely by volunteers and is funded predominantly by local fundraising efforts and donations from local organisations. The boat provides a 24-hour-a-day, 365-day-a-year service in what is the largest area of fresh water in Britain. In 2003, the rescue boat was called out on 58 occasions to help to rescue everything from broken-down boats to people who were stranded in and around the loch, to search for—unfortunately—missing people and to transport fire and mountain rescue teams to emergencies. The rescue boat helped young and old alike, from all over the west of Scotland and from all over the world. The demands on the rescue boat have increased substantially since 2002 and are likely to continue to increase due to the welcome creation of Scotland's first national park. Many members will remember that one of the first acts of the Scottish Parliament paved the way for the establishment of the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park, which subsequently opened in July 2002. The area surrounding the loch includes the beautiful and hugely popular tourist areas of Balloch, Luss, Tarbet and Balmaha, which is in the constituency of my colleague Sylvia Jackson. Those are some of the busiest areas in the national park and they are where most water  activities are concentrated, with many people taking advantage of the boat cruises and the water-skiing, sailing and canoeing facilities that are on offer. It is a little-known fact that there are approximately 38 islands on the loch, some of which are inhabited, such as the island of Inchmurrin—they, too, may have to rely on the rescue boat. The majority of people who visit Loch Lomond will—thankfully—never need to come into contact with the rescue boat. However, for the small number who get into difficulty, for whatever reason, the boat is literally a life saver. Loch Lomond is stunningly beautiful and inviting, but it is 24 miles long and 5 miles wide and it is easy for the inexperienced sailor or water skier to be lulled into a false sense of security. Many of the call-outs are to rescue people who do not know the area or who have failed to prepare fully for their trip. As the number of visitors who come to appreciate some of the most stunning scenery in the world increases to the hundreds of thousands, we need to ensure that their safety has been considered. The rescue boat service was founded in 1977 following—fittingly—an anonymous donation from a sailor. The current boat first came into service in 1993 and 11 years of continuous demand have naturally taken their toll. As with all vehicles of a similar age, the boat will need to be replaced in the near future if it is to continue to deliver what we know to be an excellent service. However, the cost of renewing the boat will be significant—£80,000, which represents a considerable amount of fundraising. Aside from the capital expenditure, annual revenue costs for the service are in the region of £10,000 to £11,000. Grants from Strathclyde police, Central police, Argyll and Bute Council and the park authority, although extremely welcome, are in some cases small and diminishing. Voluntary fundraising makes up the rest. I remind members that the service is run entirely by volunteers—they are the ones who staff the rescue boat and who raise the funds for its continuation. When that is taken into account, we begin to appreciate how truly impressive the service is. The volunteers come from all walks of life. Some are police officers, some work in local government and some run their own businesses. There is even one female crew member. They come from Dumbarton, Luss, Helensburgh and communities right the way across the loch. Like the main rescue services, the crew of the rescue boat is alerted by the 999 system through Strathclyde police. Each crew member carries a pager and is summoned from work or home to ensure that the service is available 24 hours a day, every day. The fire service relies on the boat to transfer fire pumps and personnel to fires on the  inner islands. The police and ambulance services also rely on the boat to help in searching for missing persons and in evacuating people to safety. As well as co-ordinating their work with the work of the other rescue services, crew members place a huge emphasis on training. The boat instructors are Royal Yachting Association qualified; they are also British Red Cross first-aid instructors. They play an extremely strong role in supporting the ambulance services by stabilising people who are ill or injured before transporting them to the ambulance. The crew trains alongside the search-and-rescue helicopter, Strathclyde fire brigade and the local mountain rescue teams; it maintains consistently high standards in training and equipment and in the operation of the service. Crew members also provide advice and training to users of the loch and play an active part in promoting community events. In 2003, they provided safety cover at a number of events on the loch, including the popular dragon boat challenge—I recommend that to members—and the new year's day races. In November 2003, the Scottish Executive announced a fourfold increase in public money for Scotland's mountain rescue teams. That announcement was welcomed by members from all parties. The Executive acknowledged that Scotland's mountains are among our greatest natural assets and play a vital role in tourism. Jack McConnell, our First Minister, rightly pledged our support to those who commit their time and risk their lives to help others. The extra money that was provided ensured that there would be better training and better equipment for the teams. I hope that today's debate will highlight the strong similarities between the services that are provided by the Loch Lomond rescue boat and the mountain rescue teams. Both services require funding, training and expertise if they are to keep operating. In both services, the volunteers put their lives at risk. The volunteers who crew the rescue boat, make up its management committee and contribute to the fundraising effort are ordinary people like us, but they do extraordinary things. They deserve to be recognised for their essential, life-saving, hard work. I ask the minister, first, to ensure that the Loch Lomond rescue boat service has stable, long-term funding and, secondly, to help with significant capital costs, in particular to replace the service's existing boat. Anything that the Executive can do to help that first-class service to continue will be greatly appreciated by future generations of visitors to Loch Lomond.

The minister will be aware of the significant and consistent representations by my colleague John McFall MP in opposing the introduction of strip stamps. Indeed, John McFall recently facilitated a welcome meeting between the Scotch Whisky Association and the chancellor. Given that the strip stamps are awkward and difficult to work with, what progress has been made with the Treasury in considering alternatives, such as fiscal marks?

To ask the Scottish Executive what mechanisms are in place under the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Act 2002 for people affected by Scotland's growing level of debt. (S2O-2352)

The minister will be aware that organisations such as citizens advice bureaux are concerned about the scope of the debt arrangement scheme. They are concerned that it will not be sufficient to cover many people who have serious debts and little disposable income, and that not providing for the freezing of interest in the draft debt arrangement scheme regulations may further reduce the number of people who are able to benefit from the scheme. Does the minister agree to monitor the implementation of the debt arrangement scheme and, if necessary, take steps to improve its coverage?

I am sure that members will be wise enough to resist Annabel Goldie's consistent attempt, however charming, to rewrite history. Reoffending is not a problem that simply appeared five years ago; it was a problem during the dark decades of the Conservative Government and I did not see Annabel Goldie attempting to do anything about it then. It is worth reminding ourselves of the context in which we approach this debate. Three statistics jump out: Scotland has the fourth highest rate of imprisonment in the European Union; in 2002, 82 per cent of custodial sentences were for six months or less; and 70 per cent of all individuals who were convicted of a crime or offence in 2002 were actually reoffenders. The aim of putting someone in prison is twofold. Prison is about punishing the offender; I hope that Patrick Harvie is not suggesting that people who commit serious crimes should not pay for them in some way and should be merely let off. However, prison is also about rehabilitation, which enables us to stop people committing crimes in the future. Why are we failing to deter so many individuals from reoffending? It may seem obvious to say that prison isolates offenders from their families and their communities. Isolation may indeed be necessary for those who are convicted of serious crimes, but the majority of offenders who are sent  to prison on less serious charges suffer from it—it is probably the hardest hurdle for them to overcome on their release. An ex-prisoner will often struggle to find a job or even to secure accommodation. They might have lost touch with family and friends and might be suffering from drug or alcohol addiction. Being released from prison into a community in which there is no apparent support network makes it more, rather than less, likely that the individual will reoffend. Rehabilitation is a difficult task, especially in the short term. When an offender is serving a sentence of six months or less, addressing the root causes of their behaviour and providing rehabilitation is certainly challenging and I am sure that the minister will be aware of the concerns that exist about the efficacy of the programmes that are available in prisons for those offenders who are on short-term sentences. We are beginning to acknowledge that, given the complexity of need, the most effective sentences—whether they are custodial or non-custodial—are those that take into account the much broader problem areas of the offender's life, such as health, addiction, literacy and employment. Prison is an expensive resource; it costs about £15,000 to fund a six-month prison placement. Do not get me wrong—if that provided the answers, we might not be having this debate, but it is clear that prison does not tackle reoffending. I think that it is time that we considered more effective and long-term alternatives to short-term prison sentences. What works? There are examples of—and better awareness and use of—community reparation as an effective means of dealing with offenders. In addition, the findings from SACRO's alcohol education probation programme have highlighted the positive effects of alternatives to custody. The programme was designed to give participants a much better understanding of the effects of alcohol and a greater ability to control their use of it. Of the 68 people who completed the programme, 71 per cent had no further convictions after one year. Another example of a reasonable service to do with tackling reoffending is the constructs project in West Dunbartonshire, which acts as an alternative to probation or prison. Offenders focus on addressing the consequences and impact of their offending behaviour and on some of the underlying causes, such as alcohol and drug abuse. Whatever the intervention, it is essential that it is provided as early as possible—before the offending becomes more serious—that it addresses individual needs and that it is available consistently throughout Scotland. I say to Patrick Harvie that we must acknowledge that there will be people who still require to go to prison. We must get much better  at providing throughcare and aftercare for those people. It is particularly damning of the prison service that offenders can be released into the community without having a home to go to. That means that they end up sleeping rough, the consequence of which is that one of the first things that they do is to reoffend. As part of the consideration of other ways to reduce reoffending, I recognise that there will be a debate about structural change, but I think that we have the emphasis slightly wrong. Before we start to have a debate about institutional clutter, it is much more important for us to agree what works, what we need to achieve and what our objectives are. In my view, we need to broaden the scope of our search for answers on reducing reoffending. The statistics make it clear that not all the answers lie exclusively with the criminal justice system or prisons. We must realise that if we are to achieve long-term success as opposed to a short-term fix, we need to focus our attention and resources on reducing levels of reoffending.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action within its responsibilities it is taking to support those who are excluded from using the traditional financial sector due to their credit history. (S2O-2031)

I acknowledge that the Executive recognises the importance of credit unions. However, should we not push the traditional  financial sector to do more? In that regard, will the minister consider promoting the uptake of basic bank accounts and look to spread the model of the Wester Hailes community banking agreement throughout communities in Scotland?

I welcome the opportunity to debate mental health, which, thanks to much of the action that the Scottish  Executive has taken, is not quite the Cinderella of the health service that it once was. I acknowledge the key role that the national programme for improving mental health and well-being will have as a driver of change. Change is desperately needed. Let us set the situation in context. Adam Ingram was right to cite information from the World Health Organisation that suggests that mental health problems are likely to be the second greatest cause of illness—after cardiac problems—in the next decade or two. That should concern us all. I agree with Marlyn Glen, Carolyn Leckie and others that there is a causal link between poverty and disadvantage and between substance abuse and mental health problems, but we must be careful not to over-generalise. Mental illness affects as many as one in five people, as we have heard, so it clearly impacts on people in all different walks of life. There is no uniformity to mental illness; it affects people in very different ways, so we must ensure that we deliver an appropriate range of services, as locally as possible. In the context of mental health care, small is indeed beautiful—that is different from some of the other principles that drive health service reform. I stress that point because small units are clinically advantageous, not just for the service but, more particularly, for patients. Successful treatment of mental illness, whether the illness is long or short term, depends to a large degree on the delivery of local care. I think that everyone agrees that local care that is delivered by community mental health teams and provided with appropriate support is the best option in most circumstances. However, we should not assume that the pattern of any particular mental illness remains static. As with most other illnesses, there will be crises, when appropriate in-patient services will be needed. We need a critical level of in-patient beds throughout Scotland that can be accessed locally, rather than through a centralised system. Like others, I believe that Sandra Grant's report helpfully charts the journey that is still to be undertaken. The report identifies the need for: out-of-hours and crisis services; more support for people in the community who cope with mental health problems; easier access to local, rather than centralised, services; and much better cohesion between the agencies that are involved. Perhaps most important, the report identifies the need to involve users and carers in shaping the services that are provided. Let me be parochial for a minute. I was privileged to visit the Christie ward in the Vale of Leven hospital, which provides 24 in-patient beds. Staff there take a holistic, personal approach to the needs of people with mental illness and the ward operates as a centre of excellence—as many  people would also describe it. The relocation of such provision, even to a site that was 15 miles down the road, would be detrimental to the needs of patients, because someone's recovery is partly aided when it takes place in their local community, where they are surrounded by familiar faces and vistas, rather than in a strange environment. Staff in smaller units can have a much more personal relationship with the people for whom they care and that continuity is important. There is a worrying trend in relation to access to in-patient services. Beds have closed throughout Scotland. It is absolutely right that that should happen in institutions such as Woodilee hospital, which are not appropriate for the care of people with mental illness. Notwithstanding that, we must ensure that sufficient short-term beds are available. Many people regard in-patient care facilities as places of safety for people who might be particularly vulnerable during an illness, just as they are places for people who are deemed to be at risk or unsafe. Assessment beds should therefore always be available for voluntary patients. There has been a 300 per cent increase in sectioning during the past 13 years in Scotland, so the risk that voluntary patients might have to be sectioned just to obtain a bed or escorted safe transport is fast becoming a reality. We need sufficient local in-patient care that can respond to a crisis and that is flexible enough to respond to local need. I commend to the minister the model that Argyll and Clyde NHS Board provides, in which the Christie ward works alongside a developing community mental health team. That is a model that can deliver results. Finally, I know that mental health remains a priority for the Executive. However, I also know that ministers will focus attention on the drive to improve services, because that is the key to making a difference in the experience of people with mental illness.

I join other members in congratulating Elaine Smith on securing the debate. I also declare an interest as a member of Unison. It is worth while reflecting on how we got where we are. The dispute started as a regrading claim—not this year, but prior to local government reorganisation in 1995. I think that we can all acknowledge the patience of the nursery nurses. COSLA agreed to a regrading and to a job-evaluation scheme. Regrettably, none of that has happened. I agree with Johann Lamont. Although individual local authorities are the employers, much wider issues are at stake. I therefore have considerable sympathy with the view that there should be a national settlement. To be frank, it is nonsensical that a nursery nurse in Aberdeenshire is paid differently from a nursery nurse in Dunbartonshire; the same national curriculum and the same national qualifications apply, and one has to assume that the children are not too different in the two areas.  Pre-school education has been a significant priority for the Executive. We have invested considerably; that is not in any doubt. Equally, however, the quality and the professionalism of the staff are not in any doubt. If we value pre-5 education, which I believe we all do, that should be reflected in the salaries that are paid to the staff, who are central to the provision of that education. I do not think that a starting salary of £10,000, with an upper limit of £13,800, signals the true worth of nursery nurses. It has not escaped the notice of members that the profession is dominated by women. Equally, it has not escaped their notice that it is predominantly women who experience low pay. Yes, the problem is structural, but we should not ignore it simply because it is difficult to deal with. If we truly want a society that is characterised by equality and justice, we will have to address such critical problems. For all those reasons, I support the calls for a national review and a national settlement to cover not only those in the public sector, but those in the private sector and the voluntary sector. I welcome the First Minister's commitment to have a review that will consider the roles and responsibilities of staff, early-years child care, qualifications, and career progression—and yes, a review that will address the question of better pay and conditions. However, our aims should be one framework for salaries, one structure for career progression, and a clear recognition of the responsibilities of nursery nurses so that, throughout Scotland, they are valued properly and equally.

I, too, welcome the minister's statement, the consultation on third-party rights of appeal and the national planning framework. I want to deal with the principles that underpin effective engagement with communities. Existing planning guidelines are robust in talking about involving communities right from the start, rather than consulting after the event, but for too many communities the experience is one of disengagement. Does the minister agree that it is essential to include communities from day one when devising local plans, not least because that will give them a much more strategic role, which will ultimately reduce the likelihood of objections and appeals? Does she feel that local planning forums, involving community representatives, should have a central role?

Members have touched on the importance of the Scotch whisky industry to the economy and on the effectiveness of strip stamps, so I do not intend to rehearse those points. I have to say, however, that I find Stewart Maxwell's accusations entirely disingenuous. To suggest that Scottish Labour MPs could vote down a United Kingdom budget, and have a majority to do so, shows that he cannot count and that he is much more interested in empty posturing than in doing something about this matter. I echo the call for the SNP to raise its game and to withdraw its amendment, so that the Parliament can present a united view. I visited Allied Distillers with John Healey, the Economic Secretary to the Treasury, and my colleague John McFall. We saw at first hand the consequence of using strip stamps: the wastage, the slower production lines and the security measures required. We thought that a convincing case had been made to the minister. Leaving that to one side, however, we should acknowledge that fraud is a problem, although we can, of course, debate the scale of the problem. The National Audit Office suggests that the cost of fraud can fall in the broad range of £10 million to £260 million according to one set of figures or of £330 million to more than £1,000 million according to another set  of figures—a huge margin of error. That lack of clarity is worrying, because it means that we are not clear about whether the action that we are taking in introducing strip stamps is proportionate to the size of the problem. If the matter can be reconsidered, I would encourage the Treasury to do so. Assuming that stamps are to be introduced, however, we need to ensure that we minimise the cost and impact on the industry. Other members have outlined the cost of compliance. As I understand it, the Government has made four key commitments. First, it will seek to implement the scheme without requiring up-front payments, so that the industry can continue to benefit from duty suspension and deferment. That is likely to account for about 40 per cent of the cost of compliance, so it is absolutely essential that that measure is in place. Secondly, members have covered the £3 million available to assist with capital investment, but we need to recognise that that impact is not just on small firms; it is on larger firms as well. Thirdly, the Treasury has said that it will bear the full cost of production and distribution of the stamps, which is estimated at £5 million to £10 million. That is helpful. Lastly, the Treasury has indicated that it will examine the likely security costs and the scope for reducing those. All that is welcome, but I will go slightly further and ask the Government for two more commitments, both of which I have raised with the deputy minister. First, I want flexibility in the legislation. I will explain what I mean. When the legislation is drafted, it would be useful to deal in principles rather than in specifics. For example, instead of saying that a 20mm-wide strip stamp should be applied, why not talk about fiscal marks, which are slightly different? I am encouraged that the Treasury, rather than referring to strip stamps, talks about tax stamps, which are potentially different and potentially much better. Flexibility and the involvement of the industry in determining the most appropriate measures are essential.

Absolutely. I will make that my third request, but my second point is that I would like the Government to review the measures after two years, because, by that time, it will be able to revise estimates of the scale of fraud much more accurately and there will be a reasonable amount of operating experience. Good government is all about reviewing what we do to ensure that it is effective and provides value. Not only should that be done as a matter of course, but a specific commitment to review the measures would be  welcome. Ultimately, I want the Scotch whisky industry to thrive. Let us help it to do so.

Does the member accept that John McFall has worked particularly hard on the issue? Does he further accept that it was John McFall who got the Economic Secretary to the Treasury up to Dumbarton to have a discussion with Allied Distillers and the Scotch Whisky Association on the very points that MSPs from all parties have consistently made?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will raise awareness of any problems associated with collecting shellfish from polluted beaches. (S2O-1715)

I thank the minister for that comprehensive response. In my constituency there is an unclassified area where there appears to be volume collection of shellfish, most notably on the coastline at Helensburgh, where the beaches are polluted. I would be pleased if the minister would investigate the matter and advise specifically what powers are available to the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, the local authority or the Executive to end the volume collection of shellfish and to protect our food supply from contaminated shellfish.

It is not often that I am invited to speak at length on any subject, especially by you, Presiding Officer. In fact, I completed my comments before First Minister's question time, albeit in a rushed fashion. I am happy to echo those comments now, and to thank the ministers for the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. It will make a significant contribution to modernising the justice system in Scotland. That is all that I require to say.

In the short time that is left I will say that, like many in the chamber, I support the bill, which will make a  substantial difference to the experience of children, young people and vulnerable adults in our courts. I am reassured and encouraged by the deputy minister's comments about people with non-visible disabilities and about dealing with delays in the system. I am convinced that the potential for realising the bill depends on the need to encourage the culture change to which the Minister for Justice referred, whether through training or guidance or by involving witnesses. What is important is monitoring the effectiveness of implementation. The bill was introduced for the children and young people throughout Scotland who are likely to be vulnerable witnesses. It is a breath of fresh air in the justice system and ministers are to be commended for bringing it to the Parliament.

I say to Annabel Goldie and the minister that a possible sanction could be spending an afternoon with the Justice 2 Committee, convened by Annabel Goldie.

I could never agree with that, although others might. The minister detailed the much wider range of work that is going on to modernise the justice system and I accept that that will ultimately address the issue of delays. Given his assurances and the quality standards that are being introduced as a mechanism to reduce delays in the system, I will not press amendment 28.  Amendment 28, by agreement, withdrawn.

I am significantly reassured by the package of measures that the minister, alongside the Crown Office, will be putting in place. That demonstrates that, although the Executive does not accept my amendments, its purpose remains identical to mine in relation to the support that it seeks to provide. In light of the minister's comments, I am sufficiently reassured, so I do not intend to press my amendments.  Amendment 26, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendment 27 not moved. Amendments 1 and 2 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

I am grateful for this opportunity  to speak to amendments 28 and 52, which are both in my name and which are supported by Maureen Macmillan. The purpose of the two amendments is to remove delays in the court process where child witnesses are involved. Although I appreciate the often Herculean efforts of the courts in bringing cases to trial as expeditiously as possible, the Justice 2 Committee nevertheless received substantial evidence highlighting problems with delays. Delays in cases coming to trial clearly have an impact on vulnerable witnesses. We heard about the experiences of a number of people. It was apparent from the questionnaires that had been submitted and from the interviews that we conducted with young vulnerable witnesses that it was common for cases to be postponed or delayed at the last minute. I will give a couple of examples. As a reporter to the committee, I interviewed a number of young vulnerable witnesses, with support from Children 1 st —the committee will wish to acknowledge the assistance of Children 1 st in arranging the interviews. One case involved a 12-year-old girl with learning disabilities, who had been sexually abused by her family. The trial had already been delayed three times. I do not think that we can even begin to imagine the impact that such abuse would have on any child. So frustrating was the experience that the girl even opted to dispense with special measures, because to have been assessed by a psychologist as required would have delayed the trial even further. That is hardly conducive to a child giving their best evidence and it is something that the bill seeks to change. Another case involved a 16-year-old girl. The case had been postponed three times, once on the day before the trial was due to start. Undoubtedly, that is mentally and emotionally very draining. The case began when she was 15 and so entitled to special measures and she opted to have screens in court. Because of all the delays, she turned 16 and lost her entitlement to those special measures, which she felt that she needed. Again, that was hardly conducive to a child giving their best evidence. I understand that the problem with delays may be dealt with in part by the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. I will have to rely on ministers and members of the Justice 1 Committee to clarify the matter, but it has been suggested that, rather than significantly reducing delays, the proposals will simply mean that witnesses are better informed that there will be delays. My colleague Karen Whitefield lodged a set of amendments at stage 2 to establish a simplified child witness notice procedure, which will significantly help with any prospect of delays.  I hope that I have, albeit briefly, illustrated the emotional and psychological impact of delays in the court process on vulnerable child witnesses. If we want to ensure that vulnerable witnesses give their best evidence, we must not only provide special measures, but reduce delays where possible. I move amendment 28.

In speaking to amendments 26, 27, 50 and 51, I want first to recognise the huge change that will be brought about by the passing of the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. In future, substantial numbers of children and vulnerable witnesses will for the first time have access to special measures in courts. Those special measures will not only make the process less intimidating, but undoubtedly help children and vulnerable witnesses to give their best evidence. In seeking support for my amendments, I do not dismiss any of that; the desire is simply to extend the principle to a much wider group of people, to ensure that no one slips through the net. In the Justice 2 Committee, there has been  much discussion about adding further categories to the definition of a vulnerable witness. It would be fair to say that I support the Executive's desire to avoid listing a further set of categories because, by taking the route of simply providing lists, we may end up unwittingly excluding people. At the same time, the committee was much taken by the views of Enable and the Law Society of Scotland, which suggested that automatic entitlement to special measures should be available to people with a learning disability or a mental disorder. In balancing those arguments, the committee was minded to accept the case that there should be automatic entitlement to be considered for a special measure rather than automatic entitlement to a special measure. That would have the effect of ensuring that no one fell through the net, but it would also acknowledge the Executive's concerns. The underlying thinking is that, because non-visible disabilities can sometimes be the most difficult to identify and assess, witnesses with a mental health disorder or a learning disability should have a more robust entitlement than is currently provided for in the bill. The committee was also sympathetic to the concerns expressed by Rape Crisis Scotland and other organisations, which recognised that victims of alleged domestic abuse and alleged sexual offences could benefit in similar ways. I will leave that point to my colleague Maureen Macmillan to develop. I am grateful to the Executive for the continuing dialogue over the past few months, which has allowed consideration of practical ways of giving effect to the relevant amendments. A range of other measures—which Hugh Henry helpfully set out in a letter to me and Maureen Macmillan on 29 January 2004—will ensure that vulnerable witnesses get the support that they need and deserve. I have discussed with the minister the need to review the legislation to ensure the efficacy of the definition and to establish whether it is being implemented consistently across the country. There is also a need for those who are responsible for implementation to receive training, particularly on learning disability—we know that it can be difficult to identify whether someone has a learning disability, especially if it is mild to moderate. It is also the case that people who appear to have little or no capacity can often communicate their views clearly, so it is evident that the potential exists for capacity to be overestimated and underestimated. Training for the police, the Procurator Fiscal Service, the courts and others will assist and I would be grateful if the minister accepted that the training should be informed by people with learning disabilities and should be user led, as those  people are best placed to explain how and why they need to be supported. I hope that the Executive will involve voluntary sector organisations such as Enable, because it is recognised that, for the legislation to be truly effective, we need a multi-agency approach. The Executive should also consider the provision of accessible information at all stages of the process. That is particularly important in civil cases. The vulnerable witness officer could have a role in providing early support for vulnerable witnesses in civil cases in which it is unlikely that the police or procurators fiscal will have a role. I welcome the Executive's commitment to consider creating a field in a standard police report that would identify the much wider range of vulnerable witnesses. Taken together, those measures will perhaps have the same effect as the amendments under discussion would. I welcome amendment 2, in the name of Hugh Henry. It responds to concerns that were expressed by the Disability Rights Commission at stage 1, which related to definitions and the lack of an explicit link between the bill and the definition in the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. I am pleased that agreement with the Disability Rights Commission appears to have been reached, because amendment 2—like my amendments—will help to ensure that everyone with a special need is included under the terms of the bill. I move amendment 26.

Like many others, I welcome the First Minister's statement. As someone who has a Portuguese father and a Scottish mother and was born in Hong Kong, I recognise the benefits that in-migration can bring to any country. Unlike the SNP, I think that what we are discussing is an example of devolution working at its best—a clear demonstration of strength in working together with our colleagues in the UK Government. The First Minister is to be congratulated on his efforts. Given the First Minister's comments in response to the point that Jamie Stone made, will he consider specific measures, such as the international fellowship scheme and the global recruitment programme that the Department of Health at Westminster runs, to encourage consultants and other medical professionals from around the world to come to Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will remove tolls from the Erskine bridge. (S2O-1283)

The minister will be aware that the tolls were established under the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968 to pay for construction of the bridge. Given that we have now paid for the bridge's construction not just once, but five times over, will the minister recognise the significant economic, environmental and social benefit that would be gained by removing the tolls, and will he encourage his colleague, the Minister for Transport, to remove the tolls from the Erskine bridge, once and for all?

Like other members, I recognise the importance of the Scotch whisky industry, not just to Scotland but to the UK as a whole. It is one of the largest, if not the largest, export industries in Scotland, employing something like 11,000 people, with a further 30,000 in related sectors. According to a 1999 Fraser of Allander institute report, it is twice as important as computer-related manufacturing, a third bigger than oil and gas and 12 per cent bigger than banking and finance.  We understand the industry's economic significance. I will illustrate that by being parochial. Allied Distillers is one of the largest employers in Dumbarton. It provides economic opportunities for local people in an area that faces significant unemployment. It has a work force of almost 800 people. Sales are growing, new brands are being acquired to join household names such as Teacher's, Ballantine's and Laphroaig, and export markets are increasing, with new high-value markets opening up in countries such as Korea. I want that to continue, so I, too, register my concern at the proposal to introduce strip stamps. When we last debated the matter in Parliament, I was as clear then as I am now that, although I whole-heartedly support moves to tackle duty fraud, I do not believe that strip stamps are the answer. Many people will legitimately raise the issue of cost, but I will not rehearse those arguments. For me, the more serious and fundamental concern, irrespective of cost, is that strip stamps just do not work. Brian Monteith has already outlined the international experience. The USA, Ecuador and Greece abolished tax stamp systems. Belgium, Germany and Norway pulled back from introducing them on the ground that they are not effective. Forgeries appear quickly, even when the tax stamps are state-of-the-art hologram seals. All of us—including HM Treasury, HM Customs and Excise and the Scotch Whisky Association—agree that we need to tackle duty fraud. We can debate how much duty fraud costs the taxpayer. Is it in the region of £600 million, as suggested by the Government, or is it a quarter of that figure, as suggested by the industry? Nonetheless, any fraud or loss of revenue to the Government means fewer services, so it needs to be tackled. The whisky industry has helpfully indicated its willingness to work in partnership with the Government. I welcome that, but I also recognise that over the past few years it has done exactly that with HM Customs and Excise. We need to consider where the solutions lie. I do not have much time left to talk about those solutions, but I am sure that other members will talk about them. With my colleague John McFall MP, who is a long-time supporter of the industry and chair of the all-party Scotch whisky group at Westminster, I will meet representatives of Allied Distillers tomorrow to explore further suggestions. I do not think that the Chancellor of the Exchequer wants to introduce strip stamps, for two reasons. First, in five successive budgets there has been no increase in the duty on spirits.

Secondly, in an interview that the chancellor gave to BBC Radio Scotland in December 2003, he said: "I don't want to have to introduce stamping if I can avoid it, but if we have to do so, we will do it, so we can eliminate fraud that is unfair to other tax payers and unfair to people who have to pay the duty. If we can find a better solution that eliminates much of this fraud, then will we take it." Let us ensure that the solution is found, because strip stamping does not work.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is true!

I am unclear what the member is suggesting. Is she saying that an overlap between the judiciary and the state is acceptable? It is clear that that is not the Executive's position.

Will the member give way?

I rarely associate myself with Annabel Goldie's remarks, but I do so entirely on this occasion. Is Phil Gallie suggesting that the small number of women Conservative members somehow relates to the fact that other women in his party lack merit?

Like other members, I hesitate, as a lay person, to contribute to the debate. I am conscious that many members have direct experience of the Scots legal system. Nevertheless, I will comment on a number of the basic, underlying principles behind the proposal for a supreme court, although I run the risk of intruding on what has at times seemed like a private argument among lawyers. The minister spoke about modernising our constitution, about the need to have a judiciary that is clearly independent of the state and about the need for transparency. I have no difficulty with any of those principles and I have no problem with the principles underpinning the creation of the supreme court. I recognise that, in a modern, progressive society, we need to have confidence in our judiciary and we need to ensure that it is independent of the Government. I therefore accept that the overlap between the legislature and the judiciary that exists in the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords is no longer appropriate. I acknowledge that, as Nicola Sturgeon said, the proposals present an opportunity to consider what arrangements are best suited to our needs. That does not mean that I agree with repatriating all civil cases to Scotland, because I am mindful that the right of appeal in civil cases to the House of Lords has served us well in the past 300 years. Nevertheless, we need to reflect on the advantages and disadvantages of various approaches and this debate is particularly helpful in giving us an opportunity to do so.

I thank Phil Gallie for that intervention. I could probably fill several minutes with reflections on that matter.

I am not going to be tempted, Presiding Officer, but thank you for the offer. As I am not a user of the House of Lords and am not likely to be a user of the proposed supreme court, there are others who could better reflect on the opening up of our justice system to ensure better access. However, I am sure that, if Phil Gallie considers what the Labour-led Executive has done to modernise the legal system and to make it more accessible to the people whom it should be serving, he will agree that it has done a tremendously good job.

Phil Gallie is always welcome to stand up and agree with me. It is important to debate the issues that Phil Gallie has raised, but I want to focus on the numbers in the court. Annabel Goldie helpfully outlined the current arrangements. There are 12 law lords, who generally sit in panels of five to hear cases, and there is the Appellate Committee, which operates a constitutional convention that ensures that at least two members of the committee are Scottish judges. I note that the Executive is comfortable for that arrangement to continue. In its response, the Executive said: "it is essential that, at any one time, the membership of the new Court should comprise not fewer than two people suitably qualified in Scots law and experienced in its administration." I ask the Executive whether it is proposed that we are simply to rely on that historical convention or whether it is intended to express that arrangement in statute.

That confirms the Executive's position and will help to ensure that there will be at least two suitably qualified people in the new court. The overall number of judges is less important than the balance that is needed when individual cases under Scots law are dealt with. The flexibility of being able to add additional members is helpful and means that whether there are three, four, five or however many Scottish law lords as permanent members of the court becomes less of an issue. My concern is not dissimilar to Margaret Smith's, however. There is much to be said for the principle of ensuring that, when individual cases under Scots law are before the court, a majority of judges who are sitting on the panel should be Scottish law lords. I acknowledge the points made by the minister and Nicola Sturgeon about the practicality of such an arrangement and the additional burden that that might place on judges. However, I feel that, given the limited number of cases—I believe that eight was the figure cited—and the ability to use additional members, the burden should not be unduly onerous, particularly in the context of five-member panels in which the majority would be three. I am persuaded by the comments of Pauline McNeill and the minister about the experience that judges from England, Wales and Northern Ireland can bring to our reflections. We should not close  our minds to learning from other jurisdictions. Equally, we should be proud to reflect to others our knowledge and experience of the best tenets of Scots law. For me, the key question is balance. We need to ensure that there is no unintended erosion of our legal system. I recognise that, although that might not always have been an issue and certainly was not an issue in the past, that does not automatically mean that everything will remain unchanged in the context of a new supreme court. I ask members to reflect on that important point again. Bill Butler was absolutely right to highlight the benefit of consistent decision making across all cases relating to breaches of the ECHR. That consistency will come from the supreme court. It is clearly advantageous not to have differing decisions in what are important constitutional matters. We have heard that the decisions of the supreme court in relation to the rest of the UK will not be binding on Scots law but will be seen as being highly persuasive. Perhaps the difference is too subtle for me to understand, but I am not sure that something that is highly persuasive is that far from being a must-do. I am sure that the Solicitor General will shed some light on that matter for the benefit of us poor souls who know no better. Like Pauline McNeill, I acknowledge the work that ministers have done in ensuring that the well-respected system of Scots law is not diminished but enhanced by the proposals and I will support the Executive's motion.

Will the member give way?

I did not intend to speak, but I thought that, at the very least, I should congratulate Trish Godman on securing the debate and timing it so well with the display in the foyer of Parliament headquarters, which I know that many of the members who are present visited. To take up Annabel Goldie's point, to extend projects such as the one that Unity Enterprise operates at Glasgow airport to other airports and to bus stations—indeed, to wherever—is a legitimate and appropriate role for the Executive. The Executive should facilitate projects in the voluntary or charitable sector, where the organisation concerned wants that, and should facilitate and encourage projects' expansion. Equally, we must realise that, in many respects, the Executive's agenda—which is about delivering social justice and equality of opportunity and creating employment opportunities—fits with the majority of voluntary organisations, which have no difficulty in working with us while preserving their independence and acting in the interests of the people whom they serve. I am fortunate enough to remember Unity Enterprise from a former life. I will not confess to going back to 1989, but before I arrived at the Parliament, I had worked with Unity Enterprise when I was employed in local government. I found that the work that it did at that time in East Dunbartonshire was significant and most impressive, as is the work that it currently does in West Dunbartonshire. As a social enterprise, part of Unity Enterprise's uniqueness is that it is close to the community that it serves and, because of that, delivers incredibly effectively for that community. That is something of which the Executive is mindful when it works with social enterprises. The key point that I will make about Unity Enterprise's work is to do with people with learning disabilities. If members visited the display in the PHQ foyer, they met some of them today. There was an enthusiastic young man called Gerry, who happens to come from Alexandria, which is an  area that is close to my heart. For me, Gerry epitomised what the project is all about: it is about employment and giving people life chances and opportunities that they would otherwise be denied. Many members will know of "The same as you? A review of services for people with learning disabilities". That was a seminal piece of policy work undertaken early on by the Executive. It was about changing the shape of services for people with a learning disability. One of the report's key recommendations is that it is not only about providing people with a service but about enabling people with a learning disability to go out and participate as other people would in real jobs, real opportunities and real training. We must ensure that the signal that comes from the chamber is not only that the work that Unity Enterprise is doing is significant but that we must enhance and build on the number of work opportunities that are available for people with a learning difficulty, because they can do exactly the same job that we can do. The project builds confidence and self-esteem and provides a useful service not only to the people involved but to the communities in which they live. It recognises that each of us has skills and talents that should be nurtured and cherished. I again congratulate Trish Godman on securing the debate and congratulate Unity Enterprise and all the other voluntary organisations like it that day in, day out provide a range of opportunities for people in our communities, particularly those who may be disadvantaged in the labour market.

Does the minister agree that, rather than transport patients across the Clyde, it would be better and more desirable to tell NHS Argyll and Clyde to work with NHS Greater Glasgow to ensure that a full range of services are provided for people who live north of the river, as that would fit their natural travel-to-work patterns, their social patterns and existing transport links?

There was, rightly, a resounding endorsement of dispute resolution services from Margaret Mitchell. Does the minister consider that a dispute resolution service would be useful between Margaret Mitchell and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to ensure that the Parliament's Christmas cards do indeed say "Merry Christmas"?

It was entirely wrong of Pauline McNeill to heighten expectations, because that leads to disappointment—but then we had Stewart Stevenson's speech. I have to say to him that he should get a life instead of counting the attendance of members in the chamber and checking when they make a speech. Someone whispered to me that Mr Stevenson's speech this afternoon might have been his seventh speech in the chamber—I am sure that he will check that—and that he plagiarised everyone else's speeches, which some people might not consider to be terribly good value. I am sure that he will be able to tell us the cost per word of having him here. My advice to Stewart Stevenson is to quit while he is ahead.

Quantity matters far more than quality in Mr Stevenson's case. We all acknowledge that an effective justice system has to be a central pillar of a strong and safe society. Access to quality legal advice is at the heart of ensuring that the system works to the benefit of all people. As others have already indicated, people's experience of the Scottish justice system falls short of legitimate expectations. It is critical that those who need access to the law are not excluded from using it, whether as a consequence of prohibitive cost, lack of knowledge or lack of help. It is interesting to note that some of the barriers that were identified by the Executive working group that considered how a community legal service could be developed included a lack of information about legal rights and responsibilities, patchy availability of information, and a lack of capacity and resources in the not-for-profit sector. The Executive has taken considerable action to extend access, such as the pilot projects that are run by the Scottish Legal Aid Board, which members have mentioned, the extension of the in-court Public Defence Solicitors Office, and now a review of legal aid. I particularly welcome the review of legal aid. I hope that the review is not simply designed to improve efficiency, but equally is about addressing differential access to justice, which far too many in our hard-pressed communities experience. I will use this opportunity to describe the evolution of a local service that should inform the  legal aid review. I consider myself fortunate to have worked with the West Dunbartonshire Community Law Service. It was started in 1993 with urban programme funding, due to a perceived lack of available legal representation in the field of social welfare law. The bulk of its case load centres on tenancy issues, small claims, employment matters, criminal injuries compensation and social security benefits. The purpose of the service—as it was in 1993 and still is now—is to provide representation in courts, tribunals and other legal forums, and to provide training in legal issues for community groups. It is all about ensuring that access to justice is available for all in our community.

There has indeed. I will describe that process. The project is now funded by West Dunbartonshire Partnership and West Dunbartonshire Council and is able to operate across the local authority area, not simply in social inclusion partnership areas. While that is a welcome expansion from a community point of view, the service continues to be provided by only one solicitor. In the circumstances, the service sensibly has sought practical ways of working with others in the area, thereby making the benefit of the service felt much more widely. As a result, it has developed a West Dunbartonshire-wide advice network, which includes active participation by local citizens advice bureaux, trading standards officers, the local advocacy service and many more. Indeed, I understand that solicitors also participate. Everybody is working together at a local level. In effect, the community law service acts as a second tier, with clients being referred to it by other members of the network. Ironically, the operation of the network has increased the number of clients for the community law service. Indeed, over and above that, solicitors in private practice are referring people to the service, because of a lack of legal aid for certain matters, such as small claims, criminal injuries compensation and many employment tribunals. The community law service is an asset. It would be easy to moan at the minister about more funding, but I would rather suggest a practical solution, for which the minister might at the very least wish to consider West Dunbartonshire as a possible pilot area. I suggest that community legal services in their widest sense should be able to access block funding through the legal aid fund. That source of funding would be in addition to securing commitments from the local authority and  others, and would provide much-needed stability to the service. The minister will, of course, be aware of the Scottish Association of Law Centres. The experience and expertise of that body is a resource that should be nurtured. Individual community legal services such as the one in West Dunbartonshire enhance community capacity, both through the service that they provide to people in need of advice and assistance and through the support that they give to community organisations. Let me be slightly mischievous as I wind up, Presiding Officer. I hope that the debate has not been too dull. Annabel Goldie said that it was likely to be dull and it was not clear to me from her reference to Mogadon whether she had taken some or whether we should avail ourselves of some during her speech. I shall study the Official Report but, regretfully, I suspect that it was the latter.

Given that the problems that George Lyon and other members have outlined have a resonance beyond the Argyll and Clyde NHS Board area, will the minister send a strong signal to NHS boards that they must look beyond artificial boundaries that bear no relation to communities and that they must work together so that patients have access to high-quality consultant-led services without having to travel enormous distances?

Thank you for allowing me to speak, Presiding Officer. I am not a Glasgow member, but a wider interest is involved and the level of concern about the issue among members is evident. I say at the outset that I do not believe that the closure of the Queen Mother's hospital is the best option for the care of babies and their families north of the River Clyde. As others have said, the issue is not only about provision for babies and mothers from Glasgow or even the west of Scotland; it is about a resource for the whole of Scotland. The proximity of the Queen Mother's hospital to Yorkhill is a unique situation and I will not rehearse again the arguments about those hospitals being at the cutting edge of research and practice or about the consultation process, although I associate myself with the remarks of my colleague Paul Martin on the issue.  There are genuine concerns and a recognition that the debate is about the services that are in place not only for mothers, but for babies. We should have the debate, but it must be open and honest. Everybody understands the desire to avoid maternal deaths, but that must be balanced by an understanding of the desire to avoid the death of babies. I will talk about the wider geographical context of the issue. We must consider what is going on in the neighbouring Argyll and Clyde NHS Board area. Following its maternity services review, the board concluded that there should be one consultant-led service—at the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley—with midwife-led units elsewhere, including one at the Vale of Leven hospital. I welcome the presence of a midwife-led unit at the Vale of Leven because it means that finally, after an absence of a year, babies are again being born locally. I have no problem with the principle that the best possible service should be available for women and their children. For that to happen, we need to make decisions about where those services should be located. We must strike a balance and enable easy access. I say to the minister—as I have said many times before—that, if the proposals are carried through, mothers in Argyll and Clyde would have to attend a consultant-led unit in Paisley. If a mother was discharged but there was, regrettably, something wrong with her child so that it had to be kept in the special care unit, that mother would have to undertake a five-hour return journey by public transport to bond with her child. That is not acceptable in rural Scotland, never mind in urban Scotland. Moreover, what happens when those women have to cross the river but the Erskine bridge and the Clyde tunnel are closed at the same time, as has happened before? Our natural transport corridors north of the river run into the north of Glasgow; they do not cross the river. The minister cannot ignore the proximity of the Southern general hospital to the RAH: they are a mere 7 miles apart. The proposals do not effectively balance the need for quality with the need for access. I very much welcome the minister's intervention in asking Greater Glasgow NHS Board and Argyll and Clyde NHS Board to work together to arrive at a much more reasonable solution and report to him in April. However, I ask him to reflect further on how we organise maternity services across health board boundaries. In doing so, he must recognise the fact that the Queen Mother's hospital and Yorkhill serve a population far greater than that of north Glasgow. His decision matters to women not just in Glasgow, but in Dumbarton, the Vale of Leven, Helensburgh and beyond.

I add my voice to others in the chamber, aside from the prickly, slightly discordant note coming from Annabel Goldie and the hint of an echo from Margaret Mitchell, who failed to work up as much steam as Annabel did. The bill is indeed welcome. The aim of improving the treatment of witnesses in the justice system, particularly the treatment of children, is laudable. When we put aside party politics, that view is shared by members across the chamber. Nicola Sturgeon rightly said that we recognise that our legal system is adversarial in nature. It is absolutely right that every area of evidence and every contention should be open to challenge in the interests of fairness and justice. However, in having a robust system of justice, we should never lose sight of the fact that for many people, giving evidence is a frightening and intimidating experience. If the witness is in some way vulnerable—a child or an adult with a disability—we can perhaps begin to imagine the trauma for them.

In that spirit, I take it that the member welcomes the minister's proposals for the reform of the High Court. I take her lack of response as assent. [ Interruption. ] I will make progress now because I do not take interventions from members in a sedentary position. If the witness is in some way vulnerable, one appreciates the trauma that can be caused. Ultimately, that trauma has an effect on the quality of the evidence given, which is undesirable. That is what the bill attempts to address by enabling the use of special measures for vulnerable people when giving evidence, whether it is the use of a TV link, the use of a supporter or the use of screens. I was particularly struck by the positive evidence that was taken by the Justice 2 Committee from a wide range of interests—Children 1 st , Enable, the Law Society of Scotland or the Faculty of Advocates, to name but a few. Without exception, they welcomed the principles of the bill. However, as the minister would no doubt expect the committee to point out, there are a number of areas of detail on which there are differing views, some if not all of which have been rehearsed already in the chamber this afternoon. I therefore run the risk of boring members once again, but I would like to explore a few areas of detail. First, on the thorny issue of definitions, who will automatically be considered as a vulnerable witness? I welcome Nicola Sturgeon's conversion to extending categories of vulnerable witnesses with automatic entitlement. It is clear that the power of the argument has convinced her and I hope that it will convince the minister. There is unanimous agreement that children under the age of 16 should automatically be treated as vulnerable witnesses and should be automatically entitled to special measures. However, other vulnerable witnesses, such as those with mental health problems or those who are likely to experience significant fear and distress in giving evidence will have only a discretionary entitlement. I accept the presumption against listing each and every category of vulnerable witness. One can potentially exclude by listing, but there is a genuine concern that, unless there is automatic entitlement, people will be missed and the application of entitlement will be inconsistent between courts and between judges. Members should consider, for example, those with a learning disability or those with a mental health disorder whose disability is not visible. As Mike Pringle said, vulnerability is often much more difficult to identify and assess in such cases. If  there is automatic entitlement, we must ensure that no one in such categories falls through the net. Enable and the Law Society made those points well. Equally, the Disability Rights Commission called for the definition in the bill of a vulnerable witness to reflect the much more inclusive definition of disability that is set out in the Disability Discrimination Act 1995—that again deals with the issue of non-visible disabilities. I gather that the Executive is considering that matter further. I echo what many people have said about the need for the early identification of vulnerable witnesses. We have heard that the committee called for a duty to be placed on agencies and the police in particular in respect of considering early identification, but I wonder whether the minister sees the network of vulnerable witness officers—about which she made an announcement earlier in the week—assisting with that early identification process. Like others, I welcome what the minister said about the use of supporters. The committee received compelling evidence that supporters are likely to be a key special measure and that there should be no impediment to the ability to act as a supporter, providing that the person has given evidence. The minister was right to mention an argument about consistency. Like others, I am pleased that she has spoken about changing that section of the bill. The final issue that I want to touch on is delays in the system, which other members have also mentioned. The minister mentioned constant adjournments. I acknowledge that the proposed High Court reforms will undoubtedly help in that regard and hope that other parties are gracious enough to acknowledge that, too.

No, not at this stage. On behalf of the committee, I spent time with vulnerable young witnesses and am grateful to Children 1 st for its assistance, as I am sure that other members of the committee are. Apart from a lack of information about the progress of cases or trials in which vulnerable young witnesses took part, the key problem that all of them raised was delays. In one case, a trial was delayed three times and only 24 hours' notice was given. A 12-year-old child was involved. Members can only begin to imagine the trauma that such delays would cause to that young person. Whatever we do to protect vulnerable witnesses and whatever special measures are in place, we must ensure that we eliminate delays in the system, particularly for children. Doing so will go a considerable way towards improving matters.  The bill is welcome. There are a couple of minor caveats—which I am sure we will negotiate our way through at stage 2—but it gets the balance right and I am sure that it will make a positive difference to the experience of vulnerable witnesses in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the key performance indicators are for the Scottish Prison Service. (S2O-726)

I think I thank the minister for that response. I have already read the annual report. The minister will be aware that the current performance indicators are based on quantitative rather than qualitative measures. Does the minister agree that, given the high levels of reoffending that exist, the SPS might be better to focus its performance indicators on attempting to reduce that reoffending?

I understand that the minister will meet representatives of NHS Argyll and Clyde tomorrow. In that context, will he discuss with them regional maternity planning and impress on them, first, the absolute need to co-operate with Greater Glasgow NHS Board in finding a solution for all mums who live north of the river and, secondly, the importance of access, as it is not acceptable for people in Dumbarton, the Vale of Leven or Helensburgh to be required to spend five hours on a return journey to Paisley for basic health treatment?

On the point of remoteness, one of the flaws in some of the proposals before us is that the decommissioning will take place on a separate site to storage and there is a huge risk attached to transporting waste through what is, to all intents and purposes, urban Scotland. Does the member agree that minimising any potential risk is the name of the game?

To return briefly to bridges, I note that the proposed transport agency will have responsibility for overseeing the four tolled bridges in Scotland. Given that the minister is undertaking a review of those bridges, does the member agree that, if the tolls are removed from the Skye bridge, there will be no supportable or logical reason for them not to be removed from the Erskine bridge, the Forth road bridge and the Tay bridge?

I wish to question the minister on planning powers. I understand that the Executive and the UK Government have reached agreement on the removal of Crown immunity from the planning system. Will the minister confirm the timetable for that change and say whether the proposal for the decommissioning of nuclear submarines will be considered as a normal planning application?

The minister will be aware of the accumulated £35 million deficit in NHS Argyll and Clyde. Although that deficit should be set in the context of an annual budget of £555 million, it is essential that we minimise any impact on clinical services. Will he therefore urgently review the period over which the health board must address its deficit?

In the short time that is available to me, I too would like to focus on sentencing. We need to put matters in perspective. Tens of thousands of people are sentenced by the courts each year and only a handful of cases make it to the pages of the press on the basis that the sentence is considered to be inappropriate. Where cases make it to the press, considerable dismay results, but we should keep a sense of perspective about the scale of the problem. However, we cannot afford to be complacent. We recognise the real sense of injustice that the public feel in such situations, but research from SACRO—which has been mentioned—indicates that the public want a more effective system rather than a harsher system. That should guide all our deliberations. I welcome the fact that the Executive has set up a sentencing commission, which was a Labour manifesto commitment. The commission will consider improving the consistency of sentencing, the effectiveness of sentencing in reducing reoffending and arrangements for early release from prison. That is a helpful approach to ensure that we balance the protection of the public and appropriate punishment with the need to maintain trust and confidence in our justice system, and in sentencing in particular. Annabel Goldie spoke about the need for political leadership. We should consider Tory political leadership in relation to early release. As we have heard, the Tories passed the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993, which made provision that a prisoner serving less than four years would be released automatically  after half their sentence had been served. As the minister said, with an election looming in 1997, there was a hello to political expediency. Malcolm Rifkind showed a burst of literary taste by borrowing from Dostoevsky, but showed little substantial thinking in introducing the Crime and Punishment (Scotland) Act 1997. Parole was abolished and any real prospect of early release for good behaviour was reduced. Annabel Goldie claims that the Tories have seen the light. She said that we should forget the past and that we are all right now. However, the Tories cannot wipe away their history. The people of Scotland will not let them do that. If the Tories were serious about their plans, the cost of implementing them would have been built into their spending plans. How much was set aside? Nothing. I will finish with a short but important history lesson. Under the Tories, crime doubled, the number of criminals caught fell by a third, recorded crime increased by 166 per cent and police numbers were reduced. Members should look beyond the Tories' crocodile tears. Their legacy is one of high crime levels and massive under-investment. That puts the debate, which was initiated by the Tories, in context, because the Tories are all talk and no action.

I am sorry, but I am in my final 30 seconds. Yes, we need to reform the criminal justice system. However, unlike the Tories, Labour has the objectives of more police officers on operational duty and on the beat, an effective prosecution service, courts that deliver a fair trial, appropriate sentences for those convicted and, ultimately, a reduction in reoffending. Unlike the Tories, we are on the side of the hard-pressed communities who daily experience the consequences of crime.

Members will recognise that I have more than a passing interest in charity law. In that context, I warmly welcome the minister's statement. It is clear that the Executive has made substantial strides in its policy thinking; an independent regulator will be set up by statute, with a wide range of powers and real teeth to enable public confidence in charitable giving to be restored. It will come as no surprise to the minister that I want to press her on the timetable. I note the welcome promise to bring forward the draft bill in the spring of next year and I have three questions. When does the minister envisage the bill being introduced to the chamber? It is important to legislate as quickly as possible to avoid a repeat of  the problems that were experienced with Breast Cancer Research (Scotland). Secondly, consistency with the UK Government is important, but does the minister acknowledge that we can nevertheless proceed should there be insufficient time at Wesminster? Finally, given the minister's inclusive style of working, will she include representatives from the McFadden commission and the voluntary sector directly in the drafting of the bill?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive is satisfied with the progress of Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service reform. (S2F-196)

I thank the First Minister for his response. I think that members are aware of the considerable efforts that have gone into modernising the court system. In his speech this week to an Apex conference in Edinburgh, the First Minister rightly acknowledged the importance of having an independent legal system and judiciary as a cornerstone of our democracy.  Equally, he acknowledged the perception of a public lack of confidence in the system, whether that is caused by lack of enforcement, delays in court sentencing or little difference in levels of reoffending. Does the First Minister believe that there is a need for a better balance? If so, should the approach be radical reform or measured improvement?

Will the minister give way?

A number of members have spoken about training for licensing boards. That  issue has been raised with me by a local community council. People believe that training is key to the delivery of consistent decision making in the system. Will the deputy minister consider making training mandatory and the content of the training common?

Quite rightly, in the past few months, there has been widespread comment and concern about the use of Dungavel as a removal centre for asylum seekers. I do not want to rehearse the detail of the debate, because we have heard it already, but essentially there are two strands of opinion—those who call for the complete closure of Dungavel and those who argue, rightly in my view, that we need to end the system of detention of children at Dungavel. I will take each in turn. It is generally acknowledged that in any asylum or immigration policy removal centres have a place for that small minority of asylum seekers who have a history of absconding or for those whose claim for asylum has been rejected and who are awaiting removal. It is recognised, though, that that is an option of last resort. Nobody has brought this up today, but it is worth remembering that, before Dungavel, asylum seekers were held in Barlinnie, which is hardly appropriate accommodation.  I do not believe that it is in the best interests of children to be detained for any length of time. That view crosses the entire chamber.

No, thank you. Neither Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons, who criticised the detention of children for more than seven days, nor Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, which noted that Dungavel did not offer satisfactory educational provision for children who are detained for any length of time, believes that it is in the best interests of children. I welcome the recognition of that in Robert Brown's amendment, and the efforts that have been made by Scottish ministers, who have worked continually to effect change.

No, not on that point. In particular, I congratulate Margaret Curran on pursuing the issue. She is right that we need a partnership approach to tackle the changes that are required in the interests of children. With the Executive working alongside the Home Office and South Lanarkshire Council, we will see the implementation of the recommendations in both reports. Scotland has a reputation as a fair, caring and tolerant nation, with a long tradition of welcoming asylum seekers. The Executive is upholding that tradition with, as Margaret Curran outlined, considerable investment in integration projects, language classes, further education opportunities, and legal advice and information, and very welcome progress with the Scottish refugee integration forum. So what is this debate about? To paraphrase a popular song, "Why here? Why now?" Is it about children? Is it about Dungavel? Is it even about asylum policy? Forgive me for joining Annabel Goldie in being slightly cynical. Although Shona Robison makes a persuasive case, regrettably this debate is much more to do with the SNP's internal divisions. Commentators in the press, and commentators on the SNP's own benches, suggest that it is more about John Swinney appealing to the third of his party who are unlikely to vote for him anyway. What is it about? Is it about striving to get support by outdoing them with anti-English rhetoric that at times borders on being racist? The SNP charge is that somehow members of the Executive parties are racist. If so, why did the UK Government accept 47 per cent of asylum applications that were made in the European Union? Why are local authorities, in particular Glasgow City Council, providing accommodation for 3,500 asylum seekers? The last time we debated asylum seekers in the  chamber was on 31 October 2001. John Swinney was so concerned by the issues raised by asylum that he failed to show up and he failed to vote. That is a damning indictment. It is a bit late to come to us now.

Will Mr Swinney give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Absolutely—I am giving the member ample opportunity to respond. The member will acknowledge that I gave my absolute support to the 325 DARA employees and to Roseanna Cunningham's motion. Is the SNP going to have a consistent approach? Will the member give the same commitment that he has given to DARA to the 11,000 people who rely on Faslane for employment?

I recognise that members will be wondering what I am doing in the chamber, given that the subject of the debate is not a constituency issue. Indeed, I could argue that it is not a policy area over which we have responsibility. I have no problem with the terms of Roseanna Cunningham's motion. It is sensible to seek to protect and defend defence jobs and, equally, to recognise the specialist skills of the work force. Roseanna Cunningham is right that defence is a critically important industry for Scotland. It generates thousands of jobs and millions of pounds are invested in our economy as a consequence. It matters to us. Whether it is the MOD in Glasgow, DARA at Almondbank or indeed Her Majesty's naval base Clyde at Faslane, it is important to Scotland. Faslane is important to the Scottish economy and I make no apology for mentioning it. Some 7,000 people are employed at Faslane, 4,000 of whom are civilians. There are 3,700 indirect jobs as a result of supplier linkages and income multipliers. It is one of the largest single-site employers in Scotland and by far the largest source of jobs in the local economy of West Dunbartonshire—one of the most disadvantaged areas of Scotland. I make no apology for talking about economic impact because it is recognised in Roseanna Cunningham's comments and in her motion. Nonetheless, I hope that Roseanna Cunningham will convey the message to the SNP that a consistent approach is required. SNP members cannot argue one defence policy as local MSPs and another one entirely when they put on their party hat.  I confess that I am unclear about the SNP's current defence policy—whether it is for us to be in or out of NATO—and what its position is on Faslane, a matter that we have debated in the Parliament. One SNP MSP said, "Don't worry. When we scrap Faslane, we will base the Scottish navy there, so things will be fine. That was interesting as, at the same time, Alex Salmond was saying, "Don't worry. It will be based at Rosyth, not at Faslane." Does the SNP have one policy for the west and another policy for the east? Or is it a case of the left hand not knowing what the right hand is doing? Just for the record, when asked about the size of the Scottish navy, the SNP member said that it was going to be seven frigates. That would involve 100 jobs. There was no mention of the 10,600 remaining employees who would become unemployed.

We receive a huge benefit through defence spending in Scotland. For example, there is Faslane, which is the nuclear deterrent base for the whole of the UK—never mind the establishments at Almondbank, Rosyth and elsewhere, and jobs that are protected in Govan and on the Clyde. It is not a question of defence spending; it is a question of consistency in SNP policy. I have a great deal of sympathy with the proposition in Roseanna Cunningham's motion. We should all do everything that we can to support the staff at Almondbank. However, SNP members should come clean. On the one hand, they campaign for the closure of Faslane, which would remove 10,600 defence jobs; on the other hand, when the matter is close to home, they sing from a very different hymn sheet. In similar vein, where were the SNP members when British Energy recently shed around 300 posts in East Kilbride? Did they say anything about that? Not a peep. Perhaps that was because those posts were concerned with nuclear power. I welcome what I hope is a conversion of the SNP to protecting defence jobs in Scotland. In seeking to protect jobs at Almondbank, Roseanna Cunningham must also recognise the positive news of the £5 million investment in the new facility there, which came on top of an earlier investment of £11 million. I am happy to support the workers at Almondbank, but I ask for some consistency of approach from the SNP.

As we have heard, demographic data suggest that we are all living longer and that the number of elderly people is growing. We must keep that context at the forefront of our minds when we debate the provision and funding of care homes. We are fortunate in Scotland to have a diversity of care home provision from local authorities, the private sector and the voluntary sector. As we have passed the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001, we can be assured that the standards of care in each and every home, irrespective of provider, will be the best possible in the interests of our older people. The key issue that is before us today is funding. That has been highlighted by the fact that the Church of Scotland is considering the future of its care homes throughout Scotland. It is doing that because it cannot afford to continue running its care homes at a loss. We all acknowledge that over the years it has dipped into its reserves to the point where very little is left. I declare a constituency interest, which I know the Deputy Presiding Officer shares; it is Clydeview Eventide nursing home, which is a possible candidate for closure. It celebrates its 50 th anniversary this year and is located in Helensburgh. There is concern locally about the prospect of closure. There is concern, as would be expected, among the families that are affected, but also among the wider community. There are no local authority-run homes in Helensburgh. There is insufficient capacity to meet current demand, never mind demand in the future, which, we all acknowledge, is likely to increase. Closing Clydeview Eventide nursing home will seriously affect the quality and capacity of service delivery. Let us not forget that another  consequence of closure is that hospital delayed discharges will increase in the local area. It is worth noting, as some members have said, that there is a discrepancy between the cost of local authority-run provision, at an average of £374, and that of private and voluntary sector-run provision, at an average of £288. Although those figures are from 2001 statistics, it is still true that there is a differential. That remains the case in Argyll and Bute Council's area, which has one of the worst differentials in Scotland, with a unit cost for local authority provision of £483 and a unit cost for everyone else of £265. We need to understand why that is and address the inequality. I recognise that the Executive has provided substantial additional resources—£130 million since July 2001—to implement the national review group report in full. Coupled with investment in free personal care and nursing care, that means that we are now delivering unprecedented resources so that older people can live with dignity and security. I welcome the establishment, with COSLA, of the joint working group that will further examine the true costs of care and develop a method of assessing costs for the future. It is essential that we plan for the future as well as dealing with current challenges. I urge the minister to press Argyll and Bute Council on the need to take urgent action to retain the Clydeview Eventide nursing home in Helensburgh. As I have said, the area has an increasing elderly population, already lacks capacity of delivery and, in any case, has no local authority provision. I know that the local authority is concerned about the financial implications of funding the Clydeview Eventide home—although that would require only a small revenue commitment—because of the impact on the issue of equity for other providers. The retention of the Clydeview Eventide home is an urgent issue. If the minister can intercede with the council, I am sure that the Church of Scotland, older people and the wider community would be most grateful.

Like other members, I congratulate Shona Robison on securing the debate. As the chamber knows, the news at the end of March about the proposal to close seven out of Scotland's 13 animal welfare centres caused considerable dismay in communities throughout Scotland. However, it is important for us to understand the context of the SSPCA's closures proposal. The charity had an operating deficit of £3 million pounds at the end of the year and a declining return on stock market investments, whose value has dropped over time from £20 million to less than £12 million. I think that all members accept the need for financial stability in organisations. The SSPCA is no different from other organisations in that regard. However, there is perhaps an opportunity to look wider than the original remit that the board suggested—which was simply to consider cost- saving measures—to a view that would encompass thinking about how the SSPCA can maximise its income. Like other members, I am delighted that the board agreed at the end of April to consider that issue, as that has provided a six-month window of opportunity. I, too, should perhaps declare an interest, because Milton animal welfare centre, which is one of the SSPCA's bigger facilities, is in my Dumbarton constituency. Milton, like the other centres, provides an essential and valuable service to a huge geographical area that covers Argyll and Bute as well as East and West Dunbartonshire. Milton provides a first-class service, working alongside local authorities, in rehousing abandoned and mistreated animals. I believe that about 16,000 such animals were cared for in 2002. Like most voluntary organisations, Milton has several other strands to its work. Its education service, which was cited earlier, makes contact with about 28,000 children a year. It also provides vocational training for unemployed adults, which enables them to move into jobs. Another aspect of Milton—and, I assume, other such centres—is the critical support of volunteers. Hundreds of volunteers throughout Scotland—the young and the old, and the employed and the unemployed alike—assist not only with the work of the animal welfare centres, but with fundraising. The centres are held in high regard. For example, in my local area alone 20,000-odd people signed a petition. That situation was replicated in other areas. There were also many spontaneous donations to centres. I, too, received an e-mail from a young primary school child, in which she asked whether she and her friends could assist with fundraising. Members have made several suggestions. I want to focus on the role of the Scottish Executive, because I think that all members are clearly aware of the need to sustain animal welfare centres. I pay tribute to the Scottish Mirror newspaper for its campaign and to the Dumbarton and Vale of Leven Reporter , the Helensburgh Advertiser , the Lennox Herald and Castle Rock FM 103 for their support for Milton. The situation is urgent and I know that MSPs will do all that they can to assist. However, a commitment from the Executive—from its voluntary issues unit or the Environment and Rural Affairs Department—will sustain an important service and allow us to have a discussion about its long-term stability.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to increase the number of NHS consultant surgeons. (S2O-67)

The minister will be aware of the contingency plans that have been proposed for surgery and accident and emergency services at the Vale of Leven hospital. It is a matter of much concern that, because of a shortage of consultant surgeons, there will actually be a reduction in elective and emergency surgery. Will the minister review the circumstances that led to that decision in order to ensure that all alternatives were explored fully, and will he consider how we can attract some of the additional consultants to posts outwith city hospitals?

I welcome the establishment of OSCR, which was recommended by the McFadden commission. However, I believe that it needs statutory underpinning across its functions. The problem with the Scottish charities office is that it is reactive rather than proactive, as it relies on complaints being made. We are in danger of unintentionally causing gaps in the system. What is a likely time scale for the bringing to Parliament of legislation to ensure that we do not have such gaps? Further, what is a likely time scale for defining charity in law, given that the current statute is 400 years old?

I welcome the minister's announcement of a new route action plan for the A82 north of Tarbet. Indeed, I have been urging the Executive on behalf of constituents to undertake such work for some time now. Will the minister indicate the time scale for the study and when he expects work on its recommendations to begin? Moreover, when he returns on 2 May, will he consider additional improvements to the A82 from Dumbarton to Tarbet as a key route to Scotland's first national park at Loch Lomond and the Trossachs?

I welcome all converts, even Brian Monteith, but I doubt that I will ever again be surprised by his actions. What do children have to do with politics? In some cases, everything and, in others, very little. It is time for that to change. Almost every time the Parliament passes a bill, it has an impact on children somewhere along the line. With a few notable exceptions, children are often overlooked in the decision-making process, so I am proud to say that the Commissioner for Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill is one such exception. Children have been listened to during the drafting of the bill and we can now ensure that they continue to be heard. I believe that a commissioner will make a significant difference to Scotland's children. The commissioner will be an individual who has access to policy makers and who has listened to children. The commissioner will be a champion for children and will advocate their views and concerns. As we have heard, the bill is the product of long consultation of children and those who work with children. I take this opportunity to add my thanks to all those who took the time to help us in the bill's development, from voluntary organisations—who have campaigned for such legislation for at least a decade—to local authorities and children of all ages. The bill shows the considerable potential of Parliament's committees. Committees can—I point out to Brian Monteith—do more than provide an opportunity for party-political rantings. There has been a great deal of co-operation and consensus on the bill at every stage. I echo the comments that were made by the convener of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee: we owe a special debt of thanks to the non-Executive bills unit which was, I confess, pushed to the very limit of its endurance. However, its staff came through on the other side still smiling. I also thank the committee's clerks, who helped to keep the show on the road. It is also necessary to thank the Minister and Deputy Minister for Education and Young People and the Scottish Executive for their support in getting the bill through. Let us step back, however, and remember why we are doing this. The Labour party has long believed that the provision of good co-ordinated children's services is key to the delivery of our social justice agenda for children. We believe  firmly that there must be a clear and accountable approach to children's services, which is why we support the establishment of a children's commissioner as a champion who will fight for children's interests. We are doing this in recognition of the facts that the protection of children is an on-going issue and that, as the social environment changes, so do the challenges that are faced by children. Although a host of new opportunities are available to children today, there are also new dangers through the internet, drugs or crime, and children are now more likely than ever to be brought up in broken families. Consequently, they are more likely than ever to need support and they must, as vulnerable members of our society, be protected. It is all too easy for us, as politicians, to get caught up in an adult-centric world. A children's commissioner will keep us in touch with our children's changing world. We are also introducing the measure because we do not want to wait for a fatal inter-agency communications failure. As yet, no individual or office has been dedicated solely to children, with the job of monitoring the system as a whole and constantly working to improve it. We have the opportunity to change that and to take seriously our commitment to children's welfare. Yes—the commissioner will have the power to investigate underperformers, but improving services is about more than naming and shaming. With so many dedicated and efficient staff in the children's sector, we must learn from each other and share best practice. The commissioner's role in supporting research to develop our service will be very important. It is crucial that the commissioner's post has been developed with a proactive role in mind. He or she will work to promote children's rights not only with services but with members of the public. The commissioner's independence will ensure that the welfare of our young is never marginalised. Rights are rights, not only when the political climate is right and there is space on the agenda, but all the time and every time. It seems that it is a day for quotations, so I will continue that theme. Cyril Connolly said: "Always be nice to those younger than you, because they are the ones who will be writing about you". Kids are much more sophisticated these days. Sweets might have done the trick for our generation, but if we want to be remembered kindly we had better aim a bit higher. Perhaps the appointment of a children's commissioner is a reasonable start. However, I can think of better reasons to support the bill. Those reasons include the 11,000 children without a voice who are looked after by the state, the 9,000 runaways each year  and the 2,000 children who went through the children's hearings system last year for youth crimes. Those children need the support of quality services and of a society that respects their rights and we can make that happen today. I urge the Parliament to build on the work that the Executive has already done to improve the lives of children throughout Scotland and to support the bill.

Name one.

As members know all too well, charities form a vital part of Scottish life. Their unique qualities mean that they are especially well equipped to provide to the public services that are sensitive to local needs. Social justice, community regeneration and skills development are but a few of the objectives that charities can help us to achieve. Charities are, however, forced to work in a complicated and archaic legal framework that does little to support them. Existing charity law is based on a statute that was passed in 1601. In May 2001, the report of the Scottish Charity Law Review Commission—the McFadden report—found, not surprisingly, that it was high time, 400 years later, for an update of the law on charity. The McFadden report was the result of a wide ranging year-long consultation process, in which questionnaires and leaflets were sent to every organisation that is recognised as a charity in Scotland, and with large public meetings being held in our major cities. When the commission concluded its work, its final recommendations were referred back to the charity sector for approval; its response was overwhelming support for the recommendations. In essence, the McFadden report recommended a complete overhaul of the current system. The Executive has accepted the case for charity law reform and has thereby taken an important step towards creating a framework that is fit for the 21 st century. It is now time to move on from positive sounds to positive actions. There are some important implications for legislation, which should not be allowed to fall by the wayside. One of the commission's key findings was that the 1601 definition of a charity no longer fits today's public perception of a charity. The public view of charities 400 years ago was that they were apolitical  organisations that pursued objectives such as the advancement of religion, education or poverty relief. These days, such a narrow definition is insufficient. As members know, there are about 50,000 voluntary organisations throughout Scotland; however, only 28,000 are recognised by the Inland Revenue as Scottish charities. Many organisations that members of the public assume are charities do not have that status, Amnesty International UK and Greenpeace being two examples. Because those charities seek to influence legislation and are, in a sense, political, they are unable to benefit from having charitable status. At the same time, there are many publicly funded organisations—quangos by any other name—that the person on the street would not think of as charities, yet which have charitable status and are subsidised by the taxpayer. It is time that we introduced new legislation to reflect and protect charities today. McFadden recommended four defining principles for Scottish charities: First, a charity should be for the public benefit. That should be its overriding purpose, which is essential if charities are to maintain their good names. Secondly, they should not be profit-distributing organisations. Thirdly, they should be independent and lastly, they should be able to have political—but not party-political—aims. I acknowledge that there needs to be a debate on what constitutes public benefit and on how we define bodies' independence. As for the political aspect, members need not fear—I do not think that anybody is proposing that the Official Monster Raving Loony Party should become eligible for subsidy. Many charities have a political lobbying arm, but that does not make their aims any less laudable. Westminster is currently looking into redefining charitable status. It would be ideal if there were a convergence of views between here and Westminster and if we shared our information and thinking. It looks, however, as if legislation will not reach the UK Parliament until 2005, but Scotland need not wait until then because the Labour party, with others, has made an absolute commitment to legislating through a single charities bill. Let me turn to regulation of charities. In Scotland, charities are not currently monitored to ensure that they comply with the existing body of legislation. They are not required to lodge financial or any other information centrally and, although they are required to provide copies of their accounts on request to members of the public, they do not have to provide core information, such as how many people they employ and what they spend on fundraising. As organisations that are known for their lack of profit motive and for being run by dedicated staff  with loads of committed volunteers, charities are usually rightly viewed with trust and respect by society. In fact, surviving as they do on donations, their good name is their life-blood. However, under today's less than robust legislation, the bad practices of a few charities might muddy the names of the others to the cost of society as a whole. Therefore, there is a clear need for a legislative framework for charity regulation. In England and Wales, the Charity Commission establishes charitable status and is the centre for charity regulation. It is clear that the independence of that organisation is valued; in fact, the strategy unit in Westminster is working on making England's Charity Commission more independent. We have no equivalent organisation in Scotland, but the McFadden commission shows that there is a widespread belief among charities that that situation must change. I believe that the Executive shares that view and I welcome its stated aim of putting in place a new regulator for Scottish charities that is proportionate, independent, accountable, transparent, consistent and fair. However, I urge the minister to consider putting the proposed new regulator on a statutory footing as part of the key guarantee of independence and stability. The way in which the Executive has involved the charity sector in consultation is to be commended. We in the Parliament pride ourselves on our inclusive approach, which sets us apart as an effective democracy, but if we are to come up with a sustainable solution, consultation must be continuous. We must face the fact that if the solution is to last for the next 400 years—as the current legislation has—it had better be sustainable. Consensual legislation will be strong legislation, so a charities (Scotland) act that reflects the McFadden report is crucial to our relationship with the charity sector and to our reputation as an inclusive legislature. Consultation must be seen to be more than mere gesture. Things are already changing for the better for charities in Scotland. Reform that is suited to Scottish needs and which is informed by local consultation on the charity agenda is a breath of fresh air in a stale and neglected corner of the law. That is illustrated by the comments of an employee of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, who said: "Before devolution I was a policy officer with SCVO and spent most of my time travelling to London to persuade politicians down there that issues of interest to the Scottish voluntary sector were worthy of a small amount of parliamentary time. We spent eight years trying to get charity law on to the agenda of the Westminster Parliament, but it was on the agenda of the Scottish Parliament from the word go." Let us not lose that momentum. Charities are the heartbeat of civic society and they protect our  values in an age of cynicism and social fragmentation. However, we should not through haste lose the essence of reform. We need a modern definition of a charity so that we can support organisations that deserve help, and we need a body that is sufficiently independent of Government influence to protect and regulate the sector. I urge the minister to put the commendable work that has already been undertaken to good use and to make rapid progress on charity law reform.

On a point of order.

It is indeed, Presiding Officer. It is unjust of Mike Russell to blame the Executive; all members of the Parliament are aware of the time scale for consideration of members' bills. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee has worked especially hard on the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill, but it would be  nonsense to schedule a meeting for stage 2 consideration when there is no subsequent time for stage 3 consideration. I think that the Parliamentary Bureau has, on the basis of its reflection on standing orders, arrived at the correct decision.

Will the member take an intervention?

I know that, as part of that consultation, Keith Harding visited the Community Dog Management Centre at Alexandria and is aware of the very valuable work that is undertaken there in helping dog owners to learn about their responsibilities. Based on that knowledge, does he agree that education of, and raising of awareness among, dog owners will help to promote responsible behaviour, and that preventive models of that nature should be encouraged throughout  Scotland?

I am sure that the First Minister agrees that the proposals in Argyll and Bute for whole stock transfer into community ownership are welcome, not least because they will provide significant, much- needed investment to improve the quality of people's homes. However, will he take on board the fact that the cost of construction is higher in rural and island communities because of a shortage of skilled labour? Will he take account of that additional cost in arriving at a valuation for transfer?

It is worth remembering that, aside from Nova Scotia, Scotland is the home of the Gaelic language. That gives us a unique responsibility as guardians of our cultural heritage. I am not interested in an artificial reculturalisation of Scotland. The Labour party and I are committed to ensuring that Gaelic is recognised as an official language in Scotland with the same status as English so that, protected, it may flourish. That is why, with one important reservation that I will deal with later, the Labour party supports the principles of the bill. Equal status is important, but if that equal status is not linked to a perceivable change, we will be paying only lip service to our heritage. True security for Gaelic will come from the way in which its new status is incorporated into policy. The bill can only ever be considered as one step on the way. The broader commitment to protecting Gaelic is much greater. Those of us who consider the bill to be a one-stop answer to our responsibilities will be disappointed, because, as we have heard already, it does not address the important issue of Gaelic-medium education, which is essential for the survival of the language, as is the training of more Gaelic teachers. The Executive has made those matters priorities. We must put the bill's proposals in the context of considerable Executive progress. The Executive has already shown its commitment to a secure future for Gaelic in Scotland. The fact that we have a Cabinet minister with responsibility for Gaelic for the first time is a start, although that means very little without policy progress and implementation. However, there is plenty progress to show. Perhaps the most significant development is the creation of the new Bòrd Gàidhlig na h-Alba, which met for the first time, as we heard, last month and of itself should provide a significant boost to the language's status in Scotland. The majority of the evidence that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee received reflected my main reservation about the bill—its geographical coverage. As local authorities will be in control of their own plans, I can see no reason to limit the bill to a particular area. An amended  version of the bill to require all local authorities to prepare language plans would also allow for flexibility between council areas on the simple basis of need.

Sarah Boyack is right. We should acknowledge that Gaelic speakers and supporters live in all areas of the country. A geographically limited approach could end up creating new divisions. There has been considerable development and activity in areas that are not listed in the bill. We have heard about the examples of Edinburgh and Glasgow. Although the bill is of greater significance to some areas than it is to others, a broad, nationally targeted piece of legislation will ensure that nobody is discriminated against on the basis of their postcode. If we agree to extend the bill to all Scotland, as I believe that we should, the committee will need to take further evidence. In particular, it would be useful to consider further how we implement the bill alongside local authorities and whether the provisions on language plans will need to be amended to reflect the new flexibility that I mentioned. We need to be sure that we get it right so that we can ensure the future prosperity of Gaelic in Scotland. The debate is a chance for us to make the most of a new momentum. Maintaining that momentum and taking the time to produce good, practical policy are not mutually exclusive. I therefore urge members to support the bill's principles.

To ask the Scottish Executive what arrangements it has made for consultation with the voluntary sector during the development of its response to the McFadden commission recommendations on charity law reform. (S1O-6565)

The minister will be aware of the Home Secretary's positive announcement that he will publish a draft charities bill that will provide a coherent framework for charity legislation in England and Wales. Does the minister agree that there is a need for early legislation on that matter? Does he also agree that the task of establishing a new regulator should progress hand in hand with the new bill? Will he make a commitment to a  Scottish charities bill that is based on the McFadden commission's recommendations?

Everything has already been said, but, like others, I congratulate Margo MacDonald on securing the debate. I strike a note of warning for John McAllion, who got it wrong: Margo is not the wonderful convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee—she is the magnificent convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. The debate is important because thousands of people in Scotland rely on extra minerals and vitamins to stay healthy. In light of the directive, perhaps it is time to stock up because, as Margo MacDonald rightly said, products such as high-dose vitamin C to ward off colds, easily absorbable zinc to get rid of mouth ulcers and boron to protect against osteoporosis are under  threat. It is worth remembering that such remedies have been around for decades and that, although they are not new, there has not been a murmur of a safety scandal. Food supplements now come under the remit of the Food Standards Agency and conform to food safety legislation but despite that, some 300 safe, established supplements that are available in the UK market will be put out of the reach of consumers. In fact, it will be illegal to sell them. There is a hugely bureaucratic and expensive process to go through to include a supplement on the list of so-called safe supplements, which is nonsense when one considers that the years of use and compliance with the Food Standards Agency adequately speak for consumer safety. As we have heard, not only would the directive rule out certain supplements, it would also reduce the legal vitamin or mineral dose levels in supplements so severely that their effectiveness would be undermined. The directive is bad news for consumers and bad news for the food supplements industry, which would end up becoming much more generic. A reduction in the potency of supplements to beneath effective levels would risk undermining the credibility of the sector as a whole. Millions of people in Britain use high-dosage mineral and vitamin supplements regularly and many rely on them. I agree with Shona Robison that, far from promoting safety, the new regulations might have the opposite effect. Alex Fergusson asked why the directive has been produced. There is no secret to that—the directive is not about consumer protection but about trade liberalisation. The standardisation of laws on vitamin supplements throughout Europe, while undoubtedly allowing large supplement companies to sell throughout Europe, will in effect bring laws to the lowest common denominator in terms of consumer choice. A degree of consensus is emerging on the question of derogation and I am interested in the minister's response to that. We must encourage the UK Government to adopt the most liberal interpretation of the legislation possible and to use a little common sense, because choice and safety are not mutually exclusive.

Will the member give way?

I support amendment 6. As the member who introduced the amendment at stage 2 to which Kenny Gibson referred, I believe that the Social Justice Committee was clear about the need to prohibit the inappropriate use of bed-and-breakfast accommodation for families. We know the detrimental effect that such accommodation has on children. Whole families often share a room and there is a lack of privacy. Support mechanisms tend to break down and families can be in bed-and-breakfast accommodation for several months. It is not necessary to rehearse all the reasons why bed-and-breakfast accommodation is detrimental for families, because we know the potential impact of such accommodation. I do not hesitate to support amendment 6, which reflects discussions in England on the issue, but I will make several points. First, I ask that the regulations that the Executive will introduce have the effect that amendment 6 intends, which is that the principle to end the post-assessment use of bed-and-breakfast accommodation for families remains intact. I would be grateful if the minister would confirm that that will be the case. I think that amendment 6 accepts that principle, but it also allows for flexibility that could take account not just of local circumstances such as rurality but of the particular individual circumstances of a homeless family. That is a sensible approach, particularly when it is reinforced by the other part of the amendment, which will allow for regulations to be produced that will specify accommodation that is suitable, unsuitable or of an insufficient standard. I also ask the Executive to clarify when it intends to introduce the regulations. Delays should be avoided, where possible, so that we can move swiftly to a position where housing children in bed- and-breakfast accommodation is the exception rather than the norm.

I welcome the minister's statement. As Duncan McNeil said, Argyll and Clyde is already moving to a single NHS delivery system. I can tell the minister that that has proved to be not only popular but, more important, sensible. Already, we have seen a reduction in bureaucracy, with much more focus on patient care and people in the service working together rather than against each other. There is also a renewed emphasis on front-line delivery.  I welcome the enhanced role for LHCCs. However, does the minister agree that it is important that general practitioners not only have a closer working relationship with social work, but are involved in shaping acute services? I am particularly keen that, alongside clinicians, the public are directly involved in shaping services, too. Will the minister indicate how that will be realised, as it is clear that we will require a fundamental cultural change among some clinicians as well as managers?

The bill is very much about recognising children's vulnerability and the importance of choosing the right people to work with them. We must remember that the vast majority of adults who work with children are driven by a commitment to child development and welfare. However, we must acknowledge that some adults—albeit a small minority—might want to harm children. We need not dwell on particular examples, but even here in Scotland, we know that abuse happens. Child abuse is not just about scenes in gritty dramas; we cannot just switch off the television. Real life demands real action, and the proposed new list of adults who are unsuitable to work with children is a considerable improvement to our child protection system. However, as others have said, it is important to remember that the bill does not substitute for robust child protection policies, nor does it tackle the problem of child abuse that occurs behind closed doors in family homes. Nevertheless, the bill is a positive step that seeks to minimise opportunities for people who are intent on harming children. Up until now, organisations in Scotland that work with children have used criminal records to check the suitability of future employees. Experience shows us that some of the worst incidences of child abuse have been by people with no previous convictions. Although Thomas Hamilton had no convictions, there was information on the files of a number of organisations to suggest that he was a risk. However, that information was not available to potential employers, nor was it collated or able to be shared. The bill will enable the collation of so-called soft information on those people suspected of child abuse, including details of dismissals or resignations where child welfare was an issue, which will form the basis of a list of people banned from working with children. As members know, an equivalent list already exists in England and Wales. Scotland is clearly no less committed to protecting its children. The bill has teeth. It will become a requirement for relevant organisations to consult the list. Organisations that employ a named individual will be committing a criminal offence. Organisations will also be obliged to contribute information so that the list is kept up to date. Why? It is because we want a system of child protection that works, not one that simply looks good. I welcome the amendment lodged by the minister at stage 2 to encompass all child care organisations. We could not leave a potentially dangerous loophole through which adults who wish to abuse children could simply leave the  statutory sector and move into employment in the voluntary sector. That loophole would have created a two-tier system that is not in the interests of children. Indeed, the consultation process showed that voluntary organisations agree. Some of them have said that even if they were not legally required to check and report to the list, they would feel morally obliged to do so. Good laws reflect sound moral reasoning and the bill is no exception. However, we must ensure that voluntary organisations have the means to comply with the requirements. I know that the minister will ensure that consulting the list and referring individuals are as easy as possible. If necessary, additional support will be made available, in particular to small voluntary organisations. As the minister has said, the bill acknowledges the careful balance needed to respect the rights and interests of individuals as well as the special rights of the child. I believe that, between the efforts of the committee and the considerable efforts of the minister, we have got that balance right. Like others, I commend the minister for the bill. I thank all those involved in getting it to this stage—the bill team, the clerks to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and all those people who gave evidence. The bill has been strengthened by their input. I remind the chamber that, under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, we are required to take all appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educational measures to protect children from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse. To accept the bill is to accept our obligations.

rose—

When I reflect on the education of SNP members, I note that Mike Russell must have done particularly well in his creative writing class and that Tricia Marwick must have sailed through her geography class. The observation that Falkirk is not in Glasgow is most illuminating. It might surprise Tricia Marwick to learn that Scotland is still in Britain.

No—I am still in my first minute. Although everyone knows that education and opportunity are closely linked, the link between ambition and opportunity is talked about less often. Opportunity needs to be courted. Opportunities do not just appear with the milk on the doorstep; they need to be seized. I want the children of Scotland to be educated, to be ambitious and to seize opportunities. I want them to be educated with a can-do attitude. To encourage such an attitude, it is essential to recognise the child as an individual, to address life skills as well as maths and English and to build confidence as well as qualifications. The Scottish Executive has invested money in education in the traditional sense, through the provision of bricks and mortar, school books, equipment and teachers. Unlike the SNP, it has also shown a clear understanding of education in its broadest sense.

No, I will not. Through sure start Scotland, we have recognised that a child's early educational background and family environment have an impact on their ability to learn and to fulfil their potential later in life. New community schools also embody the principle that the potential of all children can be realised only by addressing their needs in the round. In new community schools, teachers, social workers, community education workers, health  professionals and others work together in a single team to meet an individual child's needs. Following that route has meant that children in Dumbarton constituency have access to health development officers, to family and pupil support—to address barriers to achievement at school—and to groundbreaking educational information technology systems. Subsequent evaluations have shown that those investments have paid dividends, particularly in improved literacy, numeracy and good behaviour.

No. Unlike SNP members, education has come a long way in the past four years. However, I am always the first to agree that more can be done. The national debate revealed the need to make progress in some areas. I am pleased that the minister is addressing those issues. The sheer scope of the five-to-14 curriculum is one of the most important issues, as teachers in my constituency—most recently, staff at John Logie Baird Primary School—have pointed out. In trying to cover so many areas, teachers cannot give sufficient attention to core areas. A slimming down of the curriculum would lead to the devotion of more class time to core skills and would ensure that everyone attained a level of foundation learning. I must take issue with the SNP on the important issue of class sizes. Yet again, the SNP conveniently fails to acknowledge what is being done. The Executive has already set targets for primary and key secondary school years. Let us step back to analyse the logic of the SNP's call for smaller classes across the board. How would such a change be paid for? Smaller classes ultimately mean more classrooms and a complete overhaul of the school infrastructure. Although the Executive is committed to improving the school estate and has secured £1 billion to do so, that would not be enough to fund the SNP proposals. Like most critics, the SNP thinks that it knows the way, but it cannot drive the car. The SNP has no idea how it would deliver any of its proposals. Surely it is much more sensible to increase the teacher to pupil ratio. That is quicker and much more effective than counting the number of classrooms. After all, it is attainment that matters. We know that improving the adult to pupil ratio gives a significant boost to pupil learning. Anyone who removes the blindfold of bias—I urge Mike Russell and Tricia Marwick to do so—must admit that great steps have been taken. Ninety-seven per cent of secondary schools have access to the internet. Extra educational resources are being targeted at those in most need. For the  first time, more than half our young people are going on to university and further education colleges. Those are the foundations for a strong society and a strong economy.

I warmly welcome the minister's announcement of transitional assistance for social economy organisations that operate in the recycling sector. One of them, Greenlight Environmental Ltd—which employs 110 people in my constituency and conducts a number of major projects in recycling and environmental work and training—relies heavily on the landfill tax credit. Will the minister provide further details of the scheme? In particular, will he describe the support that is to be provided and will he say how quickly such support can be put in place?

The Deputy First Minister made a welcome commitment not to compromise on public safety. I agree with that view, because I believe that firefighters do, too. I heard what the minister said in response to Ken Macintosh and Iain Smith about the Scottish Executive's position on closures; however, persistent and particular rumours relate to closures of fire stations in Strathclyde fire brigade's area. It is clear that we need to get accurate information out to people in communities to alleviate their concerns about their fire services. Therefore, I seek the minister's assurance that, in the interests of public safety, no closures are planned or in the pipeline.

I add my thanks to the clerks, to NEBU, to my parliamentary colleagues on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and, in particular, to Irene McGugan. Such cross-party working shows the Parliament at its best. George Bernard Shaw once wrote: "It's all that the young can do for the old, to shock them and keep them up to date." He was undoubtedly feeling his age. However, it is true—dare I say it—that us wrinklies need constantly to be kept up to date. We need to pay particular attention to the way in which our children's world is changing. Today, children have a host of new opportunities available to them and it is essential that they are helped to make the most of them. At the same time, children are exposed to new dangers via the internet and through drugs and crime. As vulnerable members of our society, they deserve our protection. Bernard Shaw was also right that, from time to time, we are shocked; but we are shocked not so much by the way in which children behave as by the fact that, in a country such as Scotland, children can still be abused through prostitution or bullied to the point that they want to harm themselves. That beggars belief. Time and time again, in discussions of children's rights, references are made to the need for communication and a joined-up approach to children's services. However, as yet there is no one individual or office dedicated exclusively to children and to promoting their interests and constantly working to seek improvement. The creation of a commissioner for children and young people in Scotland will fill that gap. The commissioner will be more akin to a guide dog than a watchdog. Through the commissioner's significant powers of investigation, he or she may, indeed, snap at the heels of underperformers in children's services, but the role provides for a much broader and much more proactive remit than that. The commissioner will have the duty to guide service providers towards best practice. The commissioner will also have the job of acting as our eyes and ears in relation to concerns and the welfare of children up and down the country. I particularly welcome that aspect, because it is hard to focus on so many of the different needs of children simultaneously, yet those needs must not, and cannot, be neglected. An independent and permanent office of the  children's commissioner will ensure that the welfare of our young is never marginalised by political considerations and that children's voices are not lost in the clamour for the Parliament's attention. When the Education, Culture and Sport Committee set up the inquiry into the need for a children's commissioner, we did what some would have considered unthinkable: we consulted young people. We consulted not just a few young people, but hundreds. One 14-year-old girl who participated in a seminar said: "Adults don't listen to children but they would listen to a Commissioner for children." She has a point. I ask the chamber to support the principles of the bill.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am sure that that will come as a relief to other members.

I always want to be helpful. Let me return to the substance of my speech. "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright" is not just the title of the review, but the key message that has been echoed around the chamber this afternoon. Without a doubt, protecting Scotland's  children from harm and abuse is a collective responsibility. I believe that the Parliament has a special responsibility to translate those concerns into action. As many members have pointed out, civilised politics is about protecting the most vulnerable in our society. There are few more vulnerable people than little boys or girls who have run away from home, or children who have been abused by the very people who should love them. The recent review leaves us in no doubt that such children exist in Scotland. In 2002, 2,018 children were on the child protection register. They, at least, have one foot in the door of the protection system. The report also shows that there is a worrying lack of public confidence. Friends or relatives of children at risk are reluctant to report their concerns, so the problem is perhaps greater than it at first appears. The review does not make comfortable reading, and it is clear that there is much to be done. As well as identifying the heinous problem of child prostitution in Scotland, it found from the audit sample that 21 per cent of children at risk were not getting the help that they need. It is only by exposing such statistics—uncomfortable although they may be—that we are able to understand the problem and take concerted action. Children's problems have the potential to snowball. Family problems, if not addressed, can lead to child homelessness, and abuse through prostitution, crime and substance misuse. The essential task of protection agencies must relate to early detection, and to providing effective responses to warning signs. It will soon be too late if the warning signs are ignored. The review makes several suggestions as to how to improve performance. The first relates to access to information, and to ensuring that both adults and children are aware of the resources available to help them, such as freephone advice lines for counselling and advice in schools. Communication between agencies is also of critical importance. Different services and agencies must share their information and have a common strategy. It is only when we have that integrated picture of medical problems, behavioural problems at school, school absences and social work assessments that we can begin to know a child's level of risk. A lack of communication can be fatal. The working group on young runaways and children abused through prostitution proposes the development of local protocols to tackle the problem. They form a welcome basis for an integrated approach from all the relevant agencies—police, local authority and voluntary sector alike. I am delighted that the Executive has already responded to some of the key policy  recommendations in the review. The three-year programme of sustained activity to reform the child protection system, coupled with the robust monitoring of progress, indicates a commitment to the issue. New resources already announced, such as the £13.3 million for social work training and child protection measures, should also help reforms, but there is no one-off response that will solve the problem. We need a continuing commitment to improve the way that children at risk are identified and protected because even one child suffering is one child too many. If we needed a reminder, only this week a 5-year-old girl was discovered drowned in the Caledonian canal. Her body, found in a weighted bag, might have been there for several months. What kind of a society is ours that that could happen? I hope that that will spur on the Executive in its determination to build on the good efforts that it has made to reform the child protection system, and to build on them quickly.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to reform Scottish Screen. (S1O-6194)

I am sure that the minister will agree that one of the most striking features to emerge from the review is the range of activity that is undertaken by other agencies, such as Scottish Enterprise and the Scottish Arts Council, in developing our creative industries. However, there is limited joint working with Scottish Screen and sometimes there is a confused and fragmented approach. The review recommends a radical restructuring of existing agencies to form a single body concentrating solely on the creative industries. How will that be progressed and what will the time scale for implementation be?

I welcome Malcolm Chisholm's decisive action in Argyll and Clyde. What is the time scale for establishing a single NHS system in Argyll and Clyde? What involvement will stakeholders have in shaping the future of the service?

I, too, commend the minister for the bill. I cannot help but recall that many members muttered in the chamber about whether there was a need to have a homelessness task force in the first place and said, "Just get on with it." That attitude displayed an ignorance of the complexity of homelessness and is typical of the top-down approach that characterised the failed policies of the past. Like Robert Brown, I think that the Executive's approach is instructive because including people with expertise and, indeed, talking to people who have experienced homelessness means that we are much more likely to get the policy and the legislative framework right and to have shared ownership of the direction of travel—which will be crucial in the bill's implementation. The Parliament owes a debt of gratitude to the members of the homelessness task force because  they stuck with the job for two years despite, as Mel Young would complain, the veritable mountains of paper that civil servants produced for each meeting. They stuck with the job because they knew that they had a unique opportunity to change the system. They wanted not only to make our new system of dealing with homelessness the best in western Europe—as has been said—but to transform the experience of people who find themselves homeless in Scotland. Some would say that legislation is the easy part. There are many other recommendations in the task force's report on which I am sure the Executive will continue to focus to make a positive difference. What we need is nothing short of a change in culture and attitude and the bill is a fundamental part of achieving that. Let us not beat about the bush on priority need. Having a system of priority need is about restricting access to housing, because it is, basically, a rationing system. Equally, the existing categories of priority need create entirely arbitrary distinctions between homeless people. The Executive's approach, of expanding priority need groups before phasing them out entirely over time, will provide the necessary degree of flexibility to ensure that accommodation and services are in place.

I am sorry, I have a lot to say in a short time. While I accept what the minister says about the national picture, I am clear that housing supply does not always match housing demand at a local level. Resources will need to be reprioritised to certain areas to ensure that accommodation is available. Regrettably, however, Lyndsay McIntosh's myopic view of finance fails to take account of the wider picture. We must not forget the fact that homelessness is not simply about bricks and mortar. The underpinning rationale behind the initial provisions in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 were to do with preventing homelessness from occurring in the first place, putting in place homelessness strategies that extend beyond the housing department, providing assistance to people before and when they become homeless and extending the time when such assistance and support can be provided. In many cases, that will help to prevent homelessness from occurring. That is the real prize. We know the social cost of homelessness and if we can prevent it, we must do so. Instead of approaching the issue from the point of view of how much money we will need to build more houses, we should focus on helping people to maintain their tenancies in the first place.

I have no time. I note the committee's concerns about the short Scottish secure tenancy. While I agree with Shelter on substantial points, I point out that anti-social behaviour is a criminal matter and that this bill is not the vehicle for tackling the issue. The committee has raised valuable points. We need to ensure that the bill is not a loophole for those intent on abusing the system. I am sure that the minister will consider those points carefully when drafting amendments. The bill is radical and turns on its head our approach to dealing with homelessness. The current system is over 30 years old. It is time for a fundamental change. I urge members to support the bill.

I will be quick. I will also be gentle, as Frank McAveety has instructed me to be. Frankly, I am embarrassed by this debate. I am extremely disappointed that members of the SNP chose deliberately to provide misinformation to the press yesterday. Equally, I am angry that, in doing so, they breached the confidentiality of the  interview process by revealing the names of some of the candidates who were unsuccessful. I intend to complain formally in writing—

On Christine Grahame's point, I said that some members of the SNP spoke to the press. Furthermore, I should point out, although journalists are not considered to be Mystic Megs, they do not necessarily have the imagination to invent some of the things that I was told yesterday. Brian Fitzpatrick is absolutely right. What kind of signal is the SNP sending to people who apply for jobs in the Parliament? It is hardly the way for a responsible Parliament to behave. For the record, I say that the decision was a majority one and that no casting vote was required or given. I have always believed that people should be shortlisted on the basis that they are competent to do the job. At no stage did any member of the interview panel object to the shortlisting of those particular candidates. However, not only are the SNP's actions highly discourteous to the other members of the panel and the Parliament, they constitute an outrageous attack on our integrity. Has the SNP attacked the process itself? Well, no, and one must wonder why. Perhaps Iain Smith got it right. If it takes a panel member two months to respond to an e-mail and if the SNP members do not show up for the first shortlisting, they are perhaps in a difficult position to attack the process. During the entire process in which they were involved, they did not raise a single objection until now. I find it reprehensible and, frankly, cowardly that they choose to attack the candidate, who is unable to respond.

I think that the SNP has undermined the position of information commissioner and they have undermined the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. That is not the behaviour of a responsible political party, albeit that it is depressingly consistent for the SNP. This is nothing but politically motivated nonsense. For the SNP, this is not about the best candidate for the job; it is about its perpetual right of veto until it gets its candidate for the job. I am disgusted by the SNP's attitude.  We on the interview panel picked the best person for the job; that person is clearly Kevin Dunion. Kevin Dunion will make the best information commissioner for Scotland. That is nothing more than this Parliament and this country deserve. I ask members to support the motion.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Do I not have an opportunity to reply to the debate?

Thank you very much.

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is not appropriate for us to discuss the details of the candidates involved. To do so would be a gross discourtesy to them and would constitute a clear breach of the interview process.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer—a legitimate point of order. The member may not have named the alternative candidate in the chamber, but members of the Scottish National Party have named that alternative candidate to the press. [ Interruption. ]

As a member of the selection panel, it gives me great pleasure to speak to the motion in my name and to invite the Parliament to nominate Kevin Dunion as the first Scottish information commissioner. I will say a few words about the background and the process before I turn to the proposed nomination. The Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002, which the Parliament passed before the summer, makes clear provision for a Scottish information commissioner to be appointed by Her Majesty the Queen on the nomination of the Parliament. Independent of both the Parliament and the Executive, the commissioner will have responsibility for promoting good practice and ensuring compliance with the act. He will have a key role to play in the implementation of the freedom of information regime in Scotland, providing both general guidance on the legislation and specific guidance on publication schemes. The commissioner's work will be critical in ensuring that the people of Scotland have access to the information that they want and need and in making public authorities more open and accountable to the people whom they serve. As members will be aware, under our standing orders, a selection panel, chaired by the Presiding Officer, was set up on behalf of the Parliament to consider the appointment. The interview panel consisted of Bill Aitken, Christine Grahame, Cathie Craigie, Duncan Hamilton, Iain Smith and me. A recruitment process was conducted with advertisements placed in the national press, which attracted a wide range of applications. Following a blind sift of those applications, we proceeded to interview. I take the opportunity, on behalf of the interview panel, to thank Sir Michael Buckley, the former UK ombudsman, who assisted us as an external adviser in the recruitment process. As with many interviews, the calibre of candidates was high and the panel decided to conduct a second round of interviews, inviting back some of the candidates to ensure that we appointed the right one. At the conclusion of the process, the majority view of the panel was quite clear that Kevin Dunion should be nominated by the Parliament for appointment. As many members will be aware,  Kevin Dunion is currently the chief executive of Friends of the Earth Scotland—a position that he has held for 10 years. He has extensive national and international experience of dealing with people, often at the highest levels, and is skilled in helping to influence the kind of positive change that I think we need. Throughout his career he has been involved actively in campaigning issues and there is no doubt that, under his leadership, the profile of Friends of the Earth Scotland has risen considerably. Its loss is quite clearly the Parliament's and Scotland's gain. It was also clear to me from Kevin Dunion's interview that he has considerable commitment to and enthusiasm for freedom of information and, above all, a strong desire to ensure that it is firmly embedded in the culture of public authorities in Scotland. The task that he faces is challenging to say the least, but I am in absolutely no doubt that he will meet the challenge most effectively. I believe that Kevin Dunion will prove to be a formidable information commissioner and, as the first commissioner in post, he has a particularly responsible role in helping to shape a freedom of information culture in Scotland. I am sure that the Parliament will wish him every success for the future. I move, That the Parliament nominates Kevin Dunion to Her Majesty The Queen for appointment as the Scottish Information Commissioner.

I am at a loss as to how to follow that, Presiding Officer. In his usual fashion, Jamie McGrigor dismisses entirely his party's historical responsibility for where we are now. Let us be quite clear: child poverty was a driver of social policy for the Conservatives. I remind the member that there were 1.3 million more children in poverty under the Conservatives' regime than there are now. Our vision is quite clear. Unlike under the Conservatives, every child should have the best possible start in life irrespective of their social and economic background. There is a clear relationship between a poor start in life and a life of poverty. People who experience that kind of disadvantage in childhood are often unable to overcome the obstacles to achievement of their potential that they face. That is particularly true for the most vulnerable children; for those who are most at risk of abuse or neglect. I therefore welcome the Executive's initiative in setting up the child protection review. The child protection review report makes grim reading. Half of the children who are at risk of abuse or neglect are not being adequately protected or cared for. I stress that we are not  talking about negligence on the part of workers; the problem is more to do with the strain that the child protection system is under. The net result is that children can get lost between the competing demands. There are myriad reasons why that happens and I do not have sufficient time to go into them all. Probably one of the most significant factors is the shortage of social workers. I am pleased that the minister has acted quickly in response to the review's recommendations. We need to provide support to social workers to ensure that children do not continue to slip through the net. Although the main burden undoubtedly falls on social workers, there are many other professionals involved in child protection, such as health visitors, general practitioners, the police, voluntary organisations and teachers. We need to draw on all that expertise and better co-ordinate our efforts.

No, I do not have time. The three-year programme of activity to reform child protection services will deliver much-needed change in the form of clear practice standards, development of the role of child protection committees and, above all, enhancement of the system's capacity to deliver better results. That, coupled with the inter-agency implementation team and a robust new inspection framework, will ensure that reform is delivered. Capacity is probably the key constraint that we face. Despite an increase in the past decade of 20 per cent in the number of social workers, there is still a shortage of social workers throughout the country. That is due partly to the unprecedented—but welcome—scale of development of social care services. Services such as child care, community care and criminal justice have far outstripped the supply of professionals. The shortage of social workers is particularly evident in children's services where case loads can be huge and unmanageable and where the lives and circumstances of the children the services seek to protect can be harrowing and stressful. We need a competent work force that is able to work to the highest possible standards, and we need sufficient numbers in that work force so that the work load is manageable, so that support is provided and so that decisions are appropriate. As Trish Godman does, I recognise that the Minister for Education and Young People has done much already and that she is committed to doing more: from the current recruitment campaign "care in Scotland, life changing work", which is a good start; to the £3 million of additional funding for local authorities to train and support existing social workers; to the £13 million of new resources for social work training and child-protection measures.  I know that the minister will continue to take concerted and sustained action to make necessary improvements, not just in the context of the child protection audit and review, but in child protection overall. I also know that she will not only ensure that there are a policy framework and resources, but will ensure that the legislative framework is right. The Protection of Children (Scotland) Bill has been extended to cover voluntary organisations as well as public authorities and will, for the first time, create a register of people who are unsuitable to work with children. The Commissioner for Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, which was developed by the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, will promote awareness of children's rights and will ensure that we mainstream the consideration of children into what we do as a society. In conclusion, I pick up on the theme that Ian Jenkins started, which is society's responsibilities. We need public education so that individuals feel that they are able to raise with public services their concerns about children and that they feel confident doing so, so that communities are in turn encouraged to play a much more active role. We need to improve public understanding of the role of social work and of those who are involved in child protection in order to remove the old negative perceptions about social workers, and to promote the much more positive work that is done to protect children from neglect and abuse. The safety of children is everyone's responsibility. It is not just about Government or local government or voluntary organisations; it is about all of us. It is about people in communities and neighbourhoods throughout Scotland having the confidence to act where there are concerns about a child's safety. Society is judged by how it treats its young, its old and its most vulnerable. The children who we are talking about are some of the most vulnerable people in our communities today. Let our society not be judged to be found wanting.

Will the member take an intervention?

As ever, the Conservative motion before us is carefully crafted. Unsuspecting members of the public, never mind parliamentarians, might find much that is of merit in the motion. Phrases such as "equality of opportunity" and "new and different ways of education built round the needs of the individual child" are laudable, but we should not be fooled. If we listen carefully to what the Tories say, a picture will emerge of an elitist system that is designed to benefit a narrow section of society. In the name of reform, the Tories propose not diversity and flexibility in our schools, but a widening of the opportunity gap. We must be honest. There is no commitment from the Tory members to match Labour's spending on education. Given our experience of the Tories, the motion signals a return to schools being starved of resources. In contrast, Labour's approach is to ensure that all schools are centres of excellence that work to close the opportunity gap and to focus on the individual child's educational needs so that each and every child in Scotland fulfils their potential. We promote greater flexibility and diversity in the curriculum and we have invested in classrooms, the schools estate and in 7,000 more teachers and classroom assistants. Taken together, those measures provide a better environment for learning, but we cannot stop there.

No. We have had to listen to Brian Monteith for too long. It is his turn to sit quietly. The Labour party is rightly proud of our comprehensive system, as are the people of Scotland, but we cannot afford to be complacent. At the start of the 21 st century, we have a duty to equip our children for the challenges of the future. The education system must not stand still; it should lead the agenda for change. That change should not be the one that the Tories want, which would mean that only a few would succeed.  Rather, our ambition is for all children. Our aspiration is not for only one or two schools to be centres of excellence, but for all schools to be excellent. We will encourage more flexibility and innovation in schools through measures such as having teachers who work across primary and secondary schools, allowing for the first two years of secondary school to meet more clearly the needs of individual children, encouraging real parental involvement and increasing opportunities for vocational education. That will ensure that every young person leaves school with the core skills and confidence that they need to progress.

Sorry, no. We will also encourage more decentralised management so that head teachers are empowered to make decisions on using the flexibility in the system and applying resources. Positive reform is firmly on the agenda. I regret the fact that Brian Monteith keeps looking over his shoulder to compare what is going on in Scotland with the educational reforms that are proposed in England. Scotland has always had a distinctive approach to education, even pre devolution, and it is right that we should have a distinctive approach to reform. However, the objective is the same. We want to raise standards for all children. As Brian Monteith is obsessed with what is going on down south, why does he not join his colleague Ben Wallace and take a closer look? I want to describe the Tories' education policy as outlined by Brian Monteith, but because words fail me, I have borrowed some from a once-famous Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, which I assume will meet with the Tories' approval. He stated: "The honourable member's speech reminds me of Columbus. When he set out, he didn't know where he was going. When he got there, he didn't know where he was. And when he returned home, he didn't know where he'd been." That describes the Tory education policy. Members should reject the motion.

I thank Des McNulty for drawing breath and allowing me to intervene. Small voluntary organisations already get the kind of practical support he is describing, to conduct Scottish Criminal Records Office checks through the central registered body, which is based on Volunteer Development Scotland. They get practical support, advice and training to enable them to carry out SCRO checks, so surely it is a matter of extending that slightly further while still providing the organisations with the same level of advice.

Let me start by adding my voice to the chorus of approval for the Protection of Children (Scotland) Bill. Like many others, I welcome the Executive's clear intention to enhance the protection of children. By establishing a list of people deemed to be unsuitable to work with children, banning them from working with children and making it an offence for organisations to employ somebody from the list, the bill acts on the recommendations of the Cullen inquiry and the Kent children's safeguard review. For me, the bill is particularly timely for another reason. I have spent the past couple of years dealing with a constituent who experienced significant abuse as a child at the hands of staff in the care home where she lived. The bill should help to prevent such abuse from happening in future. It has been stressed already and I stress again that the bill is not, and never will be, a substitute for effective and robust child protection measures such as criminal record checks and proper supervision of all staff. It will undoubtedly close down opportunities for people intent on causing children harm. As we have heard this afternoon, protecting children is of paramount importance. That view was shared by absolutely everyone who gave evidence to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. All the witnesses, without exception, welcomed the general principles of the bill. However, a number of concerns have been raised  about the bill's application and its implementation. In the time available to me—I was going to say the short time, but the time limit has been elongated—I want to focus on one area in particular. It should come as no surprise to the minister that I want to concentrate on which organisations are covered by the bill. As the bill stands, only child care organisations regulated under the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 have a statutory duty to refer an individual to the list. Any other organisation may refer, but there is no duty or obligation to do so. In effect, we are creating a two-tier system of protection. Not only is that undesirable but, as one witness put it, it falls short of the moral duty of the state to protect all children. Many people with long-standing experience told us that individuals who are intent on harming children will simply move on to the unregulated organisations, as they are not subject to the same strictures as regulated organisations are. In my view, we must close that loophole. Surely the issue is not the status of the organisation but whether the individual has unsupervised access to children, irrespective of whether the organisation is regulated or not. I note that the minister has said that the problem lies, in part, with enforcing the duty to refer on unregulated organisations, given that the Care Commission has no statutory responsibility to ensure compliance in those cases. However, the bill does not contain provisions on enforcing the statutory duty, so in effect there is no difference at all. Therefore, there is no technical reason why the duty should not be applied across the board. The evidence taken by the committee was compelling. Voluntary organisations such as the scouts, guides and sports clubs—all of which are not regulated—have stated that they will treat the bill as placing a mandatory duty on them to refer to the list. They believe that, in addition to their well-developed child protection measures, the bill will provide a tool to ensure that their practices are robust. Their approach is to be welcomed, but there is a strong view that we cannot rely on a moral duty in place of a legal duty, particularly for organisations that do not have the same experience as those that I have just mentioned. I will quote Debra Shipley. For members who do not know her, she is the MP whose private member's bill in the Westminster Parliament led to the Protection of Children Act 1999. In a letter to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, she said: "I am concerned that there are some areas of ambiguity about definitions which have created confusion for child care organisations including the voluntary sector and an  array of organisations providing sport and leisure activities for children in England ... This still leaves a situation where children will be protected by some child care organisations but not others and it is unclear how to identify those who are. This makes the situation for a parent very difficult if they are enquiring about the protection aspects of an organisation including recruitment of paid and unpaid staff." I agree with the minister that a balance needs to be struck, but surely that balance should be tipped towards protecting children. I do not want to place an onerous burden on small voluntary sector organisations, but the interests of children should be the primary consideration. I underline the fact that the bill represents a significant step forward in ensuring maximum protection for our children, but we should make it as robust as it possibly can be. I urge members to support the general principles of the bill.

Does Bill Aitken acknowledge the independent research that Professor Lindsay Paterson of the University of Edinburgh carried out, which indicates that the attainment levels of comprehensively educated children and those educated in the private sector are the same? Will he recommend that children should be in the comprehensive sector?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member will recognise that the definition of absolute poverty has been used in the social justice annual report since the beginning. The member will also recognise that the level of absolute poverty for children has fallen sharply from 34 per cent to 21 per cent, which is 13 per cent lower. Does he welcome that—yes or no?

Will the member take an intervention?

I did not have time.

Will the member take an intervention?

The debate is timely, because, over the past few months, there has been a frenzy of activity, discussion and even enthusiasm in communities across Scotland, which have all been deliberating on the future of education. The contribution from young and old, from teachers, from parents and from employers has helped to shape the thinking that is emerging from the Executive's national debate on education and the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's parallel inquiry on the purposes of education. It is unusual that I find myself agreeing with Tommy Sheridan's assertion that the time for debating is over. We must roll up our sleeves and get on with the task of delivering a world-class education for children now and in the future. I diverge from Tommy Sheridan in the detail of how we should do that. There is much to build on. The McCrone agreement provides a stable framework that recognises teachers for the professionals that they are. The minister has given a commitment to provide 3,000 more teachers and 3,500 more support staff. There are already classroom assistants in every school and a commitment to deliver more has been made. There are record levels of investment in the school estate to ensure that our young people have the best possible environment for learning. Measures to tackle social exclusion have been taken, which will ensure that no child is left behind. I will dwell on the social exclusion issue, because education has a key role to play in closing the opportunity gap. It is depressing that it is generally true that children from less affluent backgrounds do less well at school. Whatever the reason—whether it is lack of motivation, low aspirations or systemic social injustice—the impact is often for life. It affects not just people's individual earnings potential, but their contribution  to the economy and to society as a whole. It is incumbent on us to ensure that the opportunity gap is closed and that we help every child to achieve their potential. Let us get away from using academic attainment alone to measure potential. We must acknowledge that although academic attainment is important, education is about much more. What about life skills, attitude, an understanding of society and those so-called soft skills that employers continually tell us are critical—motivation, confidence and self-esteem? If children are motivated, they learn better. If they are confident, they learn better. If they have self-esteem, they learn better. If they are inspired, they learn better. In all cases, they achieve much more. I recognise that that is not a job for teachers alone. We need to inspire and motivate parents, because involving them in their child's education will reap positive benefits. The twin aims of promoting social inclusion and raising standards are at the heart of the new community schools, which are already starting to close the opportunity gap, although there is a long way to go. The schools in my local area of West Dunbartonshire, which are all new community schools, show the potential that is created when that approach is combined with innovative devolved school management. On devolved school management in general, I give a strong welcome to the themes that are associated with flexibility in the curriculum, which the First Minister and the Minister for Education and Young People have emphasised recently. I know that the teachers at John Logie Baird Primary School in Helensburgh, whom I met recently, support those themes. Although it is the case that comprehensive education in Scotland is much valued, we need to do more to nurture the talents of each child; in other words, we need to provide individual learning for each child. Increased flexibility in the curriculum is necessary to enable teachers and head teachers to make decisions for their schools and their pupils. That will open up new opportunities. Flexibility in the curriculum needs to be matched by flexibility in how we measure standards and how we devolve the management of resources. If we intend to empower schools and pupils, that is the way forward.

Will Brian Monteith give way?

What is Mike Russell saying?

Eventually.

The minister will be aware of the academic research that was done recently by Professor Lindsay Paterson of the University of Edinburgh, which showed that pupil attainment levels in comprehensive schools are the same as those in private schools. Does the minister agree that that is a significant and independent endorsement of comprehensive education in Scotland?

Ending child poverty in a generation, ensuring employment opportunities for all, and providing dignity and security for our pensioners are the three pillars of "Closing the Opportunity Gap" and achieving social justice in Scotland and, of course, they are interlinked. It still remains the case that the best way out of poverty is through employment. Many of us in the chamber have seen the results of poverty visited on successive generations, whether it is poor diet, ill health, lack of educational attainment, or long-term unemployment leading to a lack of confidence, low self-esteem and little or no aspiration. We need to break that cycle of despair. The most effective means of doing so is to eliminate child poverty—giving children the best start in life. I will focus my comments on children and education. It is staggering to think that a child's life chances—their entire future—can be determined by the time that they reach the age of three. If we are going to make a difference, we need to get much better at identifying and supporting the most vulnerable families and their children from the earliest years of their lives. That is why I particularly welcome the Executive's sure start programme, because it has a critical role to play in targeting those who are in most need. The additional £31 million from the Executive to enhance provision in communities will help those children who are most vulnerable. Another welcome development is the child care strategy. In a short period, we have made sure that every child aged three and four has access to a nursery place—firm foundations on which we can build. And then on to school: we have a duty to ensure that no child at primary school and no young person at secondary school falls through the net. That they have access to a range of opportunities  is important, but even more important is their ability to realise those opportunities. In the past, the focus in education was on equality of input. Little attention was paid to outcomes and results. That simply is not good enough. We need to get better at delivering the best possible outcome for each and every child—every child must be given the opportunity, the encouragement and the support to maximise their potential. It does not stop at children. We need to encourage their parents too, by involving them in their child's education and, by doing so, raising their aspirations. The rolling out of new community schools, which provide a much more integrated approach to the delivery of services for children and involve their parents, is welcome. They are at the heart of the community. Supporting children throughout their lives, and as they make the transition to adulthood, is undoubtedly challenging. Nobody underestimates the scale of the task that lies ahead, but through working with our colleagues at Westminster, the Executive is taking the action that is needed to close the opportunity gap. We have to stay focused on the problem. We need to get better at targeting resources at the substantial concentrations of poverty that exist. Great political movements have not shirked hard challenges. Great political movements have a clear sense of purpose. Contrast our approach with that of the SNP. I was astonished—not disappointed, because it is consistent—to hear Linda Fabiani admit that the SNP has nothing to offer. "Sorry, we can't do anything," says the SNP. That is not surprising when the SNP is bankrupt of ideas and policies and unable to do more than whinge. Contrast that with our approach. Our purpose is nothing short of delivering full employment and nothing short of eliminating child poverty. That is our mission. The difference between Labour and other political parties is that we will deliver.

It is important to recognise that requiring child impact statements for legislation is a matter not only for the children's commissioner but for the Scottish Executive. Does Fiona McLeod agree that the Executive should have that responsibility?

I start with a quotation: "Children really don't get listened to at all". That was a comment from a child who attended a youth event that the Parliament organised in December last year to consider whether a commissioner for children and young people was needed. It is to ensure that we listen to and hear young people that I particularly welcome the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report. Some would say that I am slightly biased, as I am a member of the committee. That is true, but we have arrived here after months of consideration and of listening to children and children's organisations throughout Scotland. I welcome that contribution. I look forward to the publication and enactment of the committee bill. As members know, the creation of a commissioner for children and young people will make a key contribution to closing the opportunity gap for Scotland's children. We all know that we need good-quality, well co-ordinated children's services to break the cycle of poverty that all too often starts from the earliest years, to close the opportunity gap effectively and to deliver social justice. Not only will the commissioner have a role to play in ensuring the accountability of those services, but they will be the champion of children's rights and will promote and protect their interests.

All members would react with interest to such a comment, because, by any measure and any standard of evidence, the comprehensive system is not failing Scotland's children. Other members have outlined the commissioner's key work, which will be promoting awareness and understanding among not only children but adults of children's rights, underpinned by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child; promoting best practice; keeping under review the law, policy and practice to ensure that children's interests are properly considered; and investigations. I will focus my speech on investigations. The committee reached the consensus view that the commissioner should have the power to conduct generic investigations, but not investigations into individual cases. I will develop that point in a minute. First, I will outline the scope of the commissioner's powers. The commissioner should have the power to conduct investigations into any body or organisation that provides a service to children; that covers the public sector, the private sector and the voluntary sector. The commissioner should also have the power to require the production of documents and the attendance of witnesses during the course of an investigation. The committee agreed that failure to co-operate should be treated as a criminal offence. There was also consensus about the requirement for the commissioner to publish and lay before the Parliament reports of all investigations that are undertaken, so that they are open to public scrutiny and comment.

It would be allowed in the case of an organisation that runs a children's home. Let us take the example of a child who is being failed in some way by a particular service. The commissioner would not take up the case of the individual child, but would have the power to investigate the circumstances of the complaint. It might be helpful for the member if I give some examples—I will do so in a second. The committee believes strongly that the  distinction that we have made strikes the right balance. We wanted to ensure that the commissioner could fulfil their overarching policy role and champion the rights and interests of all children rather than take on work that is already done by other organisations. One example of that would be the case of a care provider not meeting adequate care standards, which would be a matter for the Care Commission. The committee does not believe that there is any point in duplicating a process that exists already. The commissioner should not be the court of last resort. We want the commissioner to work with the Care Commission so that children's interests are taken on board. On the other hand, if a general issue arose about the availability of legal aid, the commissioner could consider an investigation into the way in which children's rights, interests and views are taken into account in the provision of that service. It is important to note that that would not prevent the commissioner from taking on board the outcomes of investigations into individual cases so as to inform consideration of a much more generic investigation. The committee's view of the commissioner's role is that it should be proactive rather than reactive. The commissioner should be able to make a much wider impact for all children, rather than for one child. We also want to avoid duplication. The aspect of the commissioner's work that will create the maximum impact is the mainstreaming of consideration of children's interests throughout all organisations and bodies that have an impact on their lives. When the myriad issues that affect children in Scotland are taken into consideration, it is right that the role of the commissioner is wide ranging. The children who are most marginalised and disadvantaged in our society, often from the earliest years of their lives, have the weakest voices. In speaking for all children, the commissioner must ensure that all their voices are heard. Concern for children is not simply the responsibility of the commissioner. It is a responsibility for us all. Only when people from all different perspectives—whether as parents, teachers, social workers, nursery nurses or one of the many others who impact on children's lives—consider the interests of children will we achieve a step change. I want to talk briefly about society; I cannot resist Brian Monteith's invitation to respond. Brian Monteith attempts to rewrite his party's history. By all means, he can say, "There is such a thing as society." However, his actions expose those comments as nothing more than meaningless rhetoric. I have long believed that a society is judged by how it treats its children, older people  and those who are most vulnerable. A commissioner for children and young people would help to make our society a much better place for children in the future. As Karen Gillon rightly said, that would make a fitting legacy from the Parliament to the children of Scotland.

That was a killer point.

Like many members in the chamber, I have considerable sympathy with the aims of the bill. Tackling poverty, reducing the stigma that is associated with free school meals and improving nutritional standards are all principles that I support. The fundamental problem that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee had with the bill is not whether we agree about where we want to get to—we agree about that—but whether the bill is the best way of getting there. I will give practical and philosophical reasons for that view. I paraphrase Aneurin Bevan, who once said that socialism is the language of priorities. Tackling poverty, and child poverty in particular, is a priority for the Parliament, the Executive and the First Minister. We know that a clear, causal link exists between poverty and ill health and that it can affect children's life chances and opportunities. The question, therefore, is whether we should target resources at those who are in most need, or whether we should spread the jam thinly. The estimated cost of £174 million simply covers the cost of extending the existing school meals service to all children. It does not cover improvements to nutritional standards, so it would not make a significant difference to the health of our poorest children. The bill would simply extend a patchy, and sometimes bad, service to all children. Not one penny of that £174 million would go to those who are in receipt of free school meals and not one child in those circumstances would directly benefit. Is that really what we want? I believe that if we target the poorest, most disadvantaged children, we will achieve the best results in improving health and tackling poverty. The committee heard, and received, substantial evidence on the bill. Although we did not agree that the bill should proceed to stage 2, we do not find the status quo acceptable. The committee highlighted several recommendations: nutritional standards should be improved for all our children; free milk should be reintroduced, particularly for our youngest children; the stigma of free school meals should be tackled; and drinking water should be made readily available. Those recommendations will, if taken together, make a difference to the nutrition of our young people. The committee felt that the bill fails to address a number of practical problems. As I am running out  of time, I will mention only one—the behaviour of children. The children to whom we spoke, and to whom others who support the bill spoke, tell us that they do not take school meals for a variety of reasons, such as long queues, the environment in which meals are taken, the attractiveness of the meals and the choice of foods. I recall a conversation that I had with a schoolchild in Edinburgh. She said that she liked the idea of free school meals and that the Parliament should support free school meals, but when I asked her whether she would take free school meals her response was, "No way. I hate staying in school at lunch time." We may share the intentions behind the bill, but we do not agree about the way in which they should be achieved. If we want to tackle poverty—which is what the bill seeks to do—we must target our resources more effectively at those who are in most need.

I welcome the minister's statement on the acquisition of HCI for the NHS. I understand from his statement that the existing capacity is 52 beds, but that overall capacity is substantially higher. Is it his intention to increase the capacity slowly and if so, over what time scale? Will he clarify how he will ensure that there will be minimal or no impact on local acute services provision, particularly with the movement of staff? The minister will be aware of my long-standing support for the Vale of Leven hospital, which is the neighbouring hospital to HCI. We need to be sure that the benefit of HCI is not counterbalanced by any negative effect on the  Vale of Leven hospital.

I welcome the GMB retired members branch to the gallery. They may be retired, but they are still active. It pains me to say this, but if Brian Monteith had stayed long enough to listen to all the evidence at the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, we would not be wasting Parliament's time debating a motion that enjoys no support among parents or education professionals in Scotland. The overwhelming majority of parents want local authorities to be responsible for our schools, yet once again we see the Tories displaying their classic tunnel vision and entirely missing the point about what matters to pupils, to parents and to teachers. Contrast that with Labour's approach—increasing investment in our schools year on year to realise the potential of every child in Scotland. Let us continue Rhona Brankin's little history lesson with a few more reminders of what education was like under the Tories. Under the Tories, too many of our children left school unable to read or write. With Labour, we have brought about real progress in our primary schools. Standards are up and are rising in reading, writing and maths. We have achieved that by cutting class sizes and focusing relentlessly on what matters.

No, I have heard enough from Brian Monteith today. I know that he does not like what I am saying, but he should listen. Under the Tories, we had school buildings that were much more suited to the 19 th century and that were crumbling through lack of investment. With Labour, we are building and renovating 100 schools by 2003. We are delivering results for parents, pupils and teachers. I visited one of the new schools in Glasgow. Not only is the learning environment better, but teachers say that the pupils are better motivated and there are early signs of better attainment. Under the Tories, we had fewer teachers to more pupils and the trend was getting steadily worse. Now, with Labour, the position is reversed. We have more teachers in our classrooms, smaller classes and more individual attention for our children. That is just a flavour of what education was like under the Tories. What lies behind Brian Monteith's motion? It is intriguing. Where is his big idea? I looked for it. it is to be regretted that the motion says nothing new. It outlines the discredited policy that the Conservatives trumpeted in their 2001 general election manifesto, which was resoundingly rejected by the electorate, in case the Conservatives have forgotten. For "devolved  management" we should read "free schools". That is their big idea—the direct funding of schools and the abolition of education authorities. The implementation of that Tory policy would mean, as Rhona Brankin said, an end to effective services for pupils with special educational needs and an end to co-ordinated school transport services.

I do not want to hear from Murdo Fraser, either. We would see an end to the careers of 700 teachers who are employed to reduce class sizes. What would be the result of the Tory policy? A patchwork quilt of services that failed to deliver high national standards. What else would we get from the Conservatives? More inequality and inconsistency in the delivery of education services throughout Scotland. The debate is more about Tory dogma than about diversity. The proposal is not the education model that anyone I know in Scotland wants for their children. Of course we want flexibility in our schools—the flexibility to ensure that pupils are taught what is relevant to them. Creativity and innovation in the curriculum can help to make school relevant to everyone. I am afraid that if I were Brian Monteith's teacher, I would not only despair, but suspect that his report card would say: "Learned nothing; achieved little. Needs to apply himself better. Perhaps Brian needs to repeat a year, but not at this school."

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken in order to encourage a wider range of candidates to come forward for public appointments. (S1O-5291)

I welcome the appointment of the commissioner and share the minister's view that that will make a significant difference. The Executive is making progress in appointing more women and more ethnic minority and disabled people to truly reflect Scottish society, but progress is slower than expected. What further positive measures can be taken? For example, there is targeting that recognises in particular the contribution that people can bring from life experience.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking on the Race Relations (Amendment) Act 2000 as it affects education in schools. (S1O-5180)

The minister will be aware of the view that, in order successfully to promote race equality in schools, a consistent approach to the monitoring of racial incidents across Scotland needs to be taken. At present, some authorities record racial incidents under other categories, such as bullying, so the true extent of the problem remains hidden. Will the minister commit to ensuring consistent monitoring across Scotland in order that we might properly address race equality  in all our schools?

Like all other members, I welcome the Scottish Qualifications Authority Bill, not least because it will enhance the qualifications system for schools, colleges, employers and, most important, our young people. Summer 2000 may seem a long time ago to some of us, but it is still very fresh in the minds of the young people, parents and teachers who experienced the very real difficulties that were caused by the failures in the SQA. The causes of those failures are well documented. They include overly complicated systems of governance, an unwieldy board structure and a significant communications failure that permeated the organisation. Recognising those problems, the Executive and the then Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs, Jack McConnell, moved very quickly to restore public confidence in the SQA. The entire chamber welcomes the improvement in the 2001 examination diet that was brought about through their efforts. The bill—which, as Mike Russell said, was announced by Jack McConnell and developed by Cathy Jamieson and Nicol Stephen—represents the next stage in that process. It builds on the lessons that have been learned, deals with the issues of governance and communication that lay at the heart of the problems that were experienced and provides much-needed stability so that the SQA can move on. First, it reforms the SQA board, making it much smaller and much more focused on the management and governance needs of the organisation. Secondly, it sets up an advisory council, involving the stakeholders, to provide advice on qualifications and education matters. Both measures deal with the institutional clutter that existed previously. The regulations and the memorandum of understanding that set out clearly the mechanisms for ensuring that the board operates effectively, meets regularly and often, and communicates properly not just with ministers,  but with all stakeholders, will undoubtedly make a positive difference to communication at all levels. In that context, the Executive's move to include in the bill provision for employee participation on the board is very welcome. We know that fewer senior staff at the SQA reported problems prior to the 2000 examination diet, but the message did not get through. We also know that the staff are critical to the success of future examination diets. Our thanks to them and to all those who were involved in making the 2001 diet a success should be recorded. I echo the minister's comments about the very positive working relationship between the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and the Executive during the passage of this bill. We had the same aim and we worked together to achieve it. The aim, ultimately, is to ensure that the SQA delivers effectively for the young people of Scotland. I hope that the chamber will support the bill.

I welcome the Executive amendments. As we heard, they are consequential to—and indeed improve upon—the amendment that the committee accepted at stage 2. The Executive can be helpful in improving amendments that the committee lodges. The effect of the amendments will be to provide for employee participation at board level. Virtually all committee members wanted that. I am aware that a range of consultation and communication mechanisms are now in place in the SQA and the positive attempt to involve staff at all levels is welcome. Having an employee on the board does not replace those mechanisms, but serves to enhance the process and ensures that there is effective communication and that we avoid the evident failures of the past. The success of the 2001 examination diet was in no small way assisted by the efforts of the staff of the SQA and it is therefore appropriate that they are represented on the board. I hope that the chamber will support the Executive's amendments.

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing this debate. Many members have spoken about practical steps that should be taken to challenge agism, whether it be through improved access to health, fair employment practice or the contribution of the voluntary sector. I must confess that I am not sure that I agree with Donald Gorrie's view that the voluntary sector is a haven for burnt-out executives. As Sarah Boyack pointed out, the Executive and the Parliament are responsible for promoting equal opportunities and tackling discrimination in whatever form it occurs. With an increasing proportion of our population becoming older, it is essential that we tackle agism. As the chamber has recognised, agism takes many forms. It is apparent in the perception that older people are a burden, in the evidence of enforced early retirement—indeed, many fewer people aged 50 or over are in work today—and in differential access to services. None of that is acceptable, and all of it must be challenged. The Executive's equality strategy provides us with a useful framework on which we can build, because if we are to make significant and sustained progress on older people's experience, we must mainstream consideration of their concerns into our legislative, policy-making and resource allocation processes. We must also ensure that that approach extends into local government services and the national health service and across the public sector. I want to spend some time considering society's perception of older people, in particular the view that somehow they are on the scrap heap or are a burden to their families and have nothing to give. Quite frankly, I find that astonishing. I spent a period of my youth—which some would say is long gone—in a place called Hong Kong. I grew up in a society that valued older people; indeed, it positively revered them. That reverence recognised a lifetime of experience and wisdom and recognised that older people's knowledge would help us to learn for the future. Society's  attitude and perceptions cannot be changed overnight. We need visible and positive examples of older people and we need to harness the power of the media, but we also need to change how we do things on an everyday basis. I want to mention better government for older people pilots, which were carried out throughout Scotland. The aim of the pilots was to improve public services for older people by meeting their needs better and listening to and encouraging their contributions. Each pilot concentrated on a different issue, such as transport, volunteering and benefits, but the direct involvement and participation of older people was consistent through them all. They worked in partnership with agencies on the ground. Perceptions of the agencies and communities that were involved and even the older people who were involved were changed. There are now new ways of working and specific improvements to services. More important, there is long-term cultural change. That lesson is important for all of us. By engaging with older people and listening to, learning from and acting on their information, there are better results for older people and society. There is a wealth of knowledge and experience that we should value. I recognise the work of the many elderly forums and older people's organisations throughout Scotland and in my constituency. From the Vale of Leven elderly forum to the Good Companions group in Dumbarton, their energy, knowledge and commitment constantly challenge policy makers to do better for older people. More power to their elbow.

I join other members in congratulating Susan Deacon on securing the debate, which provides us with an opportunity to recognise the achievements of  CHAS over the years. Very few of us can imagine the emotional pain that is experienced by parents whose children suffer from a terminal illness. It is probably even harder to imagine the mix of feelings that such young people must cope with, and the impact on brothers, sisters, grandparents and the extended family. We know that time with the family is precious and families invariably want the time that remains with their children to be filled with laughter and joy. Caring for a seriously ill child puts immense emotional and physical strain on the whole family and absorbs what little energy and time it has to enjoy life to the full. Ten years ago, a family would have struggled without support. Thankfully that is no longer the case, which is why the work of the Children's Hospice Association Scotland is so important. I am delighted that we have an opportunity not only to reflect on the achievements of the past, but to look forward to the future. CHAS has changed the landscape of Scottish care. The organisation was founded 10 years ago, when there were no hospices for children in Scotland. As we have heard, CHAS opened its first hospice at Rachel House in Kinross in 1996, after four years of hard work. For the first time, Rachel House provided a place where children and their families can relax and feel secure in the company of staff and volunteers who work tirelessly to support them. I add my tribute to their commitment and dedication. As Susan Deacon said, children are able to make friends, to play games and to enjoy life, and parents can take a well-earned break. However, that does not begin to capture the atmosphere of Rachel House. It is a place that is filled with love, laughter and sometimes sorrow; more often than not, it is about celebrating life. Anyone who has been to Rachel House—I am privileged to have done so—will say that it is inspirational and a truly special place. Ever since the doors of Rachel House were opened, the service has gone from strength to strength. More than 200 families use Rachel House and CHAS has decided that it is time to build a second hospice to cope with demand. I am particularly pleased that the new hospice will be in Balloch—gateway to the new national park—and will be sited on the banks of Loch Lomond. I am immensely proud to welcome an organisation of such excellence, which will provide a much-needed service to the area that I represent. I pay tribute to the efforts that those in the local community have made to help raise funds for the hospice. That demonstrates their real sense of pride in the fact that the hospice is coming to the local area. I also pay tribute to our local  newspapers, which have led a remarkable fundraising campaign. The district has probably never seen quite so many cake sales and social events. Even a sponsored abseil has been organised, although I confess that I have not volunteered. Local people—from primary school children to policemen and from brownies to quilting clubs—are keen to extend a warm welcome to CHAS. Many of those people are in the visitors gallery. Perhaps without knowing it, CHAS has given us a gift among all the fundraising by bringing the community closer together. I congratulate CHAS on 10 years of hard work and wish the organisation every success for the future.

Just as the chamber unanimously welcomed the principles of the bill, I now welcome the detail of the bill at stage 3. I would like to say a word or two on process before I move to substance. Dialogue with the minister at stage 2 resulted in the introduction of a number of helpful amendments, all of which the chamber has accepted. I therefore echo the minister's comments about our beneficial and collaborative way of working. It has been instructive and I look forward to it happening again in future. I also echo the thanks that have been given to the clerks, the voluntary organisations and, indeed, the Executive. Many people put a lot of effort into getting us where we are today. I want to move on to the substance, which is much more important. What the bill will achieve will be nothing short of a challenge to the way in which education is delivered for the 15,000 or so children and young people who have a disability. My colleagues in the Labour party and I have long held the belief that education is the key to unlocking opportunity in later life. It is not the privilege of the few but a fundamental and basic right for all our children and young people. Access  to schools and to the school curriculum is critical if disabled children and young people are to be enabled to fulfil their potential. The bill brings those key principles together, building on the recommendations of the disability rights task force and the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. As Irene McGugan said, by September 2002, every education provider in Scotland will have to produce an accessibility strategy—addressing not only access to buildings but access to the school curriculum, information and communication. Access to mainstream education can now become a reality. Thinking ahead about children's needs and planning for them will become the norm. That is a positive change in the culture. As I said in a previous speech, if we are to achieve the step change in the experience of disabled children in their school years that we all desire, it is essential that we have a robust monitoring and evaluation mechanism. Accessibility strategies will only ever be as good as their implementation. The Executive's proposals on monitoring reassure me that the documents will become living and breathing strategies, rather than be destined to gather dust on a shelf. Given that Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education is involved in monitoring implementation as part of its regular inspection of schools we will know whether it is working on the ground. The bill is welcomed by statutory organisations, voluntary organisations, members and, most important, by all parents and children. It is an important step in achieving equality in education for all our children and provides a real opportunity to ensure that we unlock the potential in every child, irrespective of their ability. I urge members to support the bill.

You never know, I might constitute a flurry if the Presiding Officer lets me go on for long enough. The minister is absolutely right. There was confusion about the use of the word "records" in the title of the bill, not just in the wider world but, at least initially, among practitioners in the field. Many people assumed that we were talking about  the record of needs. Although I am sure that officials and legal advisers are technically right, the title was confusing for many of us simpler souls. I am happy to report that we are no longer confused.

I welcome very much amendments 2 and 3. They accurately reflect the discussions held during stage 2 by the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. Our concern at the time was to ensure that communication is a two-way process—in other words, that it is about not just doing to, but doing with. The Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000 and the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 recognise that education authorities must have due regard to the views of children or young people on issues that significantly affect them. Amendments 2 and 3 bring the bill very much into line with the spirit and ethos of the foregoing legislation. Therefore, the Parliament should support them. I take this opportunity to welcome the additional  guidance that will be given to ensure that the interpretation of "communication" covers not only written communication, but alternative formats such as Braille and audio tape. I welcome the progress that the two amendments reflect, for which I thank the minister.  Amendment 2 agreed to.

As I said at stage 2, I consider monitoring to be one of the most important issues before us. I welcome the very positive attitude that the Executive has taken by lodging amendment 4. I am in no doubt that the effectiveness of any policy or piece of legislation is dependent on the effectiveness of the monitoring framework that is in place. It is important that we have—for want of a better phrase—a way of knowing that strategies are working on the ground. I am pleased that the Executive will monitor the strategies and the progress that is made. I am also pleased that the minister has confirmed that HMIE will examine accessibility strategies as part of its routine inspection of schools. On that basis, strategies will become a reality on the ground and, over time, their application will become much more sophisticated. It is about providing not just physical access to premises, but access to the curriculum and to information and staff training. I am pleased that the Executive has lodged amendment 4 and I urge the chamber to support it.  Amendment 4 agreed to.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Executive is taking to mitigate loss of employment at Faslane and Coulport. (S1F-1799)

The First Minister will be aware of the real sense of anger in the work force about the substance of the Ministry of Defence's decision and the process that was followed. Over the years, that work force has given loyal and excellent service and has displayed a willingness to adapt to new working practices. I acknowledge that the issue matters to the whole UK, but the impact of the decision has a direct bearing on devolved matters. I understand that the MOD is aware that of a potential 750 job losses throughout the UK, about 500 will be at Faslane and Coulport. That will have a devastating effect on the individuals who are affected, their families and the local economy. The impact will be felt in many areas that are beyond my constituency. I ask the First Minister to ensure that the Executive, working with the MOD, provides additional resources beyond the PACE programme for retraining, reskilling and job creation. Those resources are needed now to prevent people from becoming unemployed through redundancy.

Unlike Mike Russell, I welcome the minister's comments about the unique partnership between the Executive and the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. We have a real opportunity to develop a shared understanding of the way forward. The committee is keen that we consider how we deal with alienation of some children in our schools. As the minister knows, there is a clear correlation between poverty, disadvantage and low educational attainment. Is the Executive minded to focus not only on equality of input but, increasingly, on achieving equality of outcome?

I will start by abusing the goodwill of the Presiding Officer by suggesting that we should send our best wishes to Karen Gillon, the convener of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, who will, in the next week, deliver a new member of the Gillon family.

I think that that is a safe prophecy. I welcome the Scottish Qualifications Authority Bill, which will enhance the qualifications system for schools, colleges, employers and, most importantly, for our young people and older students. Its purpose is also to provide some much-needed stability, which is welcome. We have all recognised the difficulties that were experienced during the examination diet of 2000, particularly the chaotic consequences for students and their subsequent further and higher education applications. We need to restore public confidence in the SQA, whose critical function for Scottish education has been significantly undermined. What were the causes of the failure? Elaborate and over-complicated systems of governance that inhibited its ability to react to crisis; excessive board size, which did not help to provide a coherent or collective response; and a communications failure caused, in part, by the fact that meetings were infrequent and irregular. While stakeholder interests deserve to be represented, they were perhaps misplaced on the board of the SQA, where specific skills and experience are required for competent management. There was a very welcome improvement in the 2001 diet, which demonstrates the future scope for success in the SQA. There is much to be welcomed in the bill, not  least because it builds on the lessons that have been learned. The provision for coherent SQA governance structures and the power for ministers to regulate its proceedings have received general support. Directives for board appointments are also very valuable, as they can promote the representation of financial, legal, classroom and IT experience and human resource skills as useful factors in SQA governance. As the minister has already heard, the committee also felt strongly—and I suspect continues to feel strongly—that there should be an employee representative on the board, which would ensure that employees' views are considered directly and without any filtering. Without the staff's time and commitment, the 2001 diet would not have been a success. They can make a valuable contribution that should not be lost. It is also worth noting that many of the less senior staff at the SQA were reporting problems prior to the 2000 diet; however, that message did not get through. I am sure that the minister will want to reflect further on the matter before we reach stage 2. I want to turn quickly to the advisory council. The system of checks and balances will promote accountability and transparency and I welcome the fact that the council's meetings will be open to public scrutiny. The council's function in bringing together all the stakeholders will directly uphold and maintain standards within the SQA. The committee had no difficulty in supporting the bill's general principles. However, a few issues were raised at stage 1 that I am sure the ministers will reflect on before stage 2 commences. I have already mentioned employee representation. I should also mention the apparent confusion about who does what, and that some clarification of the advisory council's role in relation to the SQA board or the Executive would be helpful. A further question is whether the SQA should simply have regard to the advisory council's advice. The committee clearly felt that there should be a duty to respond, although it recognised that the ultimate responsibility for governance must and should remain with the SQA board. Although I acknowledge some of the assurances that the minister has given, it was communication—or the lack of it—that underpinned the problems in the past. We cannot afford to take any chances with communication in the future. I welcome the bill's principles, but look forward to our stage 2 discussions.

To ask the Scottish Executive what further action it plans to take to tackle domestic abuse. (S1O-4876)

The minister will be aware—

Do you have difficulty hearing me, Presiding Officer?

I will start again. The minister will be aware of the respect project, which was developed by the Zero Tolerance Trust, and which the Scottish Executive is piloting in four primary and secondary schools in Scotland. The project's materials are designed to promote mutual respect and to help to prevent domestic abuse from occurring in future generations. Has the pilot scheme been evaluated, and when will it be extended to all schools in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

It is up to the member.

As members know, the causes of homelessness are myriad. We also know that homelessness is not simply a case of bricks and mortar, but can often be a result of family or relationship breakdown, domestic abuse or drug or alcohol problems. That list is clearly not exhaustive, which serves only to underline the complexity of the task ahead. The housing dimension of homelessness is important—I will return to it later—but it can only ever be part of the answer. Unless we address the underlying causes of homelessness, we will not begin to achieve lasting solutions. The report addresses the need to improve homelessness services and to make people's experience of those services much less traumatic, but it also addresses prevention. We know the cost of homelessness, not just the cost to society in helping the homeless to pick up the pieces, but the real human cost to those affected. The real prize for the Parliament is to prevent homelessness in the first place. The report must be set in the context of tackling poverty and inequality. As inequality in our society increased under the Tories, so did homelessness. Part of the solution must therefore lie in addressing fundamental inequalities, bridging the gap for our least well-off and achieving social  justice for all. As the minister said, the report builds on the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001. If members cast their minds back, they will remember the significant role that the homelessness task force had in shaping the initial provisions on homelessness and delivering the best-ever package of rights for homeless people in Scotland. I welcome the further recommendations for legislative change, although legislative change alone is not enough. I welcome the abolition of priority need, which will be phased out over the next 10 years, and the abolition of intentionality and local connection. However, all those provisions are about managing the system; they are not about addressing the needs of homeless people. To realise that ambition, we need to tackle housing supply and quality. If we look at our most marginalised communities around Scotland, we see houses that lie empty, that are run down and that are not fit for purpose. It is interesting to note that, broadly speaking, some of the areas that have the highest levels of homelessness also have the highest levels of void property. We need to understand why that is so. Further consideration of housing supply and quality must be a key part of future housing policy. I welcome Iain Gray's announcement of £11 million, which is a good start towards implementing the task force's ambitious and radical recommendations. We need continued political will to ensure that all the recommendations are achieved and that nothing drops off the agenda. We know that the problems that we face will not be resolved overnight, but I know that in Iain Gray we have a minister who will provide the necessary leadership to ensure that we do not lose focus. I add my personal thanks to the members of the task force for their time, energy and commitment. I was privileged to be part of a unique process in which homeless people themselves contributed to shaping the solutions. There is nothing like direct experience of the problems to help understand what the solutions should be. Homeless people were not only listened to, but heard. At the office of The Big Issue in Scotland , one young man said to me, "I don't want much. I want to work and I want a home." Do not let that young man down.

Like other speakers, I recognise the importance of the Scotch whisky industry, not only to Scotland but to the UK. Let me be slightly parochial: the industry is also critically important to people in the Dumbarton constituency. As we have heard, whisky is the second largest export industry in Scotland and the fifth largest in the UK. The industry employs directly more than 11,000 people in Scotland, and a staggering 30,000 people are employed in related sectors. The minister gave the examples of farmers who supply the quality cereals for use in distillation, bottle and label manufacturers, and people who are involved in providing transport services. A report that was produced by the Fraser of Allander Institute in 1999 for Allied Domecq identified how the Scotch whisky industry  compares with other industrial sectors. If I can find my papers, I will share those figures with members. [Interruption.] Here they are. The Scotch whisky industry is "Twice as important as computer-related manufacturing A third bigger than the oil and gas industries 12% greater than banking, insurance and finance 30% greater than mechanical engineering A third larger than the chemical industry." We can be in no doubt about the Scotch whisky industry's importance to the Scottish economy. Allied Distillers is one of the largest employers in the Dumbarton constituency. It provides economic opportunities for local people in an area that faces significant levels of unemployment and disadvantage, and has a work force of 726 permanent employees in Dumbarton. The company's sales are growing steadily, its export markets are increasing and it is acquiring new brands to sit alongside household names such as Ballantine's, Teacher's and Laphroaig. It is clear to me that Allied Distillers is a cornerstone of the local economy. I confess that I am slightly curious that the Conservatives, who have representatives in Westminster—albeit a small number, including, I believe, one member who represents a Scottish constituency—are holding a debate on a reserved matter. The subject of strip stamps is but one option on which HM Customs and Excise is consulting. We should not lose sight of the purpose of that exercise, which is to tackle the large-scale spirits fraud that results in an estimated annual revenue loss of about £450 million. The whisky industry is at one with the Westminster Government in pursuing that fraud—the industry's concerns arise from the cost of compliance and the effectiveness of the proposed use of strip stamps. The use of strip stamps would pose real cash-flow problems. Up to about £5.48 a bottle would have to be paid up front prior to sale, which amounts to a considerable sum when it is multiplied by the millions of cases that are produced in Scotland each year. I disagree slightly with Fergus Ewing's emphasis, because we have a responsibility to tackle fraud. The more serious issue is not the cost of strip stamps but the fact that they do not work—I refer to Annabel Goldie's comments on the international experience. I understand and fully support the industry's legitimate concerns. Therefore, I was heartened by Paul Boateng's comments when he said: "The Government is approaching this issue with an entirely open mind and we are keen to build up as clear a picture as possible, before taking any decisions." I remind Fergus Ewing that the consultation is  on the recommendations of the independent Roques report and not on a Government proposal.

I find myself in agreement with Mrs Ewing. I welcome the fact that the whisky industry is in direct discussions with HM Customs and Excise on those alternative means of achieving the same aim of reducing fraud. I hope that an acceptable way forward will be found. It is worth reflecting on the commitment to the whisky industry that has been shown by the Labour Government at Westminster and the Labour-led Scottish Executive. At the UK level, and due to the sound economic stewardship of Gordon Brown, there has been no increase in duty on spirits in the past four budgets, and the industry has welcomed that real-terms cut of 6.2 per cent. Duty rates are 35 per cent lower in real terms than they were 21 years ago. At the European level, the UK Government is arguing that the minimum rate for spirits is too high in comparison with the minimum rate for other drinks. We want a narrowing of the duty discrimination in the EU minimum rate structure.

I will continue with my speech, as I am conscious of the time. Douglas Alexander recently made the welcome announcement that, as a result of detailed negotiations, the Indian Government will cut its import tariff by almost 300 per cent. That announcement may not have been of immediate significance to many members, but the whisky industry regards India as the market that has the greatest potential in the world. As we have heard, the Executive, in collaboration with the Scotch Whisky Association, has published a framework document, "A Toast to the Future: working together for Scotch whisky". That represents clear recognition of the importance of the whisky industry to our economy and of the contribution that the industry makes to employment and to our local communities. I welcome the minister's commitment to pass on the terms of the debate to HM Customs and Excise. I urge the Scottish Executive to reject the strip stamps proposal. I pay tribute to the workers in the industry, who are sometimes forgotten. I have met many of them at the Allied Distillers plant in Dumbarton and am  constantly impressed by their commitment, enthusiasm and motivation. They are at the core of the success that is the Scotch whisky industry. I am conscious of the Executive's policy on alcohol. Nonetheless, I urge members who perhaps enjoy a drop of the amber nectar to keep enjoying it.

My colleagues in the Labour party and I have long held the belief that education is the key to unlocking opportunity in later life. It is not the privilege of the few but a fundamental and basic right for all our children and young people. Access to schools and to the school curriculum is critical if disabled children and young people are to be helped to reach their full potential. The bill brings all those key principles together. It builds on the recommendations of the disability rights task force and at long last rectifies the glaring omission in the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, which specifically exempted education from its provisions. The central element of the bill is the duty it places on all education authorities, grant-aided schools and independent schools to produce and implement an accessibility strategy. Such strategies are to do with improving access for all disabled pupils not only to the school building but, of equal importance, to the school curriculum. We need to remember that, for many children with a learning disability or a sensory impairment, accessibility does not stop at the provision of physical access. Indeed, during the consultation at stage 1, concerns were expressed by the committee that using terms such as "in writing"  might be too narrowly interpreted and would exclude alternative formats such as Braille. I am therefore particularly pleased and reassured by the minister's response that an amendment will be lodged by the Executive at stage 2 to ensure that the bill will be truly inclusive and that the possibility of any misinterpretation will be avoided. If we are to achieve the step change that we want in the experience of disabled children in their school years, it is essential that we have in place a robust mechanism of monitoring and evaluation. Accessibility strategies will only ever be as good as their implementation. We need to ensure that they are living, breathing documents rather than ones that simply gather dust on a shelf. One way to do that is to make an explicit linkage with schools' objectives for improvement and development plans and children's services plans. With HMIE routinely evaluating the quality of strategies and monitoring their implementation, I believe that we will see a difference. I ask ministers to consider that again before stage 2. Another issue that I ask ministers to reflect on before stage 2 is the view that we need some form of appeals mechanism when an accessibility strategy fails to meet somebody's expectations or fails to address reasonable needs. I hasten to say that I am not attracted to a cumbersome and overly bureaucratic system, but I ask ministers to consider independent mediation, which has been used successfully in other areas and provides a swift and effective response in the interests of the child. In conclusion, the principles of the bill have been warmly welcomed by the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and by a variety of statutory and voluntary organisations that have experience and interest in the sector. Much more important, the bill will be welcomed by parents and children as a critical step in ensuring equality in education. It provides the opportunity to help to unlock the potential in every child, irrespective of ability.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to address any under-representation of women in business following the report by the Industrial Society, "Unequal Entrepreneurs: Why Female Enterprise is an Uphill Business" . (S1O-4696)

Does the minister agree with the report's findings that women generally start up business with less access to financial networks, less capital to invest and poorer prospects for business growth? Although there are a number of welcome initiatives, implementation across Scotland is patchy. Will she consider establishing a national centre for women in business to oversee a coherent strategy and to drive forward an effective approach to women's enterprise development in Scotland?

I am extremely disappointed by some of the speeches that have been made. At stage 1, Fiona McLeod made none of the points that she just made. However, I am glad that she listens and learns. As Robin Harper and Richard Lochhead are both so keen to agree with and quote my opinion, perhaps they will support what I am about to say. I have no doubt that section 37 was the most contentious section at stage 2—particularly for voluntary organisations and charities that currently enjoy relief from water charges. Timing is everything. In April, many voluntary organisations will, for the first time, lose up to 40 per cent relief. It is therefore essential that we move quickly. That will place a significant burden on many voluntary organisations that have few reserves, little flexibility and limited funding streams. That is why I lodged an amendment at stage 2, which was supported by Maureen Macmillan and several other Labour MSPs. The Executive—helpfully—agreed to reflect further on the amendment's proposal in order to ensure that there is targeted relief for voluntary organisations. I welcome and endorse the Executive's proposal, which is based not on the size of an organisation—I point out to Fiona McLeod that the Water Industry (Scotland) Bill is not the place to define charities—but on premises. The proposal is based not on a turnover of £5,000, which was the starting point, but on premises' income of up to £50,000. I particularly welcome the hardship fund of £1 million for organisations that might initially encounter difficulty if they do not meet the eligibility criteria. I also note that the minister will consult the voluntary sector on the detail of the scheme. That is also welcome because we will produce better policies and outcomes if we involve the voluntary sector early.  I ask for the minister's response to four very quick points. First, I seek confirmation that the income threshold for premises relates to income generated by those premises and so excludes staff costs for running the services. Secondly, does the relief cover consumption and standing charges? Thirdly, will free water metering continue to be available, together with advice and practical support on water conservation? Last, will the  minister reflect further on the date of eligibility for the small number of voluntary organisations that have moved premises and lost relief as a consequence? I conclude by emphasising my support and, I hope, the chamber's support for the Executive's proposals. I know that those proposals will be welcomed by community organisations in my area. They are a positive example of a committee and the Executive working together and I thank the minister for listening.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member is feart.

Will the member give way?

I am slightly concerned that Ian Jenkins is perhaps not a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Bill Aitken is evidently confused, but he will recall that East Dunbartonshire Council, which is unfortunately  Liberal and Tory-controlled, is unable to spend its money. Is that down to the incompetence of the politicians or is it a signal of happy days?

Having just got used to speaking for a lot less time than usual, I will try, primarily in the interests of my colleagues' well-being, not to be tempted by the Presiding Officer's suggestion of going on for an infinite period. I very much welcome the bill as part of our on-going commitment to modernising government. The creation of a Scottish public sector ombudsman, who will bring together the existing ombudsmen for health, housing, local government and the Parliament, will establish a simple one-door approach for the public. It is good that there will be less bureaucratic clutter, but the real potential is for an open, accountable and accessible system that will deal with people's complaints about maladministration in the public sector. I particularly welcome the steps to make the process more accessible to those who are disadvantaged, as a result of disability or a lack of literacy, for example, so that the process is truly open to all. I will focus my comments on the housing aspects of the new service. I have a minor point on the terminology that is used, which has been mentioned. The bill's title refers to the "Public Sector Ombudsman". Housing associations are not public sector bodies; they are governed by the requirements placed on them by friendly societies. Therefore, the bill's title does not reflect the full range of organisations that could be subject to investigation. That lack of clarity might lead to confusion among tenants. I have no doubt that that issue can be resolved by publicising the nature of the service. However, the Executive is recognising the value and the potential of mutual and social economy organisations and we should reflect that diversity in the bill's title. The Local Government Committee suggested a minor change to make the bill's title more inclusive. I  welcome the minister's positive comments about considering that matter again before stage 2. My second point, which is perhaps more substantive, is on the ombudsman's investigative powers. Trish Godman and others have eloquently dealt with the issue, but I will repeat some of their points. The housing association ombudsman's remit currently extends beyond cases of maladministration to possible cases of injustice. The health service ombudsman has a similarly wide remit. However, the other ombudsmen focus solely on maladministration. I can foresee potential difficulties with that situation because of the increasing focus on multidisciplinary working. We could end up creating an unhelpful and unnecessary obstacle to the ombudsman's fully investigating an issue. If we descend into technical arguments about who has the power to do what and in what circumstances, that will not be in the complainer's interests and it will not help us to fulfil our intentions. A consistent set of powers across all the functions is therefore essential. I ask the minister to reflect further on that issue. We believe in first-class public services, so we should give the ombudsman the flexibility to deal with injustice and service failure beyond the narrow definitions of maladministration.

I accept that there are difficulties in taking wider views, but if our primary objective is to ensure that there are first-class public services, we should reflect on the fact that maladministration can be treated in definitive terms. The correct way forward is to enhance the remit so that it is similar to those already enjoyed by the housing association ombudsman and the health ombudsman. It is not beyond the capability of the minister and the civil servants to work their way round that issue. I welcome the provisions in section 20 of the bill, which will ensure that the service is publicised. The public need to be aware of their right to complain and of the process for doing so. We know that all too often people are left struggling and at a loss about where they can turn to for help. It can be daunting for an individual to perceive themselves as being up against an organised system. Ensuring that people have information about their rights is therefore absolutely critical. That need not necessarily be a matter for the bill, but I ask the Executive to look creatively at awareness raising to ensure that everyone in Scotland has access to that information. I also ask the Executive to consider  using voluntary agencies, which are in the business of providing advice to communities. I have gone over my allotted time. I believe that the bill's principles are worthy of members' support, because by opening up government and making it more accountable and transparent at every level we will ultimately benefit the people whom we seek to serve. We should all strive to deliver that.

It is fair to say that there are many activists in the Labour movement, including me, who have campaigned over the years for nuclear disarmament. Let me say at the outset that I will always protect the right  of people to demonstrate and to protest peacefully in support of world peace. World peace and a nuclear-free world are aspirations that we all share. We differ fundamentally on how we achieve those aims, but I know of no sane person, inside or outwith this chamber, who ever wants to see nuclear weapons used, not just here but anywhere in the world. Whether one is a unilateralist or a multilateralist, the ultimate aim is the same. The moral high ground that Tommy Sheridan seeks to claim is not his alone. It belongs to anyone and everyone who opposes nuclear weapons. It is worth reflecting on the fact that Labour has reduced the number of warheads by a third. That is action, not rhetoric, and demonstrates a clear commitment to reducing arms in Britain and across the world.

No. I would like to move on. I shall move from an international perspective to an extremely parochial one, because Faslane is in my constituency. The onus of thinking through the consequences of every action is put on all responsible politicians. Members might find interesting some facts in an EKOS report that was commissioned in 1998. More than 7,000 people are directly employed at the base, 4,000 of whom are civilians. Some 3,700 indirect jobs result from supplier linkages and income multipliers. Civilian jobs account for more than 70 per cent of the base's employment. The base is one of the largest single-site employers in Scotland and by far the largest source of jobs in the West Dunbartonshire local economy. Given that West Dunbartonshire is one of the most disadvantaged areas in Scotland and that Faslane is the source of a quarter of the employment in the area, what do we get from a party that masquerades as being on the side of the working man? It gives no real answers and no costed alternatives, only screaming headlines that call for the shutting down of Faslane in that parody of a newspaper that is published by Tommy Sheridan's party. What thought has been given to workers and their families? Unfortunately, Tommy Sheridan would consign them to unemployment and poverty. That is nothing short of irresponsible.

I say to Lloyd Quinan that what I have said also describes the SNP's behaviour. There is nothing on its website because its policy is under review. Perhaps a blank screen is the true indication of what that party offers.

I am winding up. Perhaps the SNP will enlighten the chamber whether it is in favour of withdrawing from NATO. Will it clarify comments that were made by one of its candidates at the Scottish Parliament elections? He said that we should not worry because when Faslane is scrapped, the Scottish navy and customs and excise can be based there. So far, so good. However, his leader at the time favoured Rosyth rather than Faslane. Does the SNP have one policy for the west of Scotland and a different policy for the east? When a question was put about the size of the navy, an estimate of seven frigates was given—that means 100 jobs. What about the missing 10,600 jobs? Once again, we are debating reserved matters. Perhaps Tommy Sheridan should stand for the Westminster Parliament. He could then represent his views at Glasgow City Council, the Scottish Parliament and the House of Commons. I urge the chamber to reject the motion.

Will the minister provide information on how successful SIPs are in levering in mainstream funding from other partners? As she has outlined already and as we are aware, the purpose of SIP funding is to  act as an incentive for other partners to contribute to improved provision. Will the minister outline whether more can be done to target those areas that are most in need?

I have no blood on my hands. I ask Bill Aitken, if what he says is true, how come poverty reached an all-time high of 34 per cent under the Tories?

The past few days have indeed been a time for reflection for many of us—for those who have left ministerial office and for those who are taking up challenging new portfolios. I genuinely welcome Iain Gray's appointment as Minister for Social Justice, not least because I count Iain as a friend, but also—and perhaps more important—because he has the ability and commitment to develop the social justice agenda. As we reflect, it is not to the past that we look but very much to the future. We are united in our pursuit of social justice and in our passion for politics as a means of achieving fundamental change to heal the divisions in our society and to ensure opportunity for all the people of Scotland. Nowhere is that more significant than in our ambition to end child poverty. Many members will know that I spent many years of my working life in some of the most disadvantaged housing estates in Glasgow and the west of Scotland. I saw at first hand what poverty does to children and to their families. It causes a huge disparity in life chances, massive health inequalities, lack of opportunity and very poor levels of educational attainment. Children who live in poverty are destined for later unemployment, lower earnings, higher mortality, alienation and disaffection, and a cycle of poverty and despair visits itself on successive generations. Reversing that pattern is a formidable task. We inherited a rising trend, the Tory legacy of a staggering 34 per cent of children living in poverty. That figure is now down to 25 per cent in absolute terms and we are on course to having 100,000 fewer children in Scotland living in poverty. We have long believed that having a strong economy and a strong society are two sides of the same coin. The economic stability achieved by the Labour Government at Westminster has enabled the promotion of social justice through initiatives  such as the introduction of the working families tax credit, record increases in child benefit, the new child tax credit and the proposals for a child trust fund providing all children with a capital asset that will help them to tackle poverty in later life. It is all about putting more money into people's pockets, but it is important to recognise that poverty is not about income alone. I am glad that Andrew Wilson has returned to the chamber. I tell him that the SNP needs to get away from its obsession with the constitution and from the constant series of transitional demands on the road to the so-called nirvana of independence. The people of Scotland expect delivery now and that is what the Labour Executive is doing. We need to tackle—

No, I do not need to give way any more. Kenny Gibson can sit down. [Laughter.]

That was because Kenny Gibson had nothing new to say. It is worth his while to listen to what I have to say. We need to tackle the poverty of ambition that exists in many families and communities. We need to improve their quality of life. In particular, we need to give children the best possible start in life. Three main factors affect children's opportunities: their family circumstances, environment and access to services. I welcome the fact that the Executive is working on all those fronts through a number of initiatives, from the sure start programme, which helps parents to develop parenting skills, to improving the environment with better housing and safer streets. I was going to mention one other area of work, but I know the time and see the Deputy Presiding Officer looking at me under his bushy eyebrows. I will therefore wind up. The key issue for Parliament is that every policy, action and spending commitment should underpin our determination to wage war on poverty and achieve social justice for everyone in Scotland. I will risk copying the minister by quoting John F Kennedy, who said: "Our purpose is to defeat poverty ... and our goal is to ... influence history instead of merely observing it."

To ensure that people get free, high quality debt advice, we are working with advice agencies and other partners, including the financial sector, to establish a national debtline service, which will be piloted in Fife early in the new year.

I always find that I agree with Johann Lamont. We are taking a number of initiatives to address the issues that she raises. Not least, we are considering alternatives to people getting into debt in the first place, through a £1.5 million package to develop and support credit unions in Scotland. The report "Striking the Balance—a new approach to debt management", which has been published by the working group on a replacement for poinding and warrant sale, is concerned specifically both with how we increase the provision of debt advice and advice in general, and with how we ensure that the timeous advice that is so helpful in preventing people from getting into a worse position than they are in already is available throughout Scotland.

As Kenneth Gibson will be aware, currently the funding of advice and information in a generic sense is the responsibility of local authorities. However, the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 places a statutory duty on local authorities to provide housing advice and information. We have resourced that provision, together with the full homelessness package, with £27 million. Guidance has been issued to local authorities on how to develop the provision of housing advice and information.

Does Mr Gorrie accept that there are other teams in Glasgow, including Partick Thistle? People should be able to define themselves as Jags supporters as well.

Without commenting on whether my intent is good and honourable, I put it to Colin Campbell that the important point is that the induction centre approach, which allows for an holistic assessment of people's needs, means that there will now be an early identification of people's health needs. I hope that Colin Campbell will join me in welcoming that.

In order to be helpful, I understand that people are in the process of examining office space as we speak.

I am deeply concerned about issues of factual accuracy. I simply note that all MSPs carry ID cards. Would Linda Fabiani care to comment on the fact that Denmark and Holland, both progressive  European countries, are following a similar course to that of the UK? Indeed, they set the trail. Why does the SNP constantly need to be inward looking, seeing everything through a constitutional prism, rather than being outward looking? Will the member share with the chamber the SNP's immigration policy?

Just last month, we debated the issue of asylum seekers and refugees at Paul Martin's instigation. I am very pleased to have the opportunity to speak on this important and sensitive issue in more depth today. In light of current world affairs, it is clear that the refugee situation is not going to ease. The UK—and Scotland as part of the UK—has a part to play in welcoming and supporting those who are fleeing oppression and persecution. It is worth remembering that some of that terror and persecution is beyond the scope of our experience and understanding. We have a long and proud tradition of welcoming asylum seekers to our country and I believe that everyone in the chamber wants that to continue. It is clear, as I have seen at first hand, that a significant amount of good work is going on in communities. However, that does not mean that we can be complacent. The difficulties encountered in communities that are welcoming asylum seekers are complex and multifaceted. The challenges of integrating refugees and supporting asylum seekers require a co-ordinated range of responses. As a result, it is critical that we work together, in partnership with local authorities, voluntary organisations and the communities themselves to achieve that aim. We must draw upon the extensive good work already under way, share experiences and learn from our mistakes. The tragic events at Sighthill have acted as a catalyst for reconsideration of the situation of asylum seekers and refugees within Scotland and indeed the UK. Since then, a dedicated unit has been set up in the Executive to develop our responsibilities for the devolved aspects of the issue. The unit will primarily have a co-ordination role to ensure that services such as health, education, police and social work are able to support new arrivals, as well as maintain their existing standard of service for the resident population. I will say more about each of those services later. It is also essential that we have effective liaison with colleagues in Whitehall on reserved aspects of immigration and asylum policy. To that end, I have already had discussions with George  Foulkes, the Minister of State at the Scotland Office, and Lord Rooker, who has ministerial responsibility for asylum seekers and refugees at the Home Office. As members will be aware, David Blunkett made a statement in the House of Commons on Monday. That statement represents an important step in the development of UK policy on asylum seekers and sets out a comprehensive package. The proposals have a number of implications for Scotland, which we are clarifying and pursuing as we continue to work closely with our counterparts in Whitehall to influence the shape of the white paper. I very much welcome the package of measures that the Home Secretary announced. We have all heard horror stories of the wrong people arriving off coaches in Glasgow with the wrong information to hand and, as a result, the necessary support services are not readily available. The establishment of induction centres to ensure that asylum seekers have a complete assessment of all their needs before being dispersed will ensure that such situations will not be repeated.

If Kenny Gibson had been listening, he would know that I have had discussions with George Foulkes and Lord Rooker. If he will let me continue, he will find out how they have taken on some of the concerns that have been expressed, not just by the Executive, but by the Parliament. Many people are concerned about the impact that the Home Secretary's statement will have on areas such as Glasgow, which has been at the forefront of welcoming asylum seekers to Scotland. Let me be quite clear: dispersal stays. For the national asylum support service, it is business as usual. Glasgow City Council's contract remains, and I encourage other local authorities to share the responsibility by welcoming asylum seekers to their areas. I also welcome the progressive removal of the voucher system. Not only was the system stigmatising and degrading; the benefit was paid at a very low level. That has now been uprated, and I welcome the increase in cash from £10 to £14, which is what was previously paid. The smart cards will also provide for automated cash transactions. That will start to address the situations that we have heard about, in which no change was given to asylum seekers and they lost the benefit of their voucher. The card may also be used more imaginatively in future, as a way of  accessing other support. We will feed in members' views to Whitehall.

I will make further progress and then take an intervention. We will also be interested to learn from the outcome of the pilot accommodation centres—a model that is used successfully throughout Europe. Three centres will be trialled, with a comprehensive range of services provided on site. That is clearly a much more robust and useful measure than simply abandoning asylum seekers, on their arrival, to substandard bed-and-breakfast accommodation, which is what is happening in the south-east of England. I am especially delighted that the Home Secretary has responded positively to representations from the Scottish Executive and others that immigration appeals should be heard in Scotland. As the Home Secretary said: "The system should be geared effectively towards ensuring that we take the service out; that is what we are doing in the appeals and support process in Scotland".— [ Official Report, House of Commons , 29 October 2001; Vol 373, c 636.]  Overall, the Home Secretary has put together a robust package that strikes the right balance between treating asylum seekers with dignity and respect and speeding up the process. In taking our work forward, I gave a commitment during the previous debate to adopt best practice and to develop an action plan. However, before doing so it is important for us to listen and learn. I have had the opportunity to meet a number of key people, from asylum seekers in Sighthill and throughout Glasgow to representatives of the statutory agencies, including Glasgow City Council and the Scottish Refugee Council. Those discussions are extremely valuable in helping us to build up a true picture of what is happening on the ground—where the strengths and weaknesses are—and how we can develop a sustainable strategy for the future.

I shall make a distinction between the two. Induction centres are for asylum seekers on arrival, so that we get the mix of services right before dispersal. The accommodation centres that the Government intends to trial will be part of the dispersal process:  they will be the second stage, after induction. Clearly, there needs to be a long-term mix of facilities, and the Home Secretary has made it clear that he wants to learn from what works, in the interests of both a speedy process and the asylum seeker. If we are to achieve the successful integration of refugees into our towns and cities, it is essential that there is broad ownership of the agenda. We will achieve that by working closely with the Scottish Refugee Council, local authorities and others to build dialogue with asylum seekers, refugees and their host communities. In addition, I am pleased to announce the establishment of the Scottish refugee integration forum, which I will chair. Its remit will be to consider all matters required to assist refugees to integrate into life in Scotland; to feed into the national refugee integration forum, based on experience in Scotland, ways in which the UK Government strategy that is set out in the document "Full and equal citizens" might be developed and improved over time; to collect and disseminate good practice from around the country; to play a key role in promoting positive images of refugees as members of our society; and to make recommendations, in partnership with the Scottish Executive and in consultation with the wider public and voluntary sector interests, on the action necessary to enable the successful integration of refugees in Scotland and to provide more accessible, co-ordinated and good-quality services.

I will come to the contribution of the police and the health service, which has been tremendous, later in my speech. I understand that applications for additional assistance from Strathclyde police and Greater Glasgow Primary Care NHS Trust have been received by the Executive and are in the process of being considered. Hopefully, there will be an outcome shortly. To be members of the core group of the new Scottish refugee integration forum, we intend to invite Sally Daghlian, who is the chief executive of  the Scottish Refugee Council; Professor David Walsh, who is the dean of the health faculty at Glasgow Caledonian University, chair of the National Refugee Forum and fellow trustee of the Scottish Refugee Council; and a representative from the Commission for Racial Equality. Additional members with expertise in issues relating to refugees will be invited to participate. Central to their work will be on-going dialogue with refugees themselves. In addition, the Executive has already taken direct action aimed at helping communities under stress in Glasgow. When the First Minister and I visited Sighthill in Glasgow on 19 September, we announced a funding package of £700,000 to the city's social inclusion partnerships, channelled through the Glasgow alliance.

I want to put on record my tribute to the work that is being done in Maryhill, where a number of the voluntary sector organisations in particular provide a warm welcome for asylum seekers. I can tell the member that Glasgow City Council has decided to provide additional funding—to the sum of £20,000, I believe—for non-SIP areas, which include Maryhill, Pollokshaws and Govanhill. The extra resources will be used to increase provision for the community in child care, advice and support, language development, community integration and translation and interpretation services. They will be used to benefit the whole community as well as asylum seekers and refugees across the city. I am sure that all those activities will lead to improvements in the quality of life in communities across Glasgow. We must find ways of bringing people together and of breaking down any barriers which might separate them. That process has already started in Glasgow—it was started by people in communities such as Sighthill, Pollok, Toryglen and Castlemilk. Police forces across Scotland, particularly in Strathclyde, are working hard to provide reassurance and advice to our asylum seeker community in response to racist incidents and wider community tensions. Many established lines of communication have been enhanced and new partnerships have been forged and developed with local resident groups as well as with asylum seekers. I pay tribute to the work of Strathclyde  police. Racist attacks on individuals, organisations, premises or groups have no place in Scotland in the 21 st century. We have made it clear that those attacks will not be tolerated The police will continue to monitor the situation and are fully prepared and ready to respond. We must create an environment where racism does not exist. That is what we are seeking to do by introducing our forthcoming anti-racism campaign. In recent months we have carried out a wide-ranging consultation exercise with many different groups of people throughout Scotland to get their perceptions of and concerns about racism in Scotland. The results were startling and in some cases they were, frankly, shocking. They confirmed that there is a need to increase quickly our understanding and awareness of the issue. We are now considering the execution of the campaign and I will announce further details in due course. At a time like this we should be stamping out racial abuse; we should be celebrating the diversity of cultures in Scotland. We must send out the clear message that racist abuse has no place in the new Scotland. I turn now to two fundamental issues—health and education. Access to good quality health care is a key element of our strategy to support asylum seekers. Asylum seekers very often come with a backlog of health problems, having had little or no medical treatment earlier in their lives. Lack of medical records and history means that practice staff, general practitioners and dentists need to spend a huge amount of time with asylum seekers basically just working out what they need. All that means that there is a need to plan services in a much more integrated way. I pay tribute again to the achievements of Greater Glasgow Health Board through its primary care trust. It has managed its resources to reflect highly localised needs and pressures. We must learn from the systematic and sensitive way in which it has responded to a new situation. There is no doubt that everyone in the chamber knows that education is the gateway to opportunity and to achieving social justice. Schools are at the heart of preparing young people to live in a multicultural and inclusive society. Schools and education authorities therefore have a vital role in ensuring equality of opportunity for all of our pupils. Our duty is to create a safe and inclusive learning environment and a society that understands, respects and values cultural richness and diversity.

The First Minister and I visited a school in Sighthill in which we saw exactly the opposite: considerable support was being provided to asylum seekers' children. There was a good integration package and language development needs as well as wider social and educational issues were being catered for effectively. I will continue, as I am conscious that I am rapidly running out of time. Children of asylum seekers who are in pre-school education or child care are treated in the same way as other children who are resident in Scotland. At the moment, local authorities have the power to provide pre-school education for three and four-year-old children who live in their area. From April next year, they will have a duty to secure such education either at their own hand or in partnership with other providers. We recognise that it is important for asylum seekers to be able to speak the language of the country. Many further education colleges have built up expertise in teaching people who do not have English as their first language, so it is natural that many asylum seekers find themselves looking in that direction. We were pleased to respond to the recent upsurge in demand for language support. We did so just a few weeks ago, with new money to provide for that increased demand, which is helping colleges offer courses and extra support, on top of the record resources that we are already investing in further and higher education. We recognise that we must take a flexible and broad-based approach, meeting need wherever it arises and not just through the colleges. We are also tackling the barriers that are making it difficult for asylum seekers to access basic language skills. For example, we are introducing further arrangements to provide, through the colleges, extra help with transport and books. We are enabling FE colleges, where they consider the circumstances to be appropriate, to accept asylum seekers on part-time vocational FE courses. For the asylum seekers who are given leave to remain, many of whom bring with them valuable skills and professional experience, the breaking down of those barriers allows them to make a more immediate contribution to Scotland's economy through those skills.  On legal services, there were problems in the past surrounding the so-called "substantive" interview with immigration officials, which has previously been held often in Croydon, but also in Liverpool. I am delighted that David Blunkett has agreed with us and that interviews will now take place in Scotland. The Law Society of Scotland has taken action to alert the legal profession to a range of issues that must be borne in mind when it provides advice to asylum seekers. As members may recall, Scottish ministers recently agreed to commence part V of the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986, which allows the Scottish Legal Aid Board to embark on a pilot project through which solicitors can directly supply much needed legal services to asylum seekers in Castlemilk and Sighthill. I think that that shows the commitment of the Executive and other bodies to improving the legal services provided to asylum seekers in Scotland. I conclude by reaffirming our commitment to working in partnership with the public sector, the private sector, the voluntary sector, the host communities and, most importantly, the asylum seekers and refugees themselves. Our joint aim is to build understanding, to improve dialogue and to provide more accessible, co-ordinated and good-quality services to welcome and support asylum seekers and to enable refugees to become full and equal citizens. Scotland has a reputation as a fair, caring and tolerant nation, with a long tradition of welcoming asylum seekers. We will ensure that that reputation is upheld. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment to work in partnership with the public, private and voluntary sectors to welcome and integrate asylum seekers and refugees to Scotland and further welcomes the Executive's commitment to build improved dialogue with asylum seekers and refugees and host communities and, through partnership working, enable the provision of more accessible, co-ordinated and good quality services, protection from the threat of racist attacks and harassment, and the sharing of good practice to assist the integration of refugees.

We anticipate that about 3,600 central heating systems will be installed in the homes of elderly people and tenants by March 2002.

"Nonsense" is the word that I would use for Bill Aitken. I can advise him that if he happens occasionally to go to Glasgow, he will see that, from April this year, Glasgow City Council has been installing central heating systems in the homes of tenants, and—

If Bill Aitken would allow me to finish—following the publication of guidance from Scottish Homes, housing associations have accelerated their programmes for central heating installation. Eaga Partnership advises me that it expects that provision will be made in about 1,000  homes in the private sector. Eaga is working to begin those installations over the next few weeks.

As Paul Martin will recall, we announced that we were accelerating the central heating programme for those in the social rented sector, so that all of them would be provided with central heating by April 2004, and that we were extending the programme to partial heating systems, with priority being given to the elderly and the disabled. The point that Paul Martin makes has been taken on board.

If Kenny Gibson were to read the Official Report of debates in the Parliament, he would know that I have confirmed that many times before.

The Scottish Executive and Her Majesty's Government are frequently in touch on a range of issues, including taxation, which remains, of course, reserved to the Westminster Parliament. However, the implementation of Government-funded energy-efficiency measures, such as the warm deal, already attract the lower rate of VAT at 5 per cent.

I confess to losing count of how many times I was asked to agree with Robin Harper. We are on record as supporting the reduction of VAT on home improvements and repairs, and we acknowledge Robin Harper's point that accelerating improvements and repairs contributes directly to energy efficiency, whether by taking houses above the tolerable standard, improving health or securing more warmth. As Robin Harper will know, and has welcomed, we are committed to implementing a fuel poverty strategy in Scotland that will, within 15 years, eliminate fuel poverty once and for all.

I am happy to do so. We intend to proceed with our commitment to energy efficiency in a number of ways. First is the warm deal programme, which is exceeding our warm homes target of 100,000. There is also the central heating programme, which we have spent time on in the chamber today. Most important, there are the fuel poverty strategies. We will bring together in a comprehensive form the measures that we will take to end fuel poverty in Scotland. Those measures will be open to scrutiny by this Parliament, they will be time limited and they will be adequately resourced.

It would indeed. That is why we have always argued that it would be of benefit to accelerate improvements and repairs more generally. Not only would that provide increased warmth and better health, but it would help people to remain in their own homes and contribute to energy efficiency. We are on record as saying that we would welcome a reduction of the VAT on such repairs from 17.5 per cent to 5 per cent.

Should tenants in Glasgow vote against housing stock transfer, the housing will remain in the ownership of Glasgow City Council. In those circumstances, the council would continue to receive its share of the available housing revenue account resources.

I find it astonishing that the SNP has such a confused policy position that Kenny Gibson can make statements of that kind. The deal that we have made with the Treasury is exactly in line with arrangements that exist in England. People cannot have it both ways—there is not sufficient money to service the debt and to invest in new houses. People have to recognise that we have introduced a package of fairly massive investment in new homes in Glasgow. I  say to Kenny Gibson that this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to transform the face of housing in Glasgow. Indeed, the package does more than that; it regenerates the whole city.

Demolition is part of the package that we are investing in Glasgow, which is in excess of £400 million. Tenants are right to want to be involved in the decision-making process as to which houses will be demolished, where new houses will be built and what the form and content of those new houses will be. Glasgow City Council and Glasgow Housing Association are progressing discussions with tenants. Where houses are lying empty and in areas where people do not want to live, it will be tenants who will decide on what gets demolished and what new homes will be built. We are clear about the fact that tenants are very much in charge.

Tommy Sheridan and his party sound like a broken record. Thank goodness the ultimate decision on whether to transfer council houses in Glasgow does not rest with them. It rests with the tenants of Glasgow and that is where it rightly belongs. People cannot have it both ways. It is not possible to take away the debt and simultaneously put in new investment.

Because we also want to build new schools and hospitals. We want to lever in the maximum amount of funding to ensure that people living in our communities have the best possible quality of life.

We have accelerated the programme so that all local authority tenants will have central heating installed by 2004—two years earlier than was planned. We have extended the programme so that from 2004 local authorities will receive resources to upgrade houses with partial central heating systems to give them whole-house heating. Priority will be given to the elderly and disabled.

At least 20,000 additional households will benefit from the extension of the scheme, taking the overall figure up to around 90,000 households across Scotland—predominantly made up of older people—that will benefit from the Executive's initiative. The Executive has already sent out literature to citizens advice bureaux, energy advice centres, local authorities and housing associations. The Eaga Partnership, which is the private sector body that will deliver the programme, will be required to advertise the scheme widely. We will ensure that MSPs are kept informed of progress.

I welcome the initiative that has been taken by my Liberal colleagues to highlight the fact that pensioners in rural areas should apply for the scheme. Those pensioners will be identified through the local authority route in any event, and also through the housing association route—they will not be required to do anything. The Eaga Partnership, which will be responsible for delivering the programme in the private sector, will work with local authorities and housing associations. It will run targeted campaigns across the country, paying particular attention to rural areas. I hope that that response reassures John Farquhar Munro.

Kenny Gibson makes a valuable point. At the end of the day, what matters is that we will deliver. We will deliver throughout Scotland for every pensioner and every council and housing association tenant who has no form of central heating. We are now moving to provide partial central heating and I hope that Kenny Gibson welcomes that step.

The information in the report was drawn from local authorities' returns to the Executive.

I wondered why we could not provide the breakdown that Robert Brown requested. As I understand the situation, previous ministers took the view that the provision of information on individual local authorities would result in an unhelpful league-table approach. Local authorities, including those on which SNP MSPs sit, start from different baselines and face different constraints. Therefore, comparisons between them could be misleading. However, I have noted Robert Brown's interest in the matter and have asked officials to review whether we can provide him with information at a level of transparency that I also believe to be suitable.

I will attempt to answer Robin Harper and can provide him with the technical detail that he seeks later. I understand that the figures are not guesstimates, but the best available measures. They are not simply taken from the energy companies, but are part of a standard set of figures that we collect from local authorities within a set reporting framework. The Executive wants not only to tackle fuel poverty in Scotland but to end it. I know that Robin Harper shares that sympathy. If he has technical knowledge to share with me, I would be happy to receive it.

George Lyon might not be aware that Argyll and Bute Council has recently agreed to fund a citizens advice bureau. I take it that he would welcome that.

Account is taken of the areas in which the services operate and we specifically recognised in our review of the council for voluntary services that rural areas require additional input. As a consequence of that, we have made sure that extra money is available. For example, I believe that £290,000 is being made available in the Highlands, whereas less than that is being made available in urban areas.

I regret that I am from a different generation to Mrs McIntosh and so I am not picking up the references that she is making.

Parliament has not had a general debate on the voluntary sector for around two years. Things have moved on considerably since then and I want to update Parliament on the progress that we are making in our partnership with the sector. The voluntary sector is vital to Scottish life and is a major player in all aspects of Scottish society and the Scottish economy as well as at a local, community level. The voluntary sector's potential comes from its distinct characteristics and values. It engages individuals in the life of communities and is close and sensitive to marginalised groups and areas. The sector's services are invariably delivered at a local level, at the sharp end of society's problems. The sector has a key role in helping to develop policies that work. We believe that the sector can help us to achieve a much more inclusive and just society. The sector can provide sustainable jobs and services and build the capacity of people and communities. It is also a particularly important resource for those who face difficulties in respect of access or limited choice. We also believe that the involvement of civic society in shaping policies for Scotland is one of the opportunities that the Scottish Parliament has brought and that we should capitalise on that. I want to remind members of the scope of the sector. There are 44,000 voluntary organisations in Scotland, which employ around 100,000 people. The sector enjoys income of more than £2 billion a year, which is around 4 per cent of our gross domestic product, and that income is growing. As well as having a large number of thriving voluntary organisations, Scotland enjoys the benefits of a long tradition of volunteering. Around 27 per cent of adults regularly take part in voluntary activity. The outlook is positive. I see a sector that is improving in shape and is delivering more for the increased resources that have been invested in it,  but that is capable of delivering more. The Executive wants the voluntary sector to bring its strength, sensitivity and responsiveness to local needs to the strategy to achieve social justice for Scotland. Given that vision, what policies have we put in place to assist the sector in its development? We have committed to providing the legal, financial and structural framework that will enable the sector to reach its full potential in the contribution that it can make to Scotland. For the first time, a Scotland-wide network of councils for voluntary service and local volunteering development agencies provides support to volunteers and voluntary organisations in local communities. We have increased our funding to the sector, we are reviewing how we deliver that funding and we have introduced new financial vehicles such as social investment Scotland. I will say more about that and our review of charity law a little later. The starting point in our partnership with the sector is the Scottish compact, which is the formal agreement between the Executive and the voluntary sector on working in partnership. The compact underpins and strengthens our relationship. Crucially, it gives the voluntary sector a place at the policy development table, which ultimately will make our policies much more responsive. The compact recognises the independence of the sector. I will always protect the sector's right to be critical of Government. If the sector was not independent, it would lose one of its greatest strengths. The Executive and the voluntary sector are monitoring the implementation of the compact via a joint group. I undertook to come back to Parliament to report on progress. Today, I published the joint group's report on compact implementation for 2000-01 and copies are now available in the Scottish Parliament information centre and on the Scottish Executive website. The report reflects the broadly positive experience that we have of working together. The adoption of the compact's principles makes a difference to the experience of the sector on the ground in dealing with the public sector. We want to develop further that area of work. The Executive is starting to take a much more sophisticated approach to compact implementation. We have followed up the publication of the compact and good practice guidance with training seminars for Executive staff and we hope to develop further support materials for officials. The improvement in conditions for the sector is not all to do with the compact. Funding also plays a key part—obviously, levels and stability of funding are of critical importance to the sector. Our funding for the sector is growing. In 1998-99 the then Scottish Office provided £23 million directly to  the voluntary sector. Earlier this month I announced that the figure had risen to planned expenditure of £39 million in this financial year. A further £270 million goes to the sector indirectly, through Scottish Homes, health boards and local enterprise companies. Total Executive direct and indirect funding to the sector is estimated at around £309 million. As well as giving the voluntary sector more money, we have committed ourselves to reviewing how we fund the voluntary sector. In April we published a consultation document on the subject. The responses to that document welcome the review and generally express support for our aims and objectives. The development of a more stable funding environment, provision of three-year funding packages and steps to minimise bureaucracy were welcomed. Concerns were expressed that the Executive and other funders favour innovative projects, at the expense of existing core services with a proven and successful track record. There was support for the simplification and standardisation of grant processes. There was also support for making information more accessible on the Executive's website and enabling grants to be done online. We shall take on board all those issues and we intend to pilot a model scheme in 2002-03, before moving to full implementation across the Executive from 2003-04. The next stage is to turn our attention to considering our indirect funding of the sector. The recent consultation sought views on scoping that work further. We will also work with other funders to try to ensure that the funding schemes available to the sector offer resources that are complementary and that are not at cross-purposes. We are also committed to undertaking a review of the social economy. With the aid of Stephen Maxwell, the assistant director of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, who has joined the Executive on secondment, we are examining the current contribution of the social economy to service provision and economic prosperity and the potential for social enterprise and the development of social capital. We will also consider what actions the Executive and others must take to grow that contribution. We are considering new ways of funding the sector. Last week we launched social investment Scotland, a new loan fund for the social economy. It will provide loan finance and technical assistance to social economy organisations with the aim of stimulating wealth in disadvantaged communities by encouraging enterprise. The four Scottish clearing banks are providing loan finance of £3 million and public sector funding is £2 million, which includes £1.2 million of Executive  grant. As well as addressing funding issues, we recognise that charity law in Scotland needs to be updated to take account of changes in the structure, nature and role of the voluntary sector. We established an independent commission, under Jean McFadden, to examine the issues involved. Its report was submitted to ministers in May and the Executive is currently consulting widely on the recommendations made. We anticipate publishing a full response early in 2002.

As I said, we anticipate publishing a full response early in 2002. Any bill must take its place alongside competing priorities in a full legislative programme. I cannot give Tricia Marwick a commitment that legislation will necessarily be brought forward in this session. I mentioned the key role of volunteers. We are committed to increasing the number of people from all communities who take part in voluntary activities. To achieve that we are pushing forward our active communities initiative. Last year, we made available £650,000 to support the initiative. This year, we have increased that to £1.65 million. We have also joined in the celebration of the United Nations international year of volunteers 2001. I know that many members throughout the chamber have also been involved. We also support the millennium volunteers programme, which is a UK-wide initiative that promotes volunteering specifically among 16 to 24-year-olds. It creates opportunities for young people to contribute to their community and to their personal development through volunteering. We currently fund about 2,000 places across Scotland at a cost of just under £700,000 per year. The millennium volunteers programme is relatively new and we are keen to learn from its early experience. I can announce that the programme will continue in its present form until the end of 2002-03. We have already announced that we will make available £1 million a year to ensure that people who volunteer to work with children and vulnerable adults in the voluntary sector may have criminal record checks carried out at no cost to the volunteer or to the voluntary organisations concerned. At the same time, we said that up to £250,000 a year would be available for a central registered body. I am pleased to announce today that Volunteer Development Scotland will be invited to act as that central body. As the national centre for volunteering and community  involvement, VDS already has close links with volunteers and with the voluntary sector. We can feel confident that the sector will receive the necessary help and guidance to make the best possible use of criminal record checks. The Scottish Executive values the contribution across Scotland of the voluntary sector—from small community groups to Scotland-wide providers; from playgroups to care providers; and from faith communities and their volunteers to the way that the sector tackles homelessness, drug addiction and the other difficult issues faced by our communities. The sector is a key partner for Government, but it is also a key partner in our communities, whether they are geographical communities, disadvantaged communities or communities of interest. The sector tackles and alleviates poverty and helps to renew our neighbourhoods. Partnership will deliver social justice in Scotland. Our partnership with the voluntary sector is critical for success. Together, we can—and will—make a difference. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Executive's recognition of the important role of the voluntary sector in Scottish society through the contribution it increasingly makes to promoting social justice, encouraging active citizenship and widening economic prosperity; endorses the progress made by the Executive in its commitment to working in partnership with the sector through the framework of the Scottish Compact, and welcomes the commitment demonstrated by the Executive through its increased resourcing of the sector.

Both Margaret Curran and I are proud to have been given responsibility for co-ordinating the Executive's interests in asylum seekers and refugees. We are grateful for the early opportunity to speak on the matter and we are particularly pleased that the occasion is a debate instigated by Paul Martin, who has worked tirelessly in the interests of Sighthill and today has powerfully articulated the key issues. I was pleased to have had the opportunity to visit Sighthill yesterday. During our visit, the First Minister and I met all sorts of people from across the community: community representatives, shopkeepers, the local dentist, asylum seekers, schoolchildren and many others. We also met people who are working to support the community and the asylum seekers and to assist the process of integration: representatives from Glasgow City Council, from the police, from the churches and from community and voluntary organisations. It was important for me to hear at first hand the experiences of all those people over the past few months. What I saw in practice bears out what Paul Martin said. I saw a community working hard to address and overcome some of the real and difficult challenges that it faces. I use the term "community" deliberately, to include established residents and the more recent arrivals. The First Minister and I visited St Stephen's Primary School—where it is true the First Minister tried out some of his footballing skills—talked to the tenant management co-operative and called in at the youth drop-in centre. We were enormously impressed by the efforts that were being made to help all those living in the area to integrate the new arrivals and to make them welcome. From our visit, it was clear that a significant amount of good work is going on, on all sides. Solid progress is being made and there is already good practice of the kind that will be of enormous value as Scotland continues to welcome refugees and asylum seekers. We must value and build on that good work and not allow those responsible for it to become discouraged by being told continually—by those who know no better, frankly—that Sighthill is a problem. None of that means that we are complacent. The difficulties that are being encountered in Sighthill in particular, but also in other communities across Glasgow, are complex and multifaceted. There are problems in addressing the challenges that asylum seekers and refugees face in trying to establish a new life in a new country, including the problems of tackling racism wherever it appears. I agree with Shona Robison's comments, particularly against the background of the tragic events in the United States last week. There are problems of language and culture and of all aspects of integration. There are also equally  important issues about the communities themselves and about how they cope with the influx of new people, who are often from very different cultural backgrounds. It is important to acknowledge all the work that has already been done. I pay particular tribute to the police, who have been incredible in their efforts in Sighthill, to the army of volunteers and community activists, who are working there every day, and to the asylum seekers themselves. However, the communities and those who are helping them are telling us that more can be done and that, in some cases, what we are doing could be co-ordinated more effectively. My colleagues and I have to listen carefully to those messages. Where there are areas in which we can deliver improvements or enable others to do so, we will act. For my part, following the visit that the First Minister and I made yesterday, I intend to hold discussions with a number of the key players, including the Scottish Asylum Seekers Consortium and the Scottish Refugee Council. The purpose of that is to identify areas where the Executive can add value to what is already going on, where we can remove obstacles and where we can helpfully co-ordinate activity. We must also identify what role we might play in spreading good practice. I will consider the points made by Robert Brown, Tommy Sheridan and Brian Fitzpatrick about legal services, health services and translation and interpreting services. On a general note, I am happy to consider any evidence of problems that have arisen and of improvements that people think are required. Within the Executive, we have put in place a dedicated unit of officials to take forward work on asylum and refugee issues. That unit will be working not just with local authorities, health boards, the police, voluntary organisations and others, but with the communities themselves, to ensure that everyone is pulling in the same direction. I stress that any action that we take will be developed in partnership with the communities, the asylum seekers and refugees and local people. As others working in this area have recognised, we will get nowhere if we impose solutions on communities. There has to be a true sense of community ownership of the agenda. We are taking direct action. I will shortly be establishing the Scottish refugee integration forum, which I will chair. The forum will bring together many of the key players to ensure that we plan effectively for refugees, as equal citizens in our society. As the First Minister announced yesterday, we are allocating £700,000 to the Glasgow Alliance to help communities in Glasgow to face the new challenges arising from the location of asylum  seekers and refugees. Critically, a whole-community approach is being adopted. The alliance will be responsible for deciding where and how that money is spent, although there are clearly identified requirements, including extra child care services, community integration work, advice and support services, which are to be provided on an open-door basis, and, of course, the key area of language, specifically the provision of translation and interpreting services. Today, we announced in the answer to a parliamentary question that the Scottish Executive is committed to working with the further education colleges to ensure adequate support to those who require assistance. That includes asylum seekers and those in other categories who are also new to Scotland. I am pleased to announce that the Executive intends to provide £1.7 million of new funding in the current financial year and in future financial years to support a package of measures to strengthen the ability of the colleges to undertake a range of work, including language work. That sum comprises half a million pounds to boost college provision specifically for asylum seekers and a further £1.2 million for other groups. That sum will be channelled through the Scottish Further Education Funding Council. The package of measures will include the waiving of the residence and settlement criteria that until now have governed the ability of a college to claim funding and to reclaim the cost of waived fees. I note that representatives of Stevenson College, who will welcome that announcement, are present in the public gallery. Funding is being made available to allow colleges to provide books and support with travel. A new discretion relating to asylum seekers will allow colleges to approve continued studies beyond the level of basic courses.  Paul Martin referred to the need to adopt best practice and to develop an action plan. I am happy to give that commitment. We have a programme of support on the ground, through social inclusion partnerships, but I am willing to consider what more we can do to help communities to help themselves. We have a reputation as a fair, caring and tolerant nation. The vast majority of Scots are proud of that reputation and want to maintain it. I see the qualities of fairness and tolerance in abundance in areas such as Sighthill, Castlemilk, Pollok and Toryglen. That makes me confident that we will achieve the full integration into our society of asylum seekers and refugees—often people who have suffered greatly in their own countries—so that they can live their lives safely and to the full as valued and equal citizens.  Meeting closed at 18:06.

Six million pounds of new housing partnership funding has been earmarked for Fife Council for regeneration and development projects. Resources were also made available for the council to undertake feasibility work on the future of its housing stock.

The council has made progress recently and has identified partners to work with towards regeneration and development in the four areas concerned. Subject to satisfactory progress being made on those projects, we will re-profile the community ownership budget line to ensure that they are covered. Fife Council has led me to understand that the reason for the delay is that we want to engage the community in the process. That involvement is critical to the achievement of our wider aims of community ownership.

My understanding is that the Sunday Post article was written on the basis of misinformation and scaremongering that it received from one Fiona Hyslop.

We always said, and this chamber agreed, that we should start with those who are most vulnerable first, which is those who have no central heating at all. That is exactly what we are doing.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

That is scaremongering.

rose—

I will not address the situation in Stirling; I am sure that the leadership of Stirling Council was less than inspired when it was controlled by the Conservatives. From the revised figures for the central heating programme, it is clear that about 80,000 central heating units will be installed. As I said, we are considering to which groups the programme should be extended. Once that process is complete, I will return to the Parliament with increased figures—just for Bill Aitken.

rose—

I wish to say at the outset that I welcome the debate, because it gives us an opportunity to set right the dangerous misinformation that is spread by the Scottish National Party. The SNP certainly thirsts for information about the central heating programme: since the programme was announced last September, that party has asked numerous parliamentary questions and written letters about it, and has raised it in debate whenever possible. However, its members still do not understand. Let me explain why the central heating programme has been so widely welcomed—a fact that SNP members seem to ignore. The central heating programme is one of the best packages ever offered to vulnerable households in Scotland. There is nothing like it anywhere else in the UK—indeed, there is nothing like it in the SNP manifesto. All households who live in local authority and housing association stock will receive central heating and advice on its use. They will receive loft, tank and pipe insulation, draught-proofing, safety alarms, energy efficiency advice and a check of entitlement to state benefits. All private sector households in which the head of the household or spouse is aged 60 or more will receive the same package. The central heating programme is not means-tested, and there are no hoops that people must jump through to qualify. If somebody needs the package, they get it—it is that simple. Those who get the package will see the cost of heating their homes cut by half. For many of them, fuel poverty will be a thing of the past; they will be warm.

The point is that anybody—whether that person is a pensioner or a tenant—who is without central heating will be eligible. We have always been clear about the time scale. It is a five-year programme and I hope, Mr Gibson, that you will welcome the fact that we are accelerating it. As I was saying, for many of the people who need the package, fuel poverty will be a thing of the past, and they will be warm. We will cut the incidence of illness that is related to cold and damp. We will cut the number of excess winter deaths. Smoke detectors, carbon dioxide detectors and cold alarms will ensure that households are safe. There is significant under-claiming of state  benefit, particularly among elderly people, and I expect that the benefit entitlement checks will lead to increases in household income, in addition to savings on fuel bills. That is why the central heating programme has been widely welcomed by a host of organisations, and that is why more than 4,000 people have already replied to our leaflet and registered an interest in the scheme. That is what will make the central heating programme a resounding success—something that the SNP simply does not understand.

The principle that is followed by the Executive—I hope by the Parliament as a whole—has always been that we start with the most vulnerable people; those who have no central heating at all. If there are people without central heating who fit the criteria of the scheme, they will qualify. What is depressing is that, while the Executive parties are more interested in people, the SNP is more interested in providers. We based our original estimate on the information that was available at the time, from the 1996 Scottish house condition survey. That survey indicated that about 85,000 local authority houses lacked central heating. We now have actual figures from local authorities, which show that approximately 23,000 council houses now lack central heating. Clearly, local authorities have been active in protecting the interests of their tenants, and we commend them for that. About 6,500 housing association houses also lack central heating. Scottish Homes is writing today to the associations concerned, to notify them of the additional grant aid that they will receive. We believe that about 40,000 elderly households in the private sector lack central heating.

No, because you gave way only once, Fiona. I have given way to SNP members several times. Because the numbers involved are less than we anticipated—perhaps you should listen to this,  Fiona—and because we have the resources, we will do more. First, we will accelerate the programme. Pensioners and all tenants will get central heating faster, which means more warmth, less illness and fewer winter deaths, which the SNP would surely welcome. Furthermore, we are going to extend the programme—something that we have always said we would consider. It is absolutely right to say that people who do not have central heating are the most vulnerable and that they must be attended to first. We again hear the tired old nonsense from the SNP that those who live in stock transfer areas are somehow barred from participation. They are not barred from getting central heating. They will get central heating and refurbished homes from new community landlords.

No. I repeat—perhaps this time you should listen—that if tenants in the areas concerned vote against stock transfer, they will be included in the central heating programme. Whatever they decide, they will not lose out. They will all get central heating. What really matters is that we have a central heating programme that makes provision for all pensioners and all tenants in the social rented sector to have central heating; that there is a warm deal that helps our most vulnerable households; that for the first time we are making an historic commitment to tackling fuel poverty in Scotland; and that we are investing in our housing. It is important that we make a real difference to people's lives—a difference that is based not on dangerous, irresponsible, cheap political headlines that frighten pensioners, but on delivering. That is what the Labour-Liberal Democrat partnership Executive is doing. I move amendment SM1-2023.2, to leave out "notes" to end and insert: "commends the Scottish Executive for its commitment to ensuring that all elderly households and all households in the social rented sector in Scotland have central heating by April 2005, one year earlier than anticipated, for the proposed extension of the scheme currently under consideration, for the investment it has already made through the Warm Deal in providing insulation to 80,000 homes occupied by vulnerable households, for the provisions within the Housing Bill which extend the scope of the improvement grant system to include energy efficiency measures, for the provisions within the Housing Bill which require Scottish Ministers and local authorities to set out what they will do to address fuel poverty and for the investment in local authority and housing association property to improve housing quality."

On the point about deception, I put it to the SNP that there has been a huge degree of scaremongering on that party's part. An old man came to my surgery and he was extremely distressed because he thought that the SNP was saying that the programme had been cancelled. Does Fiona Hyslop agree that it is dangerous and highly irresponsible that cheap political headlines matter more to the SNP than do the people of Scotland?

Will Fiona Hyslop take an intervention? That is factually wrong.

rose—

I congratulate Cathie Craigie on having her member's bill reach this stage. The Executive has been pleased to support a bill that will assist those in mortgage arrears who might otherwise become homeless when their homes are repossessed.  As members are aware, one of the Executive's key priorities is to tackle homelessness. Last week, the Scottish Parliament passed the Housing (Scotland) Bill to provide a package of new and enhanced rights to people who are homeless or threatened with homelessness. The Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill provides further protection to people who are in mortgage difficulties. I hope that the Parliament will give the bill its support. As Cathie Craigie noted earlier, repossession is a personal tragedy for the individuals and families that are involved. It also has a cost that goes far beyond people losing their homes or the resources that local authorities might use to rehouse a family. The experience in England, which has had similar legislation for many years, indicates that 45 per cent of debtors in default could get back on their feet and stay in their homes. That is no mean achievement. In Scotland, that would mean 1,350 fewer people having their homes possessed by lenders, 540 fewer applications to local authorities under the homelessness legislation and 405 fewer applications being classed as being in priority need. We all acknowledge that the provisions of the bill will not help everyone in mortgage difficulties. Some people are unable to cope with the responsibility that home ownership brings; for others, irregular employment patterns may make sustaining a mortgage difficult. However, that does not detract from the importance of what we are debating today. For those who can be helped in this way, the bill will make a real difference. It will give people the breathing space they need to sort themselves out. It can stop the steamroller and give the courts the opportunity to consider all the circumstances that might apply. If it looks unlikely that a debtor can get back on track, the court can give them enough time to secure alternative accommodation. I am especially pleased that the bill requires the court to consider both the applicant's circumstances and the actions of the lender. That should afford a much more balanced approach than the current position. Currently, it is often the case that all the lender has to do is to turn up, say that the debtor is in arrears and get possession—a rather one-sided approach. Where the applicant is not the debtor, it is even more important that the case is made, because it will still be the debtor who is liable for the accruing arrears. For the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I wish to advise the Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill.  The bill amends the Conveyancing and Feudal Reform (Scotland) Act 1970, which is a fairly technical piece of legislation. Throughout the passage of the bill, Cathie Craigie has been willing to give careful consideration to all the comments and suggestions that have been made. I acknowledge the care that she has taken. The Parliament should congratulate her, as I do, on being the first woman to steer a member's bill through the Parliament. The Executive and I are delighted to support the motion.

This Parliament came into being facing Scotland's great housing challenges of the post-Tory era. The imperative is to remake an effective, affordable, high-quality, community-driven housing sector out of the devastated councils and marginalised not-for-profits that the Tories left behind. We are rebuilding homes, yes; rebuilding trust, yes; but also rebuilding organisational and legal frameworks for better housing. In the stage 1 debate, I said that the bill sought to provide a framework that would allow individuals, communities and organisations to work together to that end. We stand on the threshold of changing our legislation and—more important—changing Scotland's housing for the better by delivering the promised framework for action. By passing the bill we will deliver the best ever package of rights for homeless people and for all tenants in the social rented sector, the first radical rethink of the right to buy since it was introduced two decades ago and modernisation, based on principles of fairness, that balances community and individual aspirations and that respects local strategic concerns. The bill will also deliver further measures to deal with anti-social behaviour, a new regulatory framework to guarantee and to raise standards, a new emphasis on the governance of Scottish housing with a directly accountable executive agency to replace a quango, new strategic and funding roles for local authorities, a new and historic commitment to tackling fuel poverty and new roles for communities in shaping housing provision. We are placing tenants at the heart of the process. Much of value was added during the stage 2 consideration of the bill by the Social Justice Committee. It is to the committee's credit that I can say that the theme of working together ran throughout much of the committee's work. Committee members made important changes to the bill throughout stage 2 and I am very grateful to the convener Johann Lamont, to committee members and to parliamentary officials for their efforts in helping us to shape this legislation. I would also like to express my thanks to the bill team and the officials from the housing division who are sitting at the back of the chamber. Not only did they burn the midnight oil, but, on some  occasions, they worked right through the night to ensure that the bill was robust. I would also like to thank my deputy Margaret Curran, who worked tirelessly throughout in a very good-humoured way. Throughout the development of the bill, one of the key benefits of having a Scottish Parliament has been evident—the access that the full range of interested individuals and organisations have had to their MSPs and, through them, to ministers and the legislative process. I am grateful to the many organisations and individuals who have given time, effort and expertise to help us ensure that we got the legislation right. We have spent much of today discussing the detail of the legislation but, as I have said already, the bill, coupled with the substantial expansion of the resources that we are making available over the next three years, is the beginning and not the end of our commitment to improve Scotland's housing. Scotland remains stricken by the blights of homelessness and poor housing stock. We are conscious that, having bound the fractures of the social rented sector with the support of new legislation and significant new resources, we still face the challenge of improving private housing. The chamber will be familiar with the homelessness task force, the rough sleepers initiative, the warm deal, the central heating initiative and the housing improvement task force. We will take those issues forward in the housing improvement task force and publish a report on solutions by the end of 2002. The bill is another important step in the progress that we are making towards better housing and stronger communities throughout Scotland. The bill is for all Scotland. It focuses on delivery and will make a real, tangible difference to the homeless, tenants and communities. As I said, the bill is a new beginning, not an end. As a Labour member, I am proud to move, That the Parliament agrees that the Housing (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The tolerable standard deals with a building's condition. I can accept definitions of fuel poverty, but we are not discussing those. For that reason, Tommy Sheridan's amendment is wrong in this context. Amendment 143, which would require a house to have double-glazing that can be operated safely, is evidently desirable. We would all agree on that, but it is not the first priority for housing investment. The same applies to the provisions in amendment 144. The Executive's opposition to extending the tolerable standard is the result not of a lack of commitment or of a failure to understand the problems, but of our belief that changes to the tolerable standard are not the most effective method of achieving the improvement that we all want. We already have in place strategies that are designed to promote housing quality and to improve the living conditions of households in Scotland. When we came into office we said that we would insulate 100,000 houses over a four- year term. Under the warm deal, we have already insulated 80,000 houses and we will exceed our target. Through the central heating programme we are committed to ensuring that within five years all tenants of social landlords and all elderly people have free central heating, home insulation, safety alarms, energy advice and a benefits health check. We are working in partnership with local authorities to improve home energy efficiency under the Home Energy Conservation Act 1995. We are building on our commitments. The Housing (Scotland) Bill will make major changes to the improvement and repairs grants system. Local authorities will be encouraged to give grants for home insulation, heating systems and home security measures. For the first time, the grants system will be an effective means of tackling condensation damp and fuel poverty. Finally, the new housing partnership programme will transform Scotland's housing by extending community ownership. Community ownership will provide new resources to address poor housing. I say to the SNP that we are not happy to rest on those achievements. We believe that we need to take further radical steps to address housing quality. Critically, a more strategic approach is required that takes account of changes. I am referring not just to the higher expectations of housing quality that we all share, but to the wider changes that have taken place since the tolerable standard and the improvement and repairs grant schemes were introduced.

Fiona Hyslop has her facts wrong. There has been significant new investment in housing under the Labour-Liberal Democrat partnership Executive. I want to take up the point that Fiona Hyslop made about central heating. She is correct to say that central heating is required in fewer council houses, because Labour local authorities have acted in the interests of tenants by installing central heating. I have some good news for Fiona Hyslop. That means that our pensioners and council tenants get central heating more quickly.  As Tricia Marwick said, the English tolerable standard is being reviewed. because it represents an outdated approach. The Scottish Executive has proposed and consulted on an index of housing quality, which is intended to set a much higher standard for housing quality in Scotland than the tolerable standard sets. That index will form a key part of local housing strategies and local authorities will be required to set targets for improvements in their housing covering all aspects of the index. The key elements that are proposed are that a property should be energy efficient, free from serious disrepair, safe and secure and fit for the needs of the occupant. In the light of the discussion that took place in the Social Justice Committee and subsequent helpful discussions that I have had with Robert Brown, Cathie Craigie and others, I have already decided that the index should explicitly recognise the problem of condensation dampness. We see the index of housing quality as the prime method for driving up standards in housing in Scotland in all tenures. Local authorities will have to set objectives and report on their progress in meeting them. Beyond that, we have started a fundamental review—through the housing improvement task force—of the legislative, financial and other arrangements for promoting and maintaining homes in good condition. The task force was set up because of the complexity of the issues that are involved and we will ensure that it reports on whether the tolerable standard remains appropriate in content and approach. A series of well thought out and connected actions to achieve real change and improvement is the right approach to creating a robust framework that will have a lasting effect.

Yes, I can. The proposed time scale is for a two-stage process. The first stage is to identify the problem and should be completed by the end of this year. A report will then come back on possible solutions. However, I am happy to consider whether we can accelerate that process. I have set out the measures that are already in place, the changes that we have made through the bill and the further work that is taking place to reform the housing improvement framework. The Parliament should not doubt the Executive's commitment to improving housing conditions in Scotland—not just in a piecemeal way or on a short-term basis, but in the creation of homes that are fit for the 21 st century.

There is obviously strong feeling across the chamber about the tolerable standard and many members care deeply about housing quality. No one can say that the Executive, or my colleagues on the Labour and Liberal Democrat benches, have neglected the issue or failed to give it full attention. In a moment or two, I will talk about the wider picture, but I will first respond to the amendments. The tolerable standard is not a list that details the items and appliances that houses should have. Rather, it is a standard that condemns; it seeks to identify houses with defects that seriously threaten the integrity of the building and, as a result, the health and safety of the occupants and possibly others. It can be the trigger for drastic action such as demolition or for mandatory action by the owner. All the amendments in the group propose additions to the tolerable standard, but we cannot simply add items to the tolerable standard without first thinking through whether they are appropriate and what the effect of adding them will be. As my deputy Margaret Curran said in the lively stage 2 debate, the Executive believes that the tolerable standard must meet four tests. First, if the tolerable standard is to be meaningful in determining priorities for housing investment, it must identify elements of house condition that, if not identified, would seriously threaten the building's integrity. It must focus on housing in the very worst condition to ensure that such housing receives investment first. Secondly, the tolerable standard must be easily measured. Thirdly, the condition of the property must be sufficiently serious to warrant the use of the quite draconian statutory powers that legislation gives local authorities, such as powers of compulsion over owners, and the award of mandatory improvement grants. Fourthly, the tolerable standard cannot be dependent on household type or income. I do not believe that any of the amendments in the group meets those tests in full. Tricia Marwick's amendment 10 proposes that "serious disrepair" be added to the tolerable standard.  Although I have much sympathy with the intention, the fact is that serious disrepair need not threaten the fabric of a building. The elements of disrepair that are fundamental to the integrity of the building are already included in the standard. Tommy Sheridan's amendments 140 and 141 and Tricia Marwick's amendment 11 all concern dampness or condensation damp. The tolerable standard already requires that a house should be substantially free from rising and penetrating damp.

If the member allows me to develop my speech, he will find out what we intend to do. This is a complex area and I am prepared to give a very fulsome answer. I understand the concerns about condensation damp. Indeed, many of our biggest programmes are aimed at tackling that problem. As I have said, I will talk about the wider picture. Tommy Sheridan's amendment 142 covers the temperature of the house and expenditure on heating. As those factors are dependent on the income of the occupants, they go beyond the condition of the building, which is what the standard is about.

At stage 2, I expressed my sympathy with the broad intention behind amendment 476, which was lodged by Cathie Craigie. As members may recall, I gave Cathie and the other members of the Social Justice Committee a commitment to lodge an Executive amendment at stage 3. Amendment 139 introduces a review mechanism for cases in which the grant applicant considers that their contribution has been incorrectly assessed by the local authority. The review will be conducted by a senior person in the local authority. Cathie Craigie said at stage 2 that a review would be more appropriate than an appeal, and we agree with her. Local authorities feel that a review would be faster and less cumbersome, which is why an amendment along those lines was suggested. Amendment 148 will make a minor amendment to a consequential provision. Members are probably aware that under the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987, the powers and functions of local authorities to make grants are applied to Scottish Homes. The bill already contains provision to change that so that the new executive agency can carry out those functions and use those powers if required, after Scottish Homes' functions are transferred. Amendment 148 simply replaces the word "power" with the word "function", which is more appropriate in the context. I move amendment 139.  Amendment 139 agreed to.

Kenny Gibson has again lodged the raft of amendments that he lodged at stage 2. We rejected them then; we reject them now for the same reasons. However, I am grateful for his concern about ministerial work loads. The effect of amendment 179 would be to remove the test of resources that the bill introduces into the improvement and repairs grant system. Amendments 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185 and 188 would modify the existing grant system by increasing the various rates of the grants that are payable. The rate for repairs grants would be increased to 75 per cent and the rate for grants in housing action areas to 90 per cent. The maximum approved expense limits would also be increased by the amendments. For example, amendment 185 would increase the maximum for repairs grants to £9,600. Under our proposals, grants would no longer be restricted to prescribed percentages—currently 50 per cent for most repairs. The new test of resources would provide grants at rates of up to 100 per cent for low-income households. Therefore, Kenny Gibson's amendments would disadvantage householders who are on the lowest incomes by restricting them to a maximum of 75 per cent for repairs grants and 90 per cent in housing action areas. The amendments would confine people to "approved expense limits" of, for example, £9,600 for repairs grants. We are proposing a new single limit of £20,000. Another effect of Kenny Gibson's amendments would be to give high-income families a state subsidy. Under his non-means-tested system, everybody who qualified for a grant would benefit from the high rates that he proposes. Households that can afford the cost of works would not have to pay because the state would pick up the bill. Amendment 187 proposes that the new unified "maximum approved expense limit" of £20,000 be  uprated in line with inflation. I am not attracted to upratings on that basis. There is a danger that the upratings would cause inflation in the price of works. If we were to enshrine index-linking in legislation, we would surely be sending a signal that contractors can increase their prices by a few per cent every year in the knowledge that the approved expense limit would be increased anyway. How could best value be achieved in such circumstances? In any case, the £20,000 is not an absolute limit. Local authorities can ask ministers for approval to pay grant on greater amounts in particular cases, if authorities think that there is good reason for the increased costs. That facility will remain. Of course, the £20,000 limit must be reviewed from time to time—we are not saying that it is to be unchanging. At stage 2, I gave an undertaking that the limit would be reviewed from time to time and I indicated that it might be sensible to consider that "at least once every parliamentary session."—[ Official Report, Social Justice Committee , 15 May 2001; c 2428.] On Kenny Gibson's point about bureaucracy, we have undertaken to consult local authorities on the implementation of the provisions and, as I understand it, COSLA is happy with that. We believe that the reform of the grant system as proposed in the bill will simplify the system and provide help where it is most needed. It will also extend the scope of the system, so that local authorities will be encouraged to give grant for home insulation, heating systems and home security measures. We believe that the new system will be a considerable improvement on the current one, and that it will be widely welcomed by low-income households. For those reasons, I ask the chamber to reject Kenny Gibson's amendments 179 to 188.

As witnesses from the Scottish warm homes campaign said at stage 2, the inclusion in the bill of the commitment to tackle fuel poverty means that we are on the eve of one of the most historic commitments ever made in Scotland. Members should be absolutely clear that the partnership Administration is committed to helping those in fuel poverty. The Scottish part of the UK fuel poverty strategy and the amendments that were introduced at stage 2 by the Executive and by Karen Whitefield show that beyond doubt. For the benefit of members, I shall recap on what the Executive has already done. We published for consultation a fuel poverty strategy, which commits us to ending the blight of fuel poverty for vulnerable households by 2010. Within that target, we will ensure that all pensioner households and tenants in the social rented sector live in a centrally heated and well-insulated home by 2006. We introduced the warm deal in July 1999, and more than 80,000 vulnerable households have benefited from home insulation to date.  We introduced the central heating programme, which will ensure that all tenants of social landlords and all pensioners have central heating and insulation within five years. We are working with local authorities to improve home energy efficiency under the Home Energy Conservation Act 1995. The new housing partnership programme will transform and improve Scotland's rented housing stock. We are also taking action to address poor housing through the index of housing quality, and we have established a housing improvement task force. Having set the background, I turn to amendment 199, which concerns the date of commencement of the fuel poverty provisions in the bill. Our clear intention is to commence at the earliest possible opportunity, which will be around September this year. The provision is carefully worded to set a maximum period of 12 months for the publication of the statement. My intention is that the statement will be published before the summer recess next year, which will be within 12 months of the bill receiving royal assent. That timetable should satisfy any concerns that members may have about the commencement date, therefore the amendment is unnecessary. Linda Fabiani and Robin Harper, in amendments 172 and 173, both propose dates for ending fuel poverty that are shorter than the 15-year maximum that we have set. Section 78A sets a maximum for the target date that may be included in the fuel poverty statement; the statement can include a much shorter period of time if that is appropriate. The time scale will be subject to consultation, but it would not be prudent to pick a shorter period and hope that it can be met.

I will finish the point. We must set a target that is testing but achievable. Nothing will be gained if we set a target that is impossible to meet.

Robin Harper.

Robin Harper would not expect me to agree that anything in a Labour party manifesto is unwise; there are many gems in the Labour party manifesto. We must be clear when we set a target that we know how to achieve it. Nothing will be gained if we set a target that is impossible to achieve. There is a maximum limit of 15 years.  On Fiona Hyslop's amendment to section 78A, amendment 200, we do not think that there is any need to prescribe the measures to be covered in tackling fuel poverty. Those measures will emerge following consultation. They will probably include some of the methods that are set out in amendment 200, but they may include other measures. The way in which the bill is drafted gives us maximum flexibility to tackle fuel poverty in ways that are most effective and will most help fuel-poor households. We need to consider home energy audits very carefully. I have asked the housing improvement task force to examine the issue in the wider context of the information that is available to house buyers and to report back. In amendments 201 and 202, Fiona Hyslop wants to see a report on the progress that has been made in tackling fuel poverty every year, as opposed to "at least once every 4 years", as the bill provides. I respond to that proposal very simply: the Executive believes that resources are best spent on tackling fuel poverty, rather than on permanently writing reports about it. Reports every four years will enable us to measure progress and to determine trends over a reasonable period of time. We have set out an ambitious vision to tackle the scourge of fuel poverty. It mirrors the provisions in the Warm Homes and Energy Conservation Act 2000, which was passed in England and Wales. Our commitments have been widely welcomed. I ask the chamber to reject the amendments.

Amendment 95 responds to a concern that was expressed by the Social Justice Committee at stage 2 that there should be a statutory duty on Scottish ministers to monitor the effects of the right to buy. We have always accepted the need for monitoring. Indeed, I gave a clear commitment to that in the stage 1 debate on the bill. However, it is important that any statutory duty is expressed in general terms. We all know that circumstances can change relatively quickly. It would make little sense for ministers to be under a continuing duty to monitor in ways that were no longer relevant. Amendment 95 avoids those potential problems. It will require ministers to prepare and publish a report within four years of section 44 coming into force and from time to time thereafter. The amendment will also require the report to include information on the uptake of the right to buy, its effects on the nature and condition of the housing stock, people's need for housing accommodation and the demand for and availability of housing accommodation. I move amendment 95.

On timing, my view is that a report once every parliamentary session would be the right frequency, if there were a significant number of sales. Any report that we produce is automatically published and made available to MSPs. However, I would like to engage in discussion with the Social Justice Committee, so that we can consider the implications of the information that the reports will contain. With regard to content, I appreciate that we will want to consider everything, and Robert Brown has previously raised the issue of finance. Nonetheless, the broad headings in proposed new subsection (2) in amendment 95 correspond to those that are set out in section 79 for the assessments that local authorities are required to undertake as part of their work on local housing strategies. We hope that that will facilitate the bringing together of local information into a national picture. I take on board the comments that Robert Brown made.  Amendment 95 agreed to.

One of the key features of the modernised right to buy is the change to the discounts that will be available to tenants who wish to exercise the right to buy. We inherited legislation from the Tories that allowed tenants to get a discount after two years, and that discount could increase to as much as 70 per cent for flats. The bill will ensure that in future in relation to new tenancies, there will be a qualifying period of five years and that the discount will increase by 1 per cent per annum to a maximum of 35 per cent or £15,000, whichever is the lowest. We believe that the new discount structure is fair to tenants and landlords and to the community as a whole. Moreover, we did not merely pull the figures out of a hat. The 35 per cent maximum is in line with the average difference between social and market rents; that is, the effective subsidy that tenants receive through renting a house from a local authority or an RSL, rather than from a private landlord. The £15,000 cap will also help to ensure that there is no unfair profiteering in expensive areas. All the details of the discount structure were considered carefully at stage 2 and I am grateful to Karen Whitefield for her helpful amendments, which are now incorporated in the bill. Sandra White's amendments 89, 90 and 91 seek to reduce the discount further. The amendments betray the confusion in the SNP's policy on the right to buy. Some SNP members claim to want to retain it—at least, I think they do—but they clearly want to make it as difficult as possible for any tenant in Scotland to exercise that right. Why does the SNP not come clean and admit that it wants to remove the right to buy from all tenants in Scotland? The specified proposals in the amendments are arbitrary and unhelpful and I ask members to reject them.

When we announced our proposals for a modernised right to buy linked to the Scottish secure tenancy, there was concern—as has been expressed in the chamber—that it would create financial problems for some RSLs. Section 38 is our response to that. It seeks to protect RSLs from the retrospective application of the right to buy and provides for a 10-year exemption for relevant tenancies, during which time RSLs should be able to identify and implement any changes that are necessary to take account of the full implementation of the right to buy. In many cases, we expect RSLs to be able to grow and expand during that period, as a result of further development or of the acquisition of houses through our community ownership programme. RSLs will adjust their business plans accordingly. Section 38 also allows RSLs to apply to extend the 10-year period if that proves necessary. That is a more balanced and considered approach to the problem than the approach that Bill Aitken proposes in amendment 81. I was surprised by his proposals for designating pressured social landlords, as the proposals would require a significant bureaucratic effort by RSLs and the Executive, because they would require consideration of individual applications. Rather than focus on houses that are being brought into the right-to-buy system for the first time, the proposals would suspend the right to buy for all tenants of the RSL involved, including those who already had the right to buy. We do not support that approach. Our proposals for pressured areas are based on an approach that takes account of the interests of all parties. It is right that local authorities can produce proposals for pressured areas following appropriate consultation, but tenants can be reassured by the fact that the decision will be taken by Scottish ministers, who will check carefully that the statutory criteria have been met and that sufficient information has been provided in support of the proposals. Tenants should also be reassured by the fact that the designation will be limited to five years. If it were extended, the  local authority would again have to show good cause. I recognise much of what Pauline McNeill said, as she has raised and actively pursued such issues with Margaret Curran and me, particularly the point about social mix. At stage 2, we gave her a commitment that consideration would be given to including a reference to social mix in guidance. I am happy to confirm that. Similar amendments to those that Brian Adam has lodged were well debated and rejected at stage 2. His amendments would sweep away all the checks and balances that exist and replace them with designations that local authorities could simply impose for an indefinite period. The only bodies that would be allowed to object would be RSLs. What about the tenants? I fear that the SNP has forgotten them once again. Brian Adam lodged amendment 158 to allow the designation of houses of particular sizes and types. Although we understand the benefits of seeking to protect some types and sizes of houses, it is right that we should seek to deny rights only in areas where there are acute shortages. We need to be careful not to create loopholes. The main difficulty with designating houses of certain types and sizes is in distinguishing need from simple preference. Many tenants and potential tenants would no doubt prefer some types and sizes of houses to others. For example, most tenants would no doubt prefer cottage-type houses to flats. It is more difficult to be clear about needs in that context. Another concern is the complexity of different rights that such proposals might create locally. It would be quite complex to administer variations in the right to buy from one house to another, particularly in a given area, and that could create resentment among tenants. Given such difficulties, it would be sensible not to legislate for pressured house types until we have considerably more experience of operating the pressured area designation. I urge members to reach the same conclusion as the Social Justice Committee did and to reject the amendments.

As Fiona Hyslop indicated, the clear purpose of amendments 9 and 13 is the exclusion of RSL tenants from the right to buy, with some minimal protection for those RSL tenants who already have that right. Certainly that is what the purpose seems to be on the face of it, but I am not entirely clear about the SNP's position. At a time when we are endeavouring to introduce more consistency and fairness into Scottish tenancy arrangements, amendments 9 and 13 would have the opposite effect. Rather than all social rented tenants enjoying similar rights in time, as we propose, those SNP amendments retain the discriminatory and inconsistent treatment that we aim to overcome.

I might have taken an intervention from Linda Fabiani if she had taken interventions. With the introduction of the Scottish secure tenancy, we hope to provide all social rented tenants in the country with a consistent set of rights and obligations. Amendments 9 and 13 would retain the existing distinctions between council and housing association tenants and would exclude many people from the opportunities that their friends and neighbours enjoy. As is consistent with the SNP, its amendments are backward looking, not forward looking. We made significant changes to the right to buy in the bill to ensure that, in future, it will be fair to all parties,  but the SNP completely fails to recognise those changes. Our changes include the introduction of quite different terms and conditions for all new tenancies, with reduced discounts and a longer initial qualifying period. Our proposal for a five-year qualifying period has been widely accepted as fair. The 10-year period that was to be proposed by Sandra White would be resented by tenants, as it is five times longer than the present position. That is probably a more likely indication of what the SNP really thinks about the right to buy. We have also introduced provisions to allow for the designation of pressured areas, where the right to buy can be suspended if there is a shortage of social rented housing that is being exacerbated by the right to buy. We have introduced protection for RSLs through a 10-year exemption, which can be extended if necessary, to the extension of the right to buy. We have introduced other exemptions where justified—for group housing for persons with special needs, for example. I remind Fiona Hyslop that there is a commitment in the programme for government to build 20,000 new and improved houses throughout Scotland in the space of three years. I do not recollect any such proposal from the SNP. The Executive is providing resources to build new housing. Above all, we are interested in balancing rights between tenants, landlords and the interests of the wider community. I remind John McAllion that the inheritance from the Tories of the right to buy has been radically changed by our modernisation package. We believe that that framework, together with the further detailed changes that were agreed during stage 2, represents the best available set of conditions and ensures fairness by balancing the interests of landlords. The new, modernised right to buy must also recognise the aspirations and hopes of all tenants. These amendments expose the SNP's policy on right to buy for what it is—discriminatory, unfair and, I might add, confused. I was slightly disappointed that Sandra White did not open the debate. If she had done, I would have had the opportunity to get clarification of what she said in committee. She said that she was in favour of Tommy Sheridan's amendment, which opposed having the right to buy at all.

Is it the SNP's position to deny tenants across Scotland the right to buy? It is about time that people in the SNP came clean. What we have heard is the end result of failing to accept that the right to buy should be part and  parcel of the Scottish secure tenancy.

Providing protection for RSLs when needed is one thing; refusing to give RSL tenants the right to buy in principle is quite another. Fiona Hyslop asked where we were. Let me ask this: where were the SNP members when we, on this side of the chamber, were protecting the rights of homeless people? Where were the SNP members when we were promoting the interests of tenants and communities in a balanced way? Let me tell members: they were nowhere, looking backwards.

We had a lengthy discussion about this section at stage 2, which reflected the wide range of views about the rights and responsibilities of people in hostels. Robert Brown's stage 2 amendment that inserted section 6(3A) was accepted as coming closest to getting the balance right. Amendments 36 and 37 are minor technical corrections to his wording to ensure that it achieves what he intended.  Amendment 153 follows on from Robert Brown's new subsection and reflects concerns expressed by the Subordinate Legislation Committee. Bill Aitken's amendment 38 is unnecessary, because it is quite clear that the existing terms of section 6(3A) allow for what he is trying to achieve, which is the protection of other residents and staff. Tommy Sheridan's amendments 35 and 39 also have serious disadvantages. Amendment 35 attempts to list the factors that should be covered by the regulations. Given the complex nature of this area of rights and responsibilities, that is dangerously prescriptive. It is particularly difficult to get the balance right. A sub-group of the homelessness task force is considering the issue and because regulations under subsection (3) are subject to the affirmative procedure, Parliament will have the chance to consider and debate them. Amendment 39 aims to make a point about not using our powers under the bill to introduce regulations that would undermine or be inconsistent with the rule of law. As I said at stage 2, that is unnecessary as the regulations would need to be consistent with other legislation.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Linda Fabiani is making accusations without foundation; she should be asked to withdraw them.

Central to what we are doing are efforts to protect the rights of homeless people while recognising that the co-operation between RSLs and councils is critical and based on mutual trust and respect. I reject entirely any notion—I am sure that they will do so themselves—that organisations such as Shelter Scotland, COSLA, Scottish Women's Aid and The Big Issue in Scotland, who have a wealth of experience to contribute, are in some way not independent of government. I respect their right to be independent. We in the chamber and in the Government do not know it all. It is important that we involve civic Scotland in what we are doing. If the SNP is suggesting that it will reject that, civic Scotland should think carefully about its dealings with the SNP.

Section 4 encompasses the recommendations of the homelessness task force and the new housing partnership steering group and seeks to ensure that the transfer of stock to RSLs does not disadvantage homeless people. It is designed to underpin the day-to-day working relationship between local authorities and RSLs. That relationship has to be based on mutual trust and co-operation: it cannot be rigidly prescribed in primary legislation. Executive amendment 27 would reverse the effect of amendment 93, which was passed by the Social Justice Committee at stage 2. At the time, I made it clear that because amendment 93 inserted wording that is unacceptable, the Executive would seek to reverse it by lodging an amendment at stage 3. When the homelessness task force made its recommendations, it was clear that when a local authority transfers some or all of its stock into community ownership, the rights of homeless people must be protected. The task force recommended that a statutory duty be placed on RSLs to comply with the request to house a homeless person or family. The bill, as it was originally drafted, reflected that position. The bill also took account of the homelessness task force's acknowledgement that there may be circumstances in which an RSL had a good reason for not complying with a request. The report suggested examples including where the only accommodation available is specially adapted for people with special needs. In that case, it would not be appropriate to let to a household without special needs. The SNP's stage 2 amendment undermined the balanced position that was established by the  homelessness task force. It created a loophole that put the RSL's allocation and other policies above the needs of the homeless person. That cannot be right. Indeed, amendment 93 has been described by Shelter as a body blow. I want to make it absolutely plain that I know that RSLs play an increasingly important and vital role in housing homeless people—indeed, they have an impressive record in that regard—but the loophole would allow an RSL to refuse to accept a homeless person on the ground that it was against our policy. I understand some of the concerns that were expressed at stage 2. Robert Brown rightly emphasised that some housing associations provide specialised accommodation of various kinds or provide for particular housing needs in particular areas. The SNP approach, however, is not the way to address those concerns. The needs of the homeless person must be paramount. We will cover in guidance the valuable points that were raised by Robert Brown. A working group, with representatives from local authorities, Shelter, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and others, is drawing up guidance on the situations in which an RSL may have good reason for not complying with a request to house a homeless person. The Social Justice Committee will be included in the full consultation on the guidance. Reversal of amendment 93 is supported by Shelter, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and other task force members including The Big Issue in Scotland, the Scottish Council for Single Homeless, Glasgow Council for Single Homeless, COSLA, Positive Action in Housing, Glasgow City Council, Glasgow Women's Aid, Dumbarton law centre, Dumbarton citizens advice bureau—the list is endless. I urge the chamber to support Executive amendment 27. The SNP has plainly got it wrong. Its actions are misguided and it has ignored the needs of homeless people.  Amendment 28 straightforwardly fulfils a commitment that we gave at stage 2. Karen Whitefield and others expressed concerns that there may be occasions when temporary accommodation would be preferable to permanent accommodation and that the key should be to find the right type of accommodation for a homeless person. Amendment 28 therefore disapplies the requirement on an RSL to provide a Scottish secure tenancy or short Scottish secure tenancy if a local authority has expressly requested other forms of accommodation. Amendments 29 and 30 address the information  that RSLs should provide to a local authority. We do not want to create an inflexible approach—co-operation between local authorities and RSLs is vital—so amendments 29 and 30 would require an RSL to comply with reasonable requests for information that relates to housing and is in connection with the authority's duties and allow ministers to issue guidance on what is reasonable. The SNP's amendments in this group do not offer any strengthening of the relationship between RSLs and authorities; neither do they remedy the inherent weakness in the system that the SNP's stage 2 amendment 93 introduced. We urge members to reject all the SNP amendments in the group. Tommy Sheridan's amendments 32 and 33 relate to the arbitration process that is laid out in section 5. Similar amendments were debated and rejected at stage 2. As I said then, it is important that the arbitration process works quickly and effectively. I note that the homelessness task force envisaged a quick, informal arbitration process that would take no more than 48 hours. I see no reason why that should not be achievable in the vast majority of cases. I am therefore reluctant to set a maximum of 21 days, which would unfortunately become the norm. Guidance is the best place to set out the time scale and to retain flexibility to cover complex cases.

I will respond briefly. Robert Brown started off wondering why we missed out Northern Ireland and then substituted "the United Kingdom or elsewhere". I have no difficulty with talking about the United Kingdom. The reason we referred to "elsewhere" is that it is not right for people to be considered homeless if they have, for example, a house in America or Spain—which must be reasonable for them to occupy—even if they have no housing in Britain. I hope that Tricia Marwick will appreciate that we have given an overarching commitment to how we deal with dependent children that goes beyond the narrow focus of amendment 2, in terms of homelessness strategies. That should address the points that she made earlier. We are clear that the right of review will work. The executive agency will be responsible for monitoring the observance of section 3A and we have give a commitment to the Social Justice Committee that it can help us to resolve some of the issues in guidance. The system will be robust. Assurance was sought on amendment 193. I understand, as does the homelessness task force, the need to integrate assessments of the support needs of homeless people with provision, but that does not necessarily apply in all cases. We want to consider the issue and ensure that we get it right. If there is a need for legislation, we will come back to the chamber. The homelessness task force is considering the issue. On amendment 21, let us not confuse the wider issue of sympathy for asylum seekers, because of what is happening to some of them in parts of  Glasgow, with legislation. We are clear that amendment 21 is outwith the competence of this Parliament.

No, I am just about to finish. How we take forward what is currently happening elsewhere is a wider matter for the Parliament, not for this legislation.

rose—

Group 3 is a large group that covers a range of amendments to sections 3 and 3A of the bill. I will do my best to cover all the main points as briefly as possible—but members should please bear with me, because there are some important issues to consider. I will deal first with the Executive's amendments. Amendment 25 fulfils a commitment that I gave to Robert Brown at stage 2 in relation to children. It is absolutely right that the needs of children should be highlighted and amendment 25 will achieve that purpose. It will require local authorities—in exercising their functions under sections 31 and 32 of the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987—to have regard to the best interests of any dependent children in a case. That is an effective way to emphasise the importance of children in homelessness decisions. Although amendment 25 is specifically focused, I should make it clear that guidance on local authority homelessness strategies will also set out the need for authorities to consider the needs of children more generally in the preparation of their strategies. The terms of amendment 25 are supported by Children in Scotland. The other Executive amendments in the group will simply make some necessary tidying-up changes, either by clarifying legislative references or, in the case of amendment 26, by undoing a redundant stage 2 amendment. I turn now to the non-Executive amendments in the group. Amendment 152 would add to the definition of permanent accommodation certain tenancies which, for good reasons, are exempt from the Scottish secure tenancy. The code of guidance makes it plain that "local authorities should always seek to secure long-term solutions" to homelessness, "including the provision of permanent accommodation with security of tenure." Therefore we do not wish to see tenancies in the categories that would be covered by amendment 152 being counted as permanent accommodation by local authorities when deciding whether there is a continuing duty to provide assistance. Amendments 2, 3, 4 and 5 revisit the stage 2  debate. The existing categories of priority need are set out in the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987 and power exists for Scottish ministers to add to those through subordinate legislation. There is therefore no need to use primary legislation for the purpose of the amendments. However, there is a need for careful consideration to be given to the issue. The homelessness task force is made up of key bodies that are involved in working to tackle homelessness and it is examining priority need categories. It will report later this year and when it has done so we can reflect on what changes might be needed. I am pleased that, at stage 2, the Social Justice Committee rejected an ad hoc approach to adding to priority need and accepted that it would be much better to wait for the task force's considered proposals.  Robert Brown's amendment 192 would require an independent assessor to be appointed in every case in which the local authority reviews a homelessness decision. We acknowledge that in some cases an independent element might be helpful. Currently, ministers have the power to offer guidance on circumstances in which that might be appropriate—for example, a local authority might wish to seek independent advice on a particularly complex or contentious case to assist it in coming to a decision on review. However, the approach that is set out in amendment 192 would allow no discretion. An assessor would be needed in every case, however minor or straightforward that case was. In every case, an independent assessor would have to be appointed, study the papers and participate in the review. Discussions would have to take place to resolve any disagreement. Although I have no problem with the principle behind the amendment, that would inevitably take time and it would complicate the review. Principles must be balanced with practical effect. The Executive believes that procedures should be quick and efficient as well as fair. The needs of the applicant are important; lengthy and bureaucratic procedures help no one. I am pleased that the Social Justice Committee supported that view at stage 2. There is no definition in amendment 192 of who should be regarded as an independent assessor and there is no explanation of what should happen if the assessor and the local authority officer disagree. Robert Brown has consistently put forward the proposal and cares deeply about it. I hope that he can take some reassurance from the position that has been established by the Executive, and which he has helped to shape. We have gone beyond the recommendations of the homelessness task force and inserted in the  bill a statutory right of a person to request a review of a decision. The code of guidance sets out that an applicant can make representations in writing or in person and that an independent person may accompany them. We already have powers to offer further guidance on when an independent element might be appropriate, and regulation will allow us to monitor the operation of the review system and pick up on any difficulties. Amendment 192 does not offer a helpful way forward that would enhance the current position. I ask Robert Brown not to move the amendment in light of the substantial reassurances that have been provided. Amendment 193 seeks to integrate assessments of housing support needs and provision of housing support into the homelessness process. I made it plain at stage 2 that we are enormously sympathetic to some of the principles that underpin the amendment, but the amendment is not the way in which to meet those principles. Amendment 193 would require comprehensive assessment in every case and does not focus on those in most need. The wider issue of support needs for homeless people should be addressed through homelessness strategies, in which local authorities work in partnership with other groups—social work and health services, for example. The homelessness task force is also considering support needs for homeless people and will consider the need for any legislative change in that area. On that basis, I ask Robert Brown not to move amendment 193. On amendment 21, we have already had the debate at stage 2 and I am disappointed that Fiona Hyslop has attempted to bring it back. Whatever the merits or otherwise of the way in which the needs of asylum seekers are handled, two things are clear: first, legislation on immigration and asylum seekers is outwith the competence of this Parliament; secondly, it is illogical to give a statutory right to housing to an individual who does not have a statutory right to remain in the country. In addition, it is important to remember that once an asylum seeker has been accepted as a refugee, he or she is entitled to the same rights to homelessness assistance and accommodation as anybody else in the country is. Cathie Craigie made that point. I therefore urge the Parliament to reject amendment 21, which is beyond Parliament's competence. Passing that amendment would bring into question the overall competence of the bill.

Section 2 imposes a general duty on local authorities to ensure that advice and information about homelessness is available in their areas. The detail of the advice, information and quality standards is to be set out in the supporting guidance. There is no good reason to elevate any element of that by including it in the bill.  We are absolutely clear about the importance of independent advice. We have already given a commitment that guidance will be clear on the need for local authorities to secure a comprehensive package of advice, including access to independent advice. However, that does not preclude local authorities from providing advice and information. We informed the Social Justice Committee that the homelessness task force would draw up guidance and that the committee would be consulted during that process. In addition, the regulator will be able to monitor observance of that guidance. Therefore, amendments 17 and 20 are unnecessary and we will oppose them. Amendment 14 is a technical amendment, which reflects a minor drafting error that crept in at stage 2. I move amendment 14.

The Executive's position is clear. Amendments 17 and 20 are unnecessary. We debated this issue at stage 2 and we are clear that all advice, independent or otherwise, is captured by the legislation. The detail of where to find the most useful advice in particular situations is best left to guidance.  Amendment 14 agreed to.

The Scottish Executive will put £10 million into the Scottish Homes budget over the next three years, both to increase and to improve refuge provision for women and their children. On Monday 14 May, I announced 10 projects that will begin this year. Forty-two new spaces and 21 improved spaces will be provided. Further projects will be considered following a review of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities' recommendation that there be one refuge place per 7,500 of the population.

I will address Johann Lamont's two questions separately. First, local authorities are responsible for providing funding for women's aid refuges on the ground, either directly through their core grant, or through housing benefit. We specifically ask local authorities and their partners to demonstrate that revenue funding is in place before capital funding is released for refuge provision. That requirement has COSLA's full support. We recognise that there are difficulties, and the issue of revenue funding is being examined by the national group to address domestic abuse. Secondly, Johann Lamont is right to say that the real aim is the prevention of violence against women. The Executive will work to address its underlying causes, so that women and children in Scotland will be able to live safe from the fear of domestic abuse.

The Executive has established the British Sign Language and linguistic access working group to develop a strategic approach to BSL issues in Scotland. The establishment of the group has been welcomed by organisations of and for deaf people.

As Adam Ingram is probably aware, the Disability Rights Commission has recommended to the UK Government that BSL should be formally recognised as a language. The Scottish Executive is working closely with the UK Government on its consideration of that recommendation. The BSL working group is advancing the issue in practical ways, to make a difference to people who use sign language. The three key areas identified for the group's consideration are raising awareness of BSL, developing communications strategies with deaf people and ensuring that training is provided, particularly of BSL interpreters.

We are maintaining close links with the UK Government on this issue. Cathie Craigie was right to point out that the UK Government ratified the Council of Europe's charter for regional or minority languages at the end of March. By so doing, it accepted a binding commitment to protect and preserve the many languages that make up our cultural heritage.

I can give the member an absolute assurance that the cities review will happen. It will consider the economic, social and environmental factors that are the key drivers of change and growth in our cities. Full details will be provided shortly by the appropriate minister. We are in discussion with local government in Dundee, Glasgow and elsewhere, in order to make progress.

Does not Robert Brown recognise—as he has done in the past—that, since Labour came into power both in the UK and in partnership with the Liberal Democrats in Scotland, we have lifted 100,000 children out of poverty, which is something that should be commended? Does he accept that we have achieved that aim by working in partnership?

Having worked in those  communities and witnessed Conservative policy at first hand, I am stunned to hear that the Conservatives' answer to problems was simply a lick of paint for many houses and communities. Bill Aitken claims to address matters and to recognise that they should be addressed from the inside out. Why then did the Conservative Administration leave us a legacy whereby a third of children were born into poverty, lived their lives in poverty and died in poverty?

I do not for a minute underestimate the scale of the problem in Glasgow. The member paints a bleak picture. I wonder whether he recognises the current picture, which I am about to paint for him. Over the past 10 years, unemployment in Glasgow city decreased by 9.4 per cent—faster than across Scotland as a whole. There is a higher proportion of people of working age in Glasgow: 64 per cent, which is much higher than in Scotland as a whole. Average earnings in April 2000 were 3 per cent higher than in Scotland as a whole. It is a good picture in Glasgow.

Governments in Scotland have been remaking and renewing some of our poorest places for at least half a century. That took place not just in the cities, where the emphasis was on slum clearance and rather soulless urban renewal from 1950 until the mid-1970s, but in rural areas with the forerunner of Highlands and Islands Enterprise, which was set up in the 1960s. Models and fashions in urban renewal change. By the middle of the 1970s, community-based and housing-led rehabilitation became a key route to regenerating our rundown older areas. In due course, similar approaches rolled out to housing schemes and smaller towns through new life for urban Scotland and smaller urban renewal initiatives. Indeed, it is one of the great ironies of the long period of Conservative government in Scotland that the Tories developed some effective models for the physical regeneration of small places. It would be wrong to say that we have not learned from that experience. We have learned about some effective models, but we have also learned some of the damaging limitations of the Conservative approach. It is those shortcomings of conception and commitment that we have been addressing and reversing. I want to take time today to explain why our approach is different from and better than what has prevailed in the past—those differences are substantial. The position of our predecessors was that unfettered market solutions were generally the best for Scotland. However, in some cases, concentrations of those who failed to make it in markets required some palliative policy. For them, rural and urban regeneration policy was relatively expensive sticking plaster, patching over some enduring scars resulting from their cuts. Our view is different. Markets do not always work effectively and may undervalue some places and people.

Having worked in regeneration for some time, I will not take lessons from anybody in the Conservative party. I have witnessed at first hand the damage that it has done to communities, not just across Scotland, but across the whole of the UK. We view the people and places I mentioned not as a problem, but as an opportunity, because if the appropriate mechanisms are put in place they can be levered back into social and economic action. For us, poorer places are not just an awkward moral corner, they are an affront to our sense of social justice and to our concern to maximise the contribution of all to our economy and society. Our approach is not just to fix up estates and hope for the best. Rather it is to reconnect households to each other, to the community, to the education system and to the labour market. Instead of naive Thatcherism, our approach is based on complex local development economics; instead of denying that there is such a thing as society, it recognises that economic success is embedded in strong family and social networks. Yes, financial capital matters, but so does human capital, so does social capital and so does place capital. We are rebuilding the capital of our poorest communities in diverse ways that were unimagined by our predecessors. The second important difference in our approach is that we wish to create a context in which limited area renewal policies are not simply the unavoidable consequence of cuts in public services and unstable, inadequate economic policies. For us, area regeneration is about building community capacity, making the employment linkages that allow poor places to benefit from steady economic progress, expanding public services and reducing spending on public debt. Area inequalities feature at the centre of our thinking, not at some peripheral margin. In consequence, our third point of difference is that we have emphasised the importance of joined-up approaches to area regeneration. We have all seen what happens when job opportunities improve but neighbourhoods do not—those with jobs and incomes inevitably move out. We have all seen what happens when homes are improved—some for the second or third time in 20 years—but there is no improvement in policing and no increase in employment. In those circumstances, change is not sustained. To meet our aim of addressing acute inequalities between neighbourhoods, our approach to urban regeneration deals with the physical, economic and social needs of our most disadvantaged. Our approach is cross-disciplinary, broadening the partnership base and the investment base to harness mainstream services for renewal in enterprise, health, education, justice, housing and  transport. We have adopted an approach that stresses not only the importance of connections between health, housing and employment, for example, but the essential vertical joins in policy, because as members who have worked in this area in their previous lives will know, it is only by capturing the policy levers and making connections that we will deliver sustainable solutions to multiple disadvantage in the long term. I stress that Westminster has given us growing resources and new tax programmes, which potentially are worth £100 million for Scotland, specifically to boost older-area investment and to promote new measures to reduce financial exclusion and promote the role of the social economy. This Executive has put in place social justice strategies and an economic framework that properly values the role of area regeneration. We have strengthened and given extra support to social inclusion partnerships by investing something like £169 million to lever action locally. Even more important, we have expanded service programmes across portfolios which benefit poorer places in particular. We have also introduced the £90 million better neighbourhood services programme to expand innovation in services in renewal areas. We have put community ownership of housing and the massive uplift in physical renewal resources that that will generate at the heart of our housing policies. We have given the enterprise network a new remit to raise training and employment performance in our poorest areas. All that is mainstreaming and prioritising regeneration. In working together with Westminster, we witness the highest employment levels since the 1960s and the lowest unemployment levels since the 1970s. Youth unemployment is down by 70 per cent. Long-term unemployment is down by 50 per cent. We are talking about policies that are making a difference that has been achieved by working in partnership. We believe in devolution.

I hope that the Presiding Officer will afford me some extra time to answer some of  those points.

Prudent management of the economy has meant that we can invest substantial sums—more than the SNP dreamed of in its previous manifestos—in public services and in making a difference for our communities. We believe in devolution, not only for this Parliament from Westminster, but from us to councils and from councils to communities. We will produce a neighbourhood renewal statement by the end of the year. That will be a key document that will summarise the good and bad lessons from the regeneration work that has been undertaken by many partners in Scotland in the past 30 years. It will also provide a framework for future work within which central Government—including the new executive agency, Scottish Homes—and local partners will operate. We intend to draft that statement in close co-operation with all those who have contributions to make, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Local authorities have a central role in leading the renewal of their neighbourhoods and supporting the development and empowerment of their communities. We need to set efforts to promote neighbourhood renewal in the context of community planning. I expect the neighbourhood renewal statement to make that clear. Some community planning partnerships are thinking imaginatively and constructively about social justice issues and I am keen to support that work. Community planning is relatively new and is further advanced in some areas than others. As it continues to develop, I look forward to community planning partnerships becoming the central regeneration and renewal mechanism, operating within a national neighbourhood renewal framework. It is important to make those linkages to achieve social justice for all our communities. Today's debate is an opportunity to engage members of all parties not only in a review of what we are doing, but in a celebration of how ordinary people in those communities are becoming involved in regeneration. We have worked with communities and groups in the past two years to develop capacity and we budgeted in community empowerment from the start. I am delighted to confirm that, from the resources that were made available to me in last year's spending review, I am allocating £3.7 million this year—about £60,000 per partnership—to provide support for community representatives. That will help them operate as equal partners with their colleagues from the enterprise networks, local authorities and health. Those representatives  can determine how best that resource will help them. The multilevel and multisectoral approach that regeneration needs requires cohesion and partnership working. That is why I am pleased members have the opportunity to contribute to the neighbourhood renewal statement. It is my intention to use that statement to provide the national framework for renewal for all Scotland's disadvantaged communities. I also intend to make the connections to parallel reviews of strategic planning and the cities review. We will engage in a debate with the organisations and individuals who are vital to Scotland's future success in delivering change and renewal. I am interested to hear members' contributions because, after all, we are interested in what works. We are seeking to build, from communities upwards, faster and fairer progress for Scotland. I commend the motion to the chamber. I move, That the Parliament endorses the Executive's approach to urban regeneration and the steps it has taken to enable the people in some of our most disadvantaged communities to become involved in regenerating their areas and welcomes the Executive's intention to engage in discussions to formulate the Neighbourhood Renewal statement for Scotland.

The Executive has regular meetings with the commission. The most recent meeting took place with the Deputy Minister for Social Justice on 6 March 2001.

That was a lengthy question, but I will attempt to give Michael Matheson an answer. My understanding is that the CRE is engaged in an exercise not to cut provision but to review the racial equality councils and to make them more effective and efficient. That consultation has directly involved the racial equality councils and their funding partners to ensure that we have the best service for the future. As far as I know, the CRE's review is internal. However, as we are keen for practical action to be taken to tackle racial harassment and violence, my officials are taking an active interest in events.

I have a great deal of sympathy with the point that Keith Raffan has made, but the matter is an internal one for the CRE. However, we are keen to see a structure develop that reflects the fact that we live in a multicultural society and that emphasises that we reject all forms of racial harassment and violence and are engaged in positive publicity and awareness-raising campaigns.

Last week I welcomed the 7 per cent drop in homelessness applications for the quarter ended September 2000. That is the fourth quarter in a row that homelessness applications have fallen, when compared to the previous year. That is a clear indication that the actions which we have taken since coming into office, and the funding we have made available, are beginning to have a positive effect.

Like Karen Whitefield, I welcome the news that North Lanarkshire's homelessness figures have dropped. It is one of 16 local authorities that have reported a decrease in the number of applications. The greatest decreases have been in Glasgow, Fife and Aberdeen. I agree with the valid point that Karen Whitefield made. We need a better understanding of the different groups that are applying as homeless. That is why the Executive is introducing an electronic data capture system that measures people rather than paper.

The SNP never fails to disappoint. I would have hoped that it would welcome a drop in homelessness statistics in Scotland. If Linda Fabiani considers the four quarters taken together as a yearly accounting period, she will find that there has been a drop of some 2000 applications across Scotland. That is welcome, and it shows that the Executive is tackling the scourge of homelessness in Scotland and succeeding.

I think that Keith Harding will recognise that the most dramatic increase in homelessness was under the Tories in the early 1990s. Undoubtedly, it has continued to increase. However, what Mr Harding has to realise is that this is not just about bricks and mortar, but about tackling poverty and disadvantage and the complex problems that people have. That takes time. We are putting measures in place and we can see indications that those measures are succeeding. Unfortunately, under the previous Tory Administration, there was never a drop.

That is just nonsense. If Dennis Canavan looks around Scotland, he will see that the number of empty properties available is fairly significant. If he looks at the number of lets of property, he will see that it more than adequately covers the number of people reporting as homeless. The issue is not the availability of rented accommodation. It is widely accepted that the real issue is the complex underlying needs that lead people to become homeless in the first place. For example, they may suffer from alcohol addiction, drug addiction, family breakdown or mortgage repossession. The list is endless. I am disappointed that Mr Canavan did not appreciate that.

I take it that the member welcomes the fact that the Executive is putting in place an electronic data capture system that, unlike the system we inherited from the Conservatives, will measure people, not applications.

Mr Harding made a point on how the situation has worsened dramatically. Will he comment on the latest quarterly figures that have been published, which indicate a decrease in homelessness in Fife of 24 per cent, and overall decreases in the four previous quarters? When one compares full-year figures, the numbers are down throughout Scotland by 2,000 applications. I would have thought that that was something that the member could welcome.

The guide to the grant scheme has been widely distributed to citizens advice bureaux, energy efficiency advice centres and a range of bodies in the public, private and voluntary sectors with a connection to those who are eligible for the scheme.

Kate MacLean is right to point out the needs of the visually impaired and the black and ethnic minority community. She is equally right that proportionately more black and ethnic minority people live in the private rented sector. We have quickly distributed the interim leaflet to the agencies I mentioned. However, the more substantial publicity will follow once we have appointed a managing agent. We will ensure that the material is in an appropriate and accessible format.

I indicate to Tricia Marwick that the £350 million programme will start in the next week or so and will target people who have no central heating. It is appropriate that we start with the most vulnerable. Starting next week, 141,000 households in Scotland will benefit.

With a range of key partners, the Scottish Executive launched its close the gap initiative on 8 March. That initiative aims to raise awareness of the pay gap between men and women and to promote good practice to address that issue.

I find it hard to disagree with anything that Elaine Thomson said. We are aware of the geographical and sectoral variations in the gender pay gap. She is right to highlight the specific problems in Aberdeen. We must widen employment opportunities for women, and I am keen to take her comments on board. I should point out that Scottish Enterprise Grampian will launch its women into the network programme on 18 April.

I will take it that Maureen Macmillan asked a question.

We must challenge the stereotyping of jobs, and our support for learndirect Scotland and careers Scotland will widen opportunities and choice for women.

It is astonishing that Bill Aitken should suggest that I would interfere. I remind him that the action plan is owned not only by the Executive, but by the credit union movement, which drew it up and agreed its terms. I wonder whether the member wants to retract his statement about me interfering.

I am pleased to be able to open this debate on the credit union action plan for Scotland "Unlocking the Potential", which we published on Tuesday. The action plan is backed by funding of £1.5 million to kick-start its implementation. Last March, we pulled together the key movers and shakers in the credit union world in Scotland and a range of organisations that we considered had a useful contribution to make. There were two aims: to remove barriers to growth and to ensure that credit unions throughout Scotland have access to the development and support services they require. I say straight away that far from the action plan being an indication that the Executive is trying to take over the movement, we fully recognise the movement's autonomy and that its ethos—community involvement, the role of volunteers, its mutuality—is its strength, which we wish to support. We wanted to explore how the Executive could best deploy its support and how others, such as the banks, local authorities, the local enterprise companies and the wider voluntary sector, could best contribute to the movement. The action plan is not just about resources, although they are important. It is also about bringing people together and maximising the use of their skills and expertise. Partnership is at the heart of our approach to tackling exclusion.

I will give way to Tommy Sheridan in a second. This strategy is a first-class example of what can be achieved if people are prepared to sit down together and work though the issues positively and constructively.

As Tommy Sheridan will appreciate, those matters are reserved. However, we are in constant dialogue with the credit union movement and intend to set up a Scottish credit union partnership to implement the action plan that I am outlining and to consider other matters of mutual interest. I thank all those involved in helping the Executive to draw up this strategy, because I appreciate their efforts. As I said, the strategy recommends that a Scottish credit union partnership be established to implement the actions set out in the plan. I hope that many members of the working group will continue to be involved through that partnership. Success in tackling financial exclusion is essential if we are to achieve our wider aims of eliminating social exclusion. Most people need an affordable lifeline of financial services just to get by. They need to be able to pay bills and to cash cheques; they need to have a place to save; they need insurance policies; and they need to have access to affordable credit. Too many Scots in disadvantaged communities, often those in the greatest need, do not have access to the financial services that the rest of us enjoy. As a result they are worse off: they pay more to meet their household bills; they do not have home contents insurance; and they do not save effectively. The number of people who are excluded from financial services may not be growing, but the consequences of being outside the mainstream are getting more serious. Living in the cash economy is becoming increasingly expensive, as people have to pay more for their fuel and the price of credit can be extortionate. The context that we have to consider is that 7 per cent, or 1.5 million households, use no mainstream financial products. That means that they manage their household finances without a bank or a building society account and do not have money saved or invested. They have no pension, no mortgage and no insurance. Figures vary across the United Kingdom, but we know that the levels of non-use are highest in Scotland, with close to 13 per cent of households having no financial products. That is twice the UK  average and three times the level in the south-east of England. Non-use tends to be concentrated among certain types of household and in particular types of neighbourhood. Those people make less use of financial services for complex reasons and there is no simple or single solution. Outright refusal by banks or other institutions to do business with people in those households is relatively rare. More often, the problem is about a mismatch between potential customers' needs and the products that are on offer. The way forward lies in developing products that are appropriate to the needs of people on low incomes. The importance of quality, independent advice and information is also critical. Earlier this week, I was pleased to be able to announce that we have been successful in securing funds of £1 million from the Treasury, matched by the private sector, to pilot a telephone debtline in Fife. Why are credit unions so important? Credit unions not only help to deliver appropriate and accessible financial services, but train and educate their members in the wise use of money and in the management of their financial affairs. Although credit unions alone will not solve financial exclusion, the services that they offer have a critical part to play. Credit unions are open to low-income groups and young people, and they encourage saving. They provide low-cost credit, which is a very useful alternative to the high-cost services that too many people are forced to use. In the long term, they can offer a bridge to other financial services. I was reminded of that when I visited North Edinburgh Credit Union earlier this week, accompanied by Helen Liddell, who is another long-time supporter of credit unions. A £500 loan from a credit union attracts £30 of interest. The same loan from a bank will cost £110 and from the Provident it will cost £279. That is a stark illustration. There is potential for credit unions to offer many more services, such as debt redemption services, business start-up loans and bill-paying services. That is possible where they are run as professional financial service providers. It does not mean that they have to lose their community spirit or their democracy. However, membership needs to grow. Currently, there are 120,000 members in Scotland. That is just 1 per cent of the population. It is higher than the figure for England, but paltry in comparison with Ireland, where 48 per cent of the population are members. The issue is not about making all credit unions big, which is simply not possible in many areas of Scotland—especially where rural population densities are low; it is about ensuring that as many  people as possible within a common bond are engaged. That enhances the impact at the local level. The credit union movement faces challenges such as new legislative changes and Financial Services Authority requirements, which are causing concern. Legislation and the regulatory framework are reserved matters, but there is much that we can do in Scotland to ensure that credit unions are in a position to flourish. That is the focus of the action plan. The action plan centres around five objectives: developing sustainable credit unions; helping credit unions to meet the new regulatory framework; growing the movement in Scotland; increasing the number and skills of volunteers; and bringing about a change in public attitude to credit unions by promoting the ethos and their services to the wider population to remove the tag of the poor man's bank. The working group has not only identified where action is required but prioritised areas for action and funding. Those areas are: stabilising current activity so that we have a firm base from which the movement can grow; concentrating support in the critical early stages when credit unions are getting going; supporting and developing the skills of volunteers, and increasing their numbers; and taking advantage of information technology. We have allocated £1.5 million over the next three years to run a health-check programme to ensure that as many credit unions as possible are able to comply with the new regulatory framework. The funds will also be used to provide an early support package to new credit unions, enabling them to get off the ground quickly and achieve the critical mass that will make them self-sustaining. Recognising the unique volunteer control of credit unions and the important role that volunteers play, we will make additional funding available to look at specific initiatives. There are many and varied examples of successful credit unions right around Scotland. I hope that our new strategic approach to developing and supporting credit unions will help to ensure that successful sustainable financial services are available throughout Scotland to everyone who wants them.

In conclusion, our vision is for a vibrant and self-sustaining credit union movement in Scotland that is accessible to all and used by all. It must be based on the principles of mutuality and economic justice. I move,  That the Parliament recognises that credit unions are a valuable provider of low cost financial services and an important way of tackling financial exclusion; welcomes the Action Plan for the credit union movement in Scotland, and supports its implementation and the objective of building a vibrant self-sustaining credit union movement in Scotland, accessible to all, with credit unions as broad based, community owned financial institutions operating in a sound commercial manner but based on the principles of mutuality and economic justice.

Both sectors will continue to benefit from the warm deal and will now also benefit from the central heating programme, which includes insulation and draught-proofing.

The criteria that we have set for the socially rented sector and the private sector vary slightly. In both cases, the house must lack any form of central heating. In the socially rented sector, it should not be demolished within a period of three years. We are clear that entitlement to insulation and draught-proofing is covered by the warm deal, so if somebody does not qualify for central heating they will receive draught-proofing and insulation through the warm deal.

I am disappointed to hear  another constitutional demand from the SNP. It has clearly failed to engage in a critical debate about housing and so is again letting down the people of Scotland.

The bill does not mention stock transfer. The stock transfer programme is about getting much-needed investment into housing. People are living in damp, cold homes with a backlog of disrepair. What would Sandra White do to get investment in now, rather than take her approach, which would consign people to wait for 30 years?

Does Fiona Hyslop accept that communities are made up of tenants and residents and that the right to buy, if used strategically, can create mixed and stable communities? Does she also accept that the information quoted by the CIH on the number of mortgage repossessions relates to 1999? The figures for 2000 show a 17 per cent drop. Although that drop is welcome, there is clearly more to do. As Fiona Hyslop knows, we are examining the possibility of a national mortgage rescue scheme.

This morning, I was at the annual conference of the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland, which is one of the key events in the Scottish housing calendar. The title of the conference, "Act Together", is appropriate, as one of the central aims of the Housing (Scotland) Bill is to do just that. The bill aims to provide a solid framework within which individuals, communities and organisations can act together to secure real improvements in Scotland's housing. Today's debate is about the general principles of the bill. Inevitably, much of members' interest will be in the detail. That is important, but it is also important to be clear about our overall objective. First of all, I think that it is important to see the bill in its wider context. I welcome the fact that the Social Justice Committee "agrees that the promotion of social justice in Scotland requires a co-ordinated approach to policy making and accepts that the Housing (Scotland) Bill is one part of this approach". The bill is indeed an integral part of our overall strategy for housing, for communities and for delivering social justice in Scotland. The chamber has already considered some of the very serious housing problems with which we are all too familiar: homelessness and rough sleeping; cold and damp housing for many vulnerable people; increasing disrepair; the paradox of housing shortages despite abandoned and empty housing; and, perhaps most important, the need to regenerate whole communities and neighbourhoods. Legislation alone cannot tackle those problems and the Housing (Scotland) Bill is only part of the total picture. It has to be seen alongside the rough sleepers initiative, the central heating initiative, the warm deal and the continuing work of the homelessness task force. The bill also complements the forward work programme of the housing improvement task force, in that it looks at issues of quality, particularly in the private sector, and at the  resources that we are providing through the Scottish Homes development programme for new housing for social rent—particularly in pressured rural areas and to house those in need of care in the community. Above all, the bill must be seen alongside our community ownership programme: a programme which has the potential to unlock significant levels of new investment and to put the community firmly in the driving seat, thereby securing radical improvements to conditions in the social rented sector. The bill has two key aims. First, the bill aims to secure a better deal for tenants in the social rented sector. Secondly, it aims to provide a framework that will allow all the agencies—central Government, local government, voluntary organisations, financial institutions and housing professionals—to work together to improve the quality of Scotland's housing and to deliver the best possible housing service. Within those broad aims, the bill's specific policy objectives are to prevent and alleviate homelessness and to strengthen the rights of homeless people; to provide a comprehensive and consistent set of rights for all tenants in the social rented sector; to create a single regulatory framework to drive up standards; and to provide for the conversion of Scottish Homes into a new executive agency that will be more accountable to ministers and to the Parliament. Finally, the bill is intended to enhance the strategic role of local authorities in assessing and tackling local housing needs in line with their responsibility for community planning. That will include improvements to the grants that authorities use to provide support to home owners. The Social Justice Committee and other committees have considered those objectives in detail. I welcome the thoroughness of the scrutiny that the bill has already received. Five parliamentary committees—the Social Justice Committee, the Local Government Committee, the Equal Opportunities Committee, the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee—have now had an input to the bill. I welcome the time and effort that have been given to detailed consideration of the bill. In particular, I congratulate the Social Justice Committee on its work in drawing together the threads of the wide-ranging scrutiny. I draw comfort from the fact that, after so much analysis and debate, the conclusion of all the committees is to recommend that the Parliament approve the general principles of the bill. Perhaps inevitably, however, the various committees have identified a number of concerns that need to be addressed. I cannot possibly do justice to those concerns in 15 or 20 minutes, and I will respond to many of them in much more detail  at stage 2, but I would like to comment now on some of the points that have been made. I will start with homelessness. One of the core objectives of the bill is the prevention and alleviation of homelessness. The bill implements in full the recommendations of the homelessness task force. The committee reports endorse the importance of the general principle of the bill in respect of homelessness. The Local Government Committee and the Social Justice Committee have made recommendations on the detail of the provisions, and we will consider those further as the bill progresses. On the Scottish secure tenancy, the Social Justice Committee has welcomed the focus on the rights of tenants. Specifically, it has welcomed "the decision to establish a single social tenancy which will equalise the rights of tenants in the social rented sector, and the additional rights the Bill will give those tenants."

The point that Mr Sheridan raises is interesting, because there are issues to do with rent harmonisation in England and Wales, where there is a great disparity in rents. We do not face the same problem in Scotland. In the social rented sector, rents are broadly comparable across the board. I would like to discuss anti-social behaviour.

No, I would like to carry on. When we appeared before the Social Justice Committee, Margaret Curran and I were asked about measures to tackle anti-social behaviour. We recognise the real misery that anti-social behaviour can cause for neighbours. We are therefore keen to identify practical steps that can be taken to prevent such behaviour and to tackle it robustly when it occurs. It is not right that the actions of a minority of people can disrupt the lives of decent, law-abiding people who take pride in their homes and communities. I am clear that people cannot have rights without also having responsibilities. The bill embeds that principle in the new tenancy arrangements that will operate. In entering into a Scottish secure tenancy agreement, tenants will be agreeing to show respect for their neighbours. Any breach of the conditions could lead to the loss of their home. The bill has also redefined anti-social conduct to encompass the unacceptable behaviour of  harassment. The new definition extends to cover racial abuse and harassment on the basis of gender, religion or sexuality. Conduct of that kind is, frankly, abhorrent and we will ensure that powers are in place to deal with it effectively. The bill includes powers to evict tenants who are found to be responsible for anti-social behaviour or who fail to control anti-social behaviour by other members of their family or by visitors. It also allows for landlords to seek to transfer anti-social tenants in cases where that might offer a possible way forward. Those are existing legal remedies that have been included in the bill. However, there are also some important new provisions. The bill will allow landlords to offer those who have been evicted for anti-social behaviour a short Scottish secure tenancy to enable them to address their behaviour before earning the full package of tenancy rights. Let me dispel some myths about what the new probationary regime is about. A probationary tenancy is not a soft option and it is not a guarantee. Landlords must take a view on whether the prospective tenant will benefit from having a second chance. In signing up for the tenancy, tenants will have to make a serious commitment to change, supported by the landlord and other agencies as appropriate. The bill also ensures that anti-social tenants cannot circumvent repossession action by a landlord through exercising the right to buy. Legislation—housing legislation in particular—can be only part of the answer to the problem. Earlier today, I announced a new initiative and the appointment of a social neighbourhood champion. The initiative includes £250,000 of funding to develop and disseminate good practice by landlords. Let me make it quite clear that we are firm in our determination to tackle anti-social behaviour and we are committed to working across the Executive to support those who are in the front line.

I think that I have outlined a robust package of measures. However, I am conscious that people care deeply about anti-social behaviour and about finding solutions to it. I am always happy to engage in discussion with members about how much further we can go. I am conscious that a number of the additional measures that have been suggested are not matters that should be addressed through the Housing (Scotland) Bill, but I am happy to engage in further discussion with Brian Adam on those matters.  One part of the new Scottish secure tenancy that has received a great deal of attention during the past year or so is the right to buy. The issues associated with the right to buy are not at all straightforward and examination of the evidence taken by Parliament's committees reflects that fact. The Social Justice Committee's report "acknowledges that the issue of right to buy is one such right which required unifying in some way." The Local Government Committee report on the housing bill notes: "On the general question of the Right to Buy, there is a range of views within the Committee." The Social Justice Committee, in relation to a specific aspect of the right to buy, also speaks of an apparent quandary.

I take it that Fiona Hyslop is suggesting that we should stick to the original position we announced in December 1999, which was that we were simply extending the right to buy without any qualifications. We have tried to come up with a more robust and strategic way in which to view the right to buy. If it were left alone, the right to buy would end up generating more sales in the social rented sector than would the new, modernised right to buy.

There are some factual inaccuracies in what Fiona Hyslop said. First, the underlying trend in homelessness is downwards. Secondly, we are engaged in the biggest house-building programme for as long as I can remember—20,000 new houses by March 2002. Thirdly, in real terms, our housing budget has risen by 36 per cent. That is where our priorities lie. [Interruption.] The SNP is, as ever, disingenuous. Is the SNP for or against the right to buy? Is the SNP for the right to buy, or is it for taking measures away from people?

No—let me continue. We recognise that the right to buy as it is currently constituted can affect and has affected the availability of social rented housing in some parts of Scotland. We also recognise that the majority of households in Scotland—some 75 per cent—prefer home ownership. I agree that the right to buy represents an important route to home ownership.

I am aware that Robert Brown has pursued that matter in committee and that there have been discussions about sinking funds and repair and investment funds to ensure that the fabric of properties is maintained. It is a complex area of property law, but there is considerable merit in Robert Brown's suggestion and I am happy to consider it in more detail as part of the work of the housing improvement task force. For us, the right to buy is about a balance of rights and responsibilities: responsibility to ensure that people know the cost of home ownership, and a responsibility to the wider community. That is why the bill includes a package of proposals which, when taken together, attempt to reconcile the housing needs and aspirations of people across Scotland.

I am happy to meet a range of organisations, as we did in the production of the bill. We have listened to the points that have been made in response to consultation over the past year and we have modernised the right to buy in a number of respects: we have reduced and capped discounts; we have introduced an extendable 10-year exemption to protect the financial viability of housing associations; and we have developed the concept of restricting the right to buy in designated areas of housing pressure.

No, I have given way sufficiently. I am rapidly running out of time. I welcome the Social Justice Committee's conclusion that "the achievement of mixed and stable communities is an aim to be pursued and that the modernisation of the existing system of right to buy, in line with the other legislative components of the Bill, integrated with other policy tools within local housing plans, does have a role to play in the pursuit of this goal." The Social Justice Committee is right to draw attention to the local context in which those and other issues have to be addressed. That is why we are keen for local authorities to develop their strategic capacity and why the bill places such emphasis on the strategic role of local authorities operating within a community planning framework. I am also clear that local authorities should take on responsibility for development funding in areas where, if the tenants decided that they should, they have transferred their stock into community ownership. We have indicated that funding responsibility can transfer in other circumstances, but before that happens we need to be sure that there is local agreement and that the local authority has the capacity and skills to take on that role. The corollary of local responsiveness is consistent standards. That is why the bill establishes a single regulatory framework, to ensure that tenants can expect a high level of service, whoever their landlord is. That framework will be overseen by the new executive agency. The Social Justice Committee urged the Executive "to consider carefully how the independence of the regulatory function can be ensured so that tenants, housing bodies and the Parliament may have confidence in the integrity" of the new executive agency. We will give further consideration to that, although I am not in the business of setting up another quango to take on the role. In conclusion, the Housing (Scotland) Bill has developed in the spirit of openness and consultation, as the report from the Social Justice Committee recognises. I am reminded of the words of John Ruskin: "Government and co-operation are in all things the laws of life". I look forward to working with the Social Justice Committee in that spirit of "Government and co-operation", so that we can enhance the quality of life and housing for many people across Scotland. The bill provides us with the foundations to deliver warm, dry and affordable homes for all.  I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Housing (Scotland) Bill.

It is in.

The proposed Scottish secure tenancy will lead to a single set of rights for all tenants of local authorities and registered social landlords. It will provide enhanced rights in relation to both succession and information and, for the first time, there will be a right to a joint tenancy and a right to exchange, together with new duties on social landlords to promote tenant participation.

It is for a sheriff, having considered all the circumstances of a case, to decide whether it is reasonable to grant an order for recovery of possession. As Elaine Smith will know, sheriffs have discretion to refuse such orders, even if a landlord has made a case for one. We are keen that the courts should retain that wide discretion so that they can take into account all the circumstances of any individual in a particular case.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member is so kind, but I am sorry that I cannot continue that consensual approach. Perhaps you could explain to the chamber exactly what you were doing for the previous 18 years, when you were in control.

rose—

You admitted that part of the problem was decades of underinvestment in housing quality. You—or at least your colleagues—were responsible during that period. HEES was targeted badly: while it helped people who were on benefit, it failed to target the fuel poor. I am sorry, but HEES comes from a past that does not make sense today.

Will the member give way?

Will Tricia Marwick take an intervention?

indicated disagreement.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

I became slightly confused during Fiona Hyslop's speech, because I was not aware that the Executive was responsible for the weather. The country is not on its knees. However, the Executive is charged with taking action to help the fuel poor, and that is what we are doing. I have not yet heard any suggestion of what the SNP would do.

I was evidently on a different radio programme from the one that Fiona Hyslop is talking about. We have been clear that, irrespective of whether tenants vote for stock transfer, they will get central heating.

All parties in the Scottish Parliament agree that providing affordable, adequate and warm homes for all is an appropriate and necessary objective for housing policy—and not just on extremely wintry March days such as today. We know that cold homes dull the educational performance of children, rub cold noses in the lack of household resources, chill the very bones of the elderly and cut like daggers into weak chests. Cold homes are damp homes and they are usually leaky homes; they let damp in but they also let out and waste heat, adding to the production of greenhouse gases. In short, cold homes and fuel poverty reduce individual and household capabilities to learn, work and play and they contribute not just to neighbourhood despair but to global damage. Fuel poverty has complex causes and major, multiple impacts; tackling fuel poverty requires integrated and partnership approaches. Last week, the UK Government, working in partnership with the devolved Administrations, published our collective strategy for ending fuel poverty. That strategy contains chilling estimates, prepared by Scottish Homes, of the extent of fuel poverty in Scotland. The current depth and extent of fuel poverty in Scotland is unacceptable. Our cause is to strive for social justice, not endlessly to debate constitutional niceties while people are freezing at home.

Fiona Hyslop constantly disappoints me. This debate is about our central heating programme initiative and the warm deal in Scotland. Those are the measures that we are taking. She fails to recognise that if we are serious about tackling fuel poverty, we have to do it in partnership at the UK level and with the private and voluntary sectors. I am disappointed that, once again, we are back to talking about constitutional niceties.

No, I have given way already. We define fuel-poor households as those households that spend more than 10 per cent of their income on domestic fuel. According to the 1996 Scottish house condition survey, 740,000 Scottish households—one household in three—are fuel poor. Those are three quarters of a million reasons to hold this debate. If members need further convincing, they should watch the video that many of us received this morning from Unison, Energy Action Scotland and Transco, which paints a bleak picture of the reality of fuel poverty. It highlights the problem of a woman and her family from Knightswood who have one heating source in one room, even though three children have chronic asthma. However, it is positive about what can be achieved if we work together.

We are not prioritising geographical areas; we are prioritising people who are aged over 75, elderly people who live alone, the disabled and the long-term ill. I anticipate that a sizeable proportion of the people who are being given priority will be in cities where there are concentrations of elderly people. This is a programme for the whole of Scotland and we want to ensure that all our elderly people benefit.

Our priority is to ensure that 140,000 households that have no central heating at all benefit first. When we have completed the programme, we will look to extend it. I am happy to consider the case that Hugh Henry highlighted in further discussions with him. I must press on. The 2002 Scottish house condition survey will be our earliest opportunity to assess how the figures have changed since 1996.  We believe that the number of fuel-poor households is likely to have declined. There are three causes of fuel poverty for the three quarters of a million fuel-poor households. The first and second are low incomes and high energy prices, both of which are largely influenced by reserved powers. The third is almost two decades of low investment in housing stock, which is a devolved matter. We are all aware of the improvements in Scottish incomes and employment since 1996, with unemployment at its lowest level for a generation. Over the same period, domestic fuel prices have fallen. Having restored some vigour to the Scottish economy, we have begun to reverse the shocking decline in housing quality. However, to avoid any suggestion of complacency on the part of the Executive, and given the tendency for the Opposition to generate more heat than light on most issues, the Executive is taking the number of fuel-poor households to be around 740,000.

No, I have given way several times. We can talk at length about the nature and scale of the problem, but let me focus on actions. The UK fuel poverty strategy was published on Friday. It commits the Westminster Government, the Scottish Executive, the Welsh Assembly and the Northern Ireland Assembly to "end the blight of fuel poverty for vulnerable households by 2010." As I have said many times, that commitment will be reflected in an amendment to the Housing (Scotland) Bill that will align Scotland with the Warm Homes and Energy Conservation Act 2000, which came into force in England and Wales three months ago. The amendment will place a duty on ministers to put in place a strategy, with aims, targets and monitoring arrangements, to address fuel poverty. However, I will not wait for the bill to complete its passage through the Parliament. Key elements of that strategy are being put in place now.

I have taken enough interventions and am rapidly running out of time. We have an interim target in Scotland. We will ensure that by 2006 all pensioner households and all tenants in the social rented sector live in a centrally heated and well-insulated home. Those are our most vulnerable groups. We do not exclude other groups of people—when the central heating programme is completed, we will consider and take views on which groups should next be  identified for priority treatment. However, pensioners in all sectors and council tenants need help now. That is why our main policy—the central heating programme—is aimed at them. The new central heating programme is probably the most ambitious and best-funded programme of its kind ever introduced in Scotland. Some £350 million will be spent and 140,000 homes will receive central heating and better insulation. We will continue the existing warm deal programme. We are committed to insulating 100,000 homes over this parliamentary session. As at 31  March 2000, we will have achieved a total of 47,000 houses that have been insulated to much higher standards than before. I can announce today that the figures for the second year of this session will show that more than 80,000 houses have now been insulated. We are very much on course to exceed our target. Let us not forget that, in addition, 400 new deal places have been created and sustained in both those years. That is a major achievement. The warm deal is about creating energy-efficient homes; it is about making a real difference to fuel poverty; it is also about generating employment. Probably only a small minority of members now fail to recognise that we will have increased public spending on housing during this session by 25 per cent above Tory plans. At the same time, we have been unleashing greatly increased investment in not-for-profit community housing. With new designs and new standards, we will fashion warm homes well beyond the central heating initiative and the warm deal. I do not forget that around half of the Scots who are in fuel poverty live in private housing, most of them as home owners. The Housing (Scotland) Bill seeks to reform the improvement and repairs grant system to deal more effectively with fuel poverty. There is, however, a physical limit to the extent to which we can reduce fuel poverty by improving housing alone. We could have all Scottish households in the right-sized homes—all at peak quality and all energy efficient—but low incomes would still contribute to fuel poverty. That is why we are working in partnership with the United Kingdom Parliament to make changes. It is fair to say that there has been a sea change in our understanding of fuel poverty and in the considerable resources that we are committing to tackling it. That has been our prize. Unlike the SNP, we want to devote our energies to the real problems that Scots face today rather than replay tired historical divisions. Unlike the Tories, we believe in social justice that is delivered through higher employment, higher incomes and better and warmer homes. My Labour and Liberal  colleagues are adamant that no pensioner and no vulnerable household in Scotland should be huddled over a two-bar fire yearning for warmth or have to choose between heating or eating. That is the difference between us and our opponents. We are not just talking about the scandal of fuel poverty, we are acting to end it. I move, That the Parliament commends the Scottish Executive for its commitment to tackling fuel poverty, as set out in the UK Fuel Poverty Strategy which will form part of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, through the central heating programme, which will provide all council and housing association tenants and all pensioners, irrespective of their tenure, with warm and dry homes by 2006, through the Warm Deal, New Housing Partnerships and investment in social rented housing and through its proposals for a new Index of Housing Quality and its plans to extend the scope of the improvement and repairs grant system to include energy efficiency measures.

In the current year, housing associations will receive £169 million to invest in social housing. It is estimated that local authorities will have around £347 million available, through housing revenue account borrowing consents, usable capital receipts and revenue surpluses. It is not possible at this stage to show separate figures for authorities that are not pursuing stock transfer.

I assure John Home Robertson that that is precisely why our programme for government commitment has increased from 18,000 to 20,000 the number of new and improved homes that we will build over the next three years. I pay particular tribute to East Lothian Council, which will receive some £10 million of support from our new housing partnership initiative to build 500 new houses for rent in the area. I hope that that will address some of the problems that John Home Robertson has outlined.

I can assure Kenny Gibson that I have enormous faith in all local authorities, but his question oversimplifies the issue. We have some £4 billion of debt in Scottish housing stock. That housing stock is valued at only £2 billion. People who are tenants are currently bearing the cost of  that debt. It is therefore critical that we reduce that debt to benefit them.

If I have anything to do with it, I am quite happy to give Mr Gorrie that commitment. Our programme for government statement clearly indicated that we wanted to build 20,000 new and improved homes across Scotland, and we are on course to deliver that.

It is not very often that I find myself agreeing with Bill Aitken, and this is not going to be one of those occasions. The high level of debt and disrepair is a direct consequence of the 18 years of underfunding that local authorities experienced at the hands of the Conservatives. We are keen to create that step change in investment to ensure that people in Scotland have access to warm, dry and affordable homes. Our policy is to support community ownership, not just for financial reasons but to ensure that communities themselves have control over their houses.

Owners who purchased houses from Cumbernauld Development Corporation have responsibility for their own homes. However, I am aware that Scottish Homes is working closely with the affected owners.

I do not think that there was any suggestion that Cumbernauld Development Corporation knowingly sold those homes on with faults. I am aware of the problem, not as a result of reading about it in the local press, but as a result of discussing the matter with Cathie Craigie, the MSP for Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. I have told Cathie that I would be happy to have a further discussion with her on the basis of Scottish Homes commissioning structural reports and working with the owners to try to find solutions to the problems.

I would be happy to meet Cathie Craigie and the steering group, which has worked extremely hard to find solutions. That is the fundamental difference: people can quote the headlines, which last for 24 hours, or they can do some real hard work to help.

The Executive's publication "Using People's Juries in Social Inclusion Partnerships" sets out the main considerations and principles that SIPs should address when deciding to hold a people's jury.

Dear, dear. As ever, we have a series of misquotes from the SNP. People's juries are not a failure. The report that was carried out was an assessment of a whole range of tools to test community opinion. Our perspective is about empowering communities and engaging them in shaping and developing policy. We want to bring about real change, which is shaped by local people and creates empowered communities. I regret that the SNP does not know a great deal about that.

I am happy to welcome the experiences in the pilots in East Ayrshire and Aberdeen. In addition, Glasgow carried out a city-wide drugs jury. The information that we gleaned from people that are able to have an in-depth consideration of the issues has been informative in shaping policy for the better for those people in their communities in the future.

At 26 January, 48 per cent of the rough sleepers initiative funding allocated for the financial year 2000-01 had been drawn down by local authorities and others.

I will deal with the more general part of Fiona Hyslop's question first. The majority of funding through the rough sleepers initiative is revenue based, so it is drawn down after the revenue has been expended. It is not drawn down in advance of need, so Fiona Hyslop will find that a substantial amount is still to be drawn down for the last quarter. Secondly, I will deal specifically with the difficulties in Edinburgh. There was Victorian accommodation in the city, where people were living in appalling conditions. It is right that improvements should be made. The Executive and the rough sleepers advisory group have had discussions with the City of Edinburgh Council, which is now on track to increase the level of accommodation available: temporary provision is being put in place in February with two permanent facilities following on track before the end of the year.

I do not know how to make it clearer to the SNP than do the figures in our annual social justice report, published last year, which show that we have lifted 70,000 children out of poverty. There is a huge task ahead of us and I am delighted at Fiona Hyslop's commitment to assist the coalition to deliver on that.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

The Executive is working closely with the Disability Rights Commission on a range of issues. My officials and I meet the Disability Rights Commission regularly—most recently, last week.

The Disability Rights Commission has not raised that matter with me but I am happy to discuss it with it. As Michael Matheson will appreciate, the commission is a UK-wide operation that reports to the Department for Education and Employment. I am sure that the department will give due consideration to the representations that are made directly by the commission.

It was made clear at the time that the Executive judges each case on its merits. As Fiona Hyslop knows, the Executive is providing policy assistance to the Justice 1 Committee—in particular to Maureen Macmillan—on the prevention of abuse bill.

I take the Presiding Officer's comment as a clear hint to be brief. I congratulate Cathie Craigie, who is evidently a very wise woman, on the introduction of her member's bill. The Executive is pleased to support the bill, which will assist those in mortgage arrears who might otherwise become homeless when their homes are repossessed. As members are aware, homelessness is one of the Executive's key challenges during the next few years. It may interest members to know that applications to local authorities for assistance due to homelessness resulting specifically from mortgage default have increased during the past few years, and that 600 of all those applying have been identified as being in priority need. Let us consider for a minute the very real cost of repossession. Repossession is, without doubt, a personal tragedy for the individuals and families involved. It has a cost that goes far beyond people simply losing their homes or the resources that local authorities need to use to rehouse a family.  The disruption to family life, the disruption to the education of children, and the very real health impacts due to worry and distress are costs not only to the individuals concerned but to society as a whole. Repossession costs the lenders, too. The lenders tell us that repossession is a last resort because they inevitably lose money. In many cases of repossession, the lenders are not able to recoup the full value of their loan. We recognise the significant role that the code of practice of the Council of Mortgage Lenders plays when lenders are dealing with cases of mortgage arrears. But some mortgage lenders—albeit a small proportion—are not members of the CML and in some cases they, or the lenders of secondary loans secured on a home, do not try to resolve the problem with debtors. Even where the lender has made a genuine attempt to help the debtor, there may be cases where a neutral third party is better able to get agreement on a way forward. The Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill gives people a safety net in legislation to ensure that proper steps are taken in every case. As Cathie Craigie reminded the Parliament, similar provisions have been in existence in England and Wales for many years. Research there has shown that courts suspend about 60 per cent of the repossession orders applied for by creditors. Of that 60 per cent of debtors, three quarters subsequently maintain their payments. That means that almost half—45 per cent—of debtors in default could get back on their feet and stay in their homes; that is a worthwhile objective. I recognise that the bill will not help everyone who gets into mortgage default to keep their home. There are many reasons why people get into default and home ownership is not appropriate for everyone at all life stages. Some people are unable to cope with the responsibility that home ownership brings; for others, irregular employment patterns may make sustaining a mortgage difficult. For those reasons, the Executive will continue to look for ways to help people in mortgage difficulties. That does not detract from the importance of what we are debating today. For those who can be helped in this way, the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill will make a real difference. It gives people the breathing space that they need to sort themselves out. It stops the steamroller and gives a third party the opportunity to look at all the circumstances. If it looks unlikely that the debtor can get back on track, the court can give them enough time to secure alternative accommodation, while ensuring that the minimum of further arrears is accrued. That will help directly to minimise homelessness  as a result of repossession. In evidence to the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, a number of people expressed concern about the risk of inconsistency in the application of the law. There are different views on consistency. There is the "one size fits all" kind of consistency in the current legislation. I hope that the bill will introduce the sort of consistency where, if a debtor can show a reasonable likelihood of clearing the arrears in a reasonable time scale, the court can give them the opportunity to do that, subject to time limits and conditions that reflect the debtor's particular circumstances. Taken together, the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill and the lenders' own good practices will give people in mortgage arrears a number of options to resolve their difficulties—crucially, in the way most appropriate for their own circumstances. That will help to avoid the impact that the negative effects of repossession can have on households around Scotland. I welcome Cathie Craigie's willingness to take on board some of the positive comments and recommendations that have been made during the committee's examination of the bill. I confess that the Conveyancing and Feudal Reform (Scotland) Act 1970 is a fairly technical piece of legislation and care has to be taken in understanding it—never mind amending it. As a result, the bill is fairly technical—however, I would highlight the opportunity that the bill gives to the debtor to apply to the court. For those reasons, I am happy to confirm the Executive's support for Cathie Craigie's bill. I also congratulate her on being the first woman to introduce a member's bill to Parliament. I commend the bill to members.

Meeting the needs of homeless people is central to the Housing (Scotland) Bill and the Executive's housing policy. The bill incorporates all the recommendations made by the homelessness task force, which will strengthen the rights of homeless people and place new duties on local authorities and registered social landlords.

The bill's provisions will ensure that every person who is assessed as homeless will have new rights to a minimum package of support that includes advice and assistance and, in particular, access to temporary accommodation. That particular provision will provide accommodation for people who are not currently considered to be in priority need and who end up sleeping rough on Scotland's streets. The bill's provisions will help prevent that from occurring in future.

As I am sure the member knows, homelessness peaked during the period of the previous Conservative Administration. It will take time to tackle homelessness now, but the real prize is to prevent it from occurring in the future.

The homelessness task force is especially keen to ensure that the homelessness functions of local authorities will increasingly be delivered in partnership with registered social landlords. We have therefore introduced new arrangements to ensure such effective co-operation. It would be inappropriate, for example, to place a family of five in sheltered accommodation that was reserved for pensioners, where there is insufficient space. In such a case, it would be entirely reasonable for a registered social landlord to decline the offer of a placement.

Figures for individual local authority areas are not currently available, but the Scottish Executive has given a firm commitment that every householder aged 60 years or more who wants central heating will have it under the terms of the central heating initiative.

The scheme starts in April. It is a five-year scheme, which will run until March 2006. It is a £350 million initiative to install central heating and insulation in 141,000 homes, which has been warmly welcomed. It is clear that, in the event of stock transfer, the package will be provided by the new landlords. That will be a requirement of the contract that is entered into with them, and the cost of that will be reflected in the value of the stock. If tenants vote against stock transfer, the central heating initiative—paid for by the Scottish Executive—will kick in and no tenant will lose out.

I will be happy to visit the project in question and, if it is helpful, I will be happy to take questions from Phil Gallie. Elaine Thomson is right. Through our warm deal scheme, we are installing insulation in thousands of houses throughout Scotland, which will lead to considerable savings on people's heating bills. Our ultimate aim of tackling fuel poverty in Scotland will be assisted by a number of practical measures, of which energy efficiency is one.

Did Mr Quinan not get his committee of choice?

No resources have yet been allocated, as the programme starts in April 2001. We are in discussion with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and Scottish Homes about the allocations to local authorities and housing associations. We are also considering the resources that will be made available in the first year of the scheme for the private sector. An announcement will be made in due course.

I hope that Fiona Hyslop welcomes the £350 million initiative. She will recognise that it is a five-year initiative. We have indicated publicly the resources that are available in the first three years, which will be £204 million. I have already indicated that the private sector utilities are considering what their contribution to the overall programme will be. Because of the nature of our budget arrangements, the figures for the fourth and fifth years have not been announced yet.

We will install central heating in 141,000 homes throughout Scotland—homes which, prior to the announcement, would not have had the benefit of that central heating. I acknowledge that we want to do that as quickly as possible but, as Mr Canavan will recognise, these things take time. We are committing resources and we will have a rolling programme that will assist pensioners immediately. They are the first priority in the scheme.

I like you too, Ian.

I will reply to Phil Gallie's questions. Fifty-eight projects have benefited from the domestic abuse service development fund and a variety of work has taken place across 31 local authorities in Scotland. The £2 million for Scottish Homes will create 120 new bed spaces. Like all members, I recognise the growing concern about provision for men who have been abused. We have instructed officials to commission research on the scale and nature of the problem, on what services exist and, critically, on what more needs to be done. However, I remind Mr Gallie that the statistics show that about 96 per cent of those who are abused are women and that they are abused by men.

Tackling domestic abuse is, rightly, one of the priorities of this Executive and of this Parliament. I recall our debate in October last year, which was characterised by cross-party agreement. Today, we launch the first ever national strategy to tackle domestic abuse in Scotland. Our mission is not simply to reduce but to eradicate domestic abuse from our society. Let no one underestimate the scale of the task ahead of us. One in five women in Scotland will experience domestic abuse in their lifetime; one in 10 women dies each year as a result of domestic abuse. It does not make a bit of difference whether a woman lives in Bearsden or Drumchapel, in Morningside or Wester Hailes. That is the stark reality of what is happening in Scotland now. Equally worrying is what the future holds. Research conducted by the Zero Tolerance Trust tells us that almost 40 per cent of young men aged between 13 and 16 think that it is acceptable to hit a women. Is that the future that we want for successive generations of Scots? Do we really believe that domestic abuse is acceptable in a modern and progressive society? I think not. That is why our strategy is such an important step in the war against domestic abuse. This is just the beginning; the challenge for us all is to make the recommendations and actions outlined in the strategy come alive. Before I move on, I thank all the members of the Scottish partnership on domestic abuse. Ably led by Anne Smith as the chair, they devoted two years of their time and their considerable experience to this important area of work. Thanks must also go to Dr Sheila Henderson, who, as the consultant to the partnership, assisted its members throughout the process. Their work is complete but, to ensure that the actions that have been identified are carried forward in a coherent and structured manner, I intend to set up a national group early in 2001 to oversee implementation of the plan. It will be chaired by Margaret Curran and will develop links with local groups and service providers, with the aim of ensuring a consistency of approach across Scotland. The document that is before members today comprises a comprehensive overall strategy, a detailed and practical action plan, good practice guidelines and service standards. It is the product of wide consultation at two stages of drafting,  involving organisations that have direct experience of the problem, such as Scottish Women's Aid and the Scottish Rape Crisis Network. We hope and believe that we have a mandate for the strategy from organisations and bodies that have a role in addressing domestic abuse. The strategy identifies key areas of work that need to be carried out and will instruct the way forward at national and local level. Our aims are stated clearly: prevention, protection and provision—the three Ps. Our aims are the prevention of crimes of violence against women and children; appropriate legal protection for women or children who experience abuse; and adequate provision of support. The action plan lays out clearly what should be accomplished in each of the next three years and, which is important, identifies just who should be doing what. It requires us all to work together if we are to succeed. I hope that all local and national organisations will embrace the strategy and play their part in implementing the action plan. On behalf of the Scottish Executive, I whole-heartedly endorse the strategy and definition of domestic abuse and commit us to delivering results that will make a real difference to people's lives. We fully accept that to put the partnership's recommendations into practice, we have to come up with resources. That is exactly what we have done. I am delighted to tell Parliament that we have introduced a comprehensive financial package that is worth more than £18 million, which will enable us to make a difference.

I assure Fiona Hyslop that the funding is new money. I am disappointed that she chooses to question that yet again—it seems to be a common theme for SNP members when they have nothing else to say. The Women's Aid provision in Glasgow covers four different areas. The target is 83 places, and there are currently 80 places, but some of the accommodation is not ideal. We intend to use the money not just to build new facilities but to expand  existing facilities. We recognise that cities act as magnets for areas that have no provision. One of the first tasks that the action plan calls for is a review of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities recommendations for refuge spaces, which should be followed by the provision of the required number of refuge spaces to meet the needs of the population. We have to recognise the diversity of needs—the needs of disabled women and children and those of women and children from ethnic minority groups. The plan also calls for the provision of refuge services for those who do not currently have access to such provision, such as women using drugs or alcohol, or those who have learning disabilities or mental health problems. We have long accepted that current refuge provision falls far short of what is needed. There are something like 320 places, compared to a recommended figure of approximately 680. For example, in Aberdeenshire, the recommended number of places is 30, but the actual number is 10; in Angus, the recommended number is 15, but the actual number is four; and in Edinburgh, the recommended number is 60, but the actual number is 18. Women are turned away daily because provision is not adequate. We are therefore putting an additional £10 million into the Scottish Homes budget, over the three years from April 2001, to fully address the shortage of refuge spaces. We will build new refuges and adapt, extend and upgrade existing ones. Importantly, there will also be an on-going commitment to running costs for all of the new refuges. I am delighted to say that we have the full backing of COSLA for our proposals. I am confident that that very considerable sum of money will enable us to ensure that refuge provision will be available to every woman and child in Scotland who needs it, whether from the north, the south, the east or the west, for as long as they need it. As I said, the programme will begin in April 2001, but we are not just sitting back and waiting until then. We have identified £818,000 in the current year's budget to enable us to make an early start in improving services. That funding has been made available to Scottish Women's Aid for projects in areas identified by the partnership as requiring particular attention.

I confirm that the funding is  available to all women's aid groups in Scotland, whether affiliated to Scottish Women's Aid or not. Those areas include training for professionals working in the domestic abuse field, for example, the police, health services, social workers and legal professionals; translating existing information leaflets into ethnic community languages; and producing a leaflet for children and young people who live with the daily horror of domestic abuse. It will provide local groups with funding to improve disabled access to refuges and offices and to improve facilities in refuges and offices for children and young people.

I have taken a number of interventions and I have a time constraint. We are also providing an extra £4.5 million, over the next three years, to take work forward in other areas prioritised for action by the partnership, including the development of preventive work with children and young people, outreach work with women and children and training for service providers. We are also extending the domestic abuse service development fund for a further two years with an extra £3 million. That fund, which started in April this year, is currently providing support for 58 projects in 31 local authority areas. Work under way includes the development of multi-agency partnerships, outreach work in rural areas and services for children and young people. The Scottish Executive is providing a total sum of over £18 million to tackle domestic abuse in Scotland. That is over and above the £3 million we have already put into the domestic abuse service development fund and the £2 million already committed by Scottish Homes for refuge and move-on accommodation. That makes Scotland a leader within the United Kingdom if not a leader in the world. We are not complacent. The task ahead of us is enormous, although we are not starting from scratch. On the prevention side we will continue our work on awareness raising with a brand-new advertisement to be screened over the festive season, from boxing day to the end of January. Research shows that awareness raising works—attitudes change and women realise that they are not alone, so have the courage to come forward. If there is one signal that must go out consistently, it is that the victims of domestic abuse are never to blame. Do not suffer in silence. We are also working with the Zero Tolerance Trust with a view to using their respect programme in all schools in Scotland. A pilot of the materials is being carried out in Edinburgh schools from  January 2001. If we are to truly change attitudes for future generations we must start young, challenging the assumption that it is somehow acceptable to hit a woman. The domestic abuse helpline that we set up last June is answering an average of 50 calls a week. It takes calls from anyone affected by domestic abuse and is staffed from 10 am to 4 pm, Monday to Friday. I am pleased to be able to say that the helpline will be extended. From 11 December, it will be open for 12 hours a day, between 10 am and 10 pm, seven days a week, to help more women and children across Scotland. Our recent white paper on family law contains proposals to extend the protection available under the Matrimonial Act 1981 to spouses, whether together or separated, to divorcees, and to cohabitants and ex-cohabitants. It also proposes that a power of arrest should be attached to interdicts for three years, where requested. That will give greater protection to abused women. We are also taking steps to protect victims of rape and sexual abuse from being subjected to cross-examination by the person who is alleged to have abused them, and to strengthen the provisions restricting the extent to which evidence can be allowed regarding their sexual history and character. Let me challenge the notion—which does exist out there—that domestic abuse is somehow just a feminist issue. It is not. It is a matter of basic human rights—the right to dignity, the right to security and the right to live free from fear. It concerns each and every one of us. There is no place for domestic abuse in a modern Scotland; we are determined to do all we can to reduce and, ultimately, eradicate it. The Scottish Executive is providing unprecedented resources and commitment to tackle the problem and I am convinced that, if we all pull together, we can really make a difference. I will finish with the words of a woman who has been battered for over eight years. "I never talked to anyone about it because I didn't think they'd believe me. When everyone says how nice your husband is, you begin to think it's you that must be in the wrong. I was embarrassed and ashamed when it all came out but, at the same time, I was relieved because it showed I wasn't crackers." To women across Scotland I say: do not suffer in silence. I move, That the Parliament approves the final Report of the Scottish Partnership on Domestic Abuse, endorses the National Strategy to Address Domestic Abuse in Scotland and welcomes the funding package which has been put in place to implement the recommendations of the Partnership.

We are investing over £470 million in early education, child care and sure start Scotland to break into the cycle of deprivation and give children the best possible start in life. We are also providing parents with the means to build skills and improve their employability. Furthermore, we are taking steps to help low-income families directly through a proposed £24 million water affordability scheme and a £350 million central heating initiative.

I am glad that Christine Grahame recognises that the union is indeed a success. Since 1997, through a partnership arrangement between Labour at Westminster and a Labour-led Scottish Office—now the Scottish Executive—we have reduced child poverty by 70,000; 40,000 in the first year and 30,000 in the second year. We are on course to reduce child poverty by 100,000, which is something that this side of the chamber cares deeply about.

I thank John McAllion for his comments. We recognise some of the problems that asylum seekers experience and we are discussing the matter with both voluntary sector organisations and local authorities. Indeed, given his responsibility for the matter, my colleague Malcolm Chisholm is certainly aware of those problems. Earlier, the Executive indicated that it will monitor precisely what is happening to asylum seekers and that it will take that review forward.

I can certainly give a commitment to co-operate very closely with the two ministers that Mr Gorrie mentioned. Indeed, in the next few weeks, the chamber will have the opportunity to debate a national strategy on alcohol misuse.

Our social justice annual report sets out in detail the actions that we are taking to promote social justice across Scotland. As part of that programme of action, we are providing £150 million over three years to fund 48 social inclusion partnerships that are tackling the problems of disadvantaged groups and areas.

Irene Oldfather is correct about the fact that the better neighbourhood fund was announced by Jack McConnell in September with the provision of £90 million over three years. The member will appreciate that I cannot at this stage give any details of the criteria on which the awards will be made. I can say that Angus MacKay and I are considering how best to target communities that are suffering from deprivation to help them to improve their local services. We will discuss that with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities.

That is exactly what is happening. The increase to child benefit and the increase to the working families tax credit, through which 1 million families will benefit, demonstrate that our agenda is about getting people back in to work, because that is the best way to tackle poverty.

The only part of Mr Gallie's question that I recognise is the part about the Government doing something about the persistent poverty that occurs in our communities. It is only right that we should place resources in the communities that are most disadvantaged, to reverse the inheritance that the Conservatives left us.

Meetings take place on a regular basis to discuss a range of matters. The Scottish Executive is aware of the importance of the role of the Department of Social Security in the pursuit of social justice and of the need to work closely with it to achieve our aims.

We have regular discussions with our colleagues in the Department of Social Security—about housing benefit, but also about children and pensioners. I hope that Mr Quinan welcomes the significant lifting of 70,000 children out of poverty and the new package for pensioners, which will benefit 900,000 pensioners in Scotland. We have discussed the issue of housing benefit with the DSS. There are no referrals by local authorities in the case of under-occupation—an issue that I know Mr Quinan cares deeply about—nor will there be any referrals in the future.

As Mr Sheridan is aware, those are reserved matters. I do not know the detail of social fund rejections. Our approach is based on getting people back to work, and we have had significant success in doing that. Since 1997, 70,000 new jobs have been created in Scotland. There is now 70 per cent less youth unemployment in Scotland than there was in 1997, and long-term unemployment has been halved. I hope that the member welcomes the fact that people are getting back to work.

As Margo MacDonald has asked me to do so, I certainly will. We have a real interest not only in ensuring that benefits are there as an adequate safety net for people, but in getting Scotland back to work. That is the basis of our approach to tackling poverty in this country.

The debate is yet another example of the SNP wasting the Parliament's time. It is another opportunity for the SNP to peddle even more confusion and distortion. The more cynical among us would perhaps be forgiven for making a connection with the Glasgow Anniesland by-election. It would be more helpful if the SNP could produce something credible. I challenge it to do that. Frankly, SNP housing policy is a mess. Let us consider it. Policy 1 is where the SNP started—independence is the answer. In 1998 the SNP said that "there are simply not the funds in the Scottish block allocated to pay for a proper solution." An independent Scotland would have all the housing debt, taxes would go up and not one extra house would be built. Policy 2 is that the UK Government is now the answer. The SNP national council wanted the UK Treasury to meet the costs of debt write-off. That write-off would be of not just housing debt, but all debt. We would constantly be going cap in hand.

No, I will not. I suggest that the SNP should grow up and take some responsibility. Policy 3 was that devolution was the answer. Back in September's debate, Lloyd Quinan said that the former Deputy Minister for Local Government was "well aware that we could deal with the debt problem through the powers that he and the Minister for Communities have within the Parliament." In the same debate, policy 4 was revealed. Kenny Gibson, who was on message, got up and said that "Scotland as an independent, sovereign state is the only way forward for Scottish housing".— [ Official Report , 21 September 2000; Vol 8, c 610, 589.]  For goodness' sake, which is it? I would be grateful if SNP members made up their minds and stopped dithering. Instead of carping, they should focus on the issues. We know the legacy of debt and disrepair that characterises public sector housing in Scotland. In Glasgow, there is a debt of £850 million and a backlog of repairs totalling £1.6 billion. However, stock transfer is not just about Glasgow. Seven councils are currently considering community ownership and a further 24 are undertaking feasibility studies across both urban and rural Scotland. We recognise the need to secure significant new investment in houses and to tackle housing debt. We must also promote community  empowerment, community control and, ultimately, community ownership. Radical solutions are necessary, and that is exactly what the Parliament and the Executive are offering.

What is the SNP offering? Small-scale, area-by-area transfers that will take longer to achieve, will deprive tenants of much-needed investment now, and will leave tenants with 90 per cent of the debt. Fiona Hyslop tells us that the SNP would provide an additional £117 million for housing—yes, we are grateful—and would generate private finance, but I question how it would do that. What we are offered is a snappily titled "public service homes and community trust", with no explanation of how it would avoid public sector borrowing requirement rules or lever in private finance—because everybody knows that it would not lever in extra private finance. While we are on the subject of policy reviews—Fiona Hyslop is charged with reviewing the SNP's policy—I suggest that consistency and coherence in SNP housing policy would be a welcome change. Is the SNP opposed to transfer or not? As is depressingly often the case with the SNP, it seeks to be all things to all people. SNP policy is not opposed to stock transfer, yet SNP members have missed no opportunity to spread fear and misinformation among tenants regarding the Executive's plans. While national activists are prominent in campaigning against transfer, Fiona Hyslop's colleagues in Dumfries and Galloway are supporting wholesale stock transfer. Which is it to be?

Although I regret the SNP's confusion, I condemn the misinformation that is being peddled. I hope that SNP members are aware that their candidate in Anniesland is saying that the Executive wants all council houses to be transferred to a private company. I have never heard such blatant nonsense in my life. We have made it clear that all transfer landlords will be non-profit making, with tenants in the lead. I hope that the SNP will stop that scaremongering. Stock transfer is not about privatisation; it is about putting people in charge. Is the SNP opposed to that?

I ask Mr Gibson to let me finish. The member who responds for the SNP can answer the points.

Is the SNP aware that its candidate in Glasgow is saying that Glasgow City Council is a bad landlord? The contradiction in the SNP's position is that it would push more money at local authorities, causing more confusion.

I will. Five minutes is not a great deal of time. Housing stock transfer boils down to a choice. Fortunately, that choice is not up to the SNP or the inherently pessimistic Scottish Socialist Party. The choice is up to the tenants. They can choose between new investment to tackle the legacy of disrepair and allowing the situation stay the same; between tackling debt and lifting the crippling burden of debt and leaving it with the tenant.

Do we have community ownership that puts tenants in the lead now, or do we follow the SNP and wait for decades while homes crumble? Such choices are for the tenants of Glasgow—of Scotland—and I know that they will reject the confusion and distortion of the SNP.

She is indeed. The SNP's confusion and distortion will be rejected because people want better homes and communities and more jobs. Tenants want a radical solution to a pressing problem, and we will give them the choice because they deserve nothing less.

rose  —

Sit down.

Our approach is based entirely on what the evaluation action team came forward with. I refer Linda Fabiani to the technical document that accompanies the main social justice document; it contains hundreds of measures and indicators of progress.

May I make a helpful intervention?

On the basis of Donald Gorrie's comments, I take it that he will welcome the Executive's national development strategy on credit unions, which we intend to introduce in the next few months.

Will the member give way?

Fiona Hyslop's talk of the theft of policies is an interesting development. Where is the SNP's commitment to ending child poverty? What are its targets and time scales? We would be delighted to hear them, because, so far, we have heard soundbites and scare stories but no substance.

We used 1996-97 figures as a baseline because that allowed us to measure over a longer period of time. Income measures include reserved powers and we wanted to be able to draw a contrast with what is happening across Britain. If the member cares to read the technical document, which is also red, she will find that there are 20 different measures on income poverty, 19 of which are moving in the right direction. Child poverty is down by 40,000 in one year—

Today is significant. We are debating Scotland's first annual social justice report. On 22 November 1999, Donald Dewar launched our social justice strategy. In it, he set out our vision of a new Scotland: a more socially just Scotland in which everybody is valued and has the opportunity to fulfil their potential. He committed us to the task of breaking the cycle of deprivation, disadvantage and sheer poverty that affects too many of Scotland's people and places. That legacy of poverty and disadvantage, which had been inherited from the Tories, demanded that we set ambitious targets such as defeating child poverty within a generation; providing full employment through opportunities for all; and providing dignity and security in old age. It also demanded that we measure what matters by reporting every year to ensure that we are making progress towards delivering the things that make a real difference to people's lives. One year on from setting up our strategic framework and challenging all of Scotland to join us in defeating child poverty, we have published our first annual social justice report. The report reflects the early outcomes of our actions and our commitment to creating a fairer Scotland. Under Henry McLeish's leadership, we will turn that vision and strategy into action and reality. For the first time, Scotland has a means of ensuring that deprivation will no longer exist as a way of life for any child, family or older person. We have already started to turn the strategy into action by putting social justice at the heart of our spending plans. There are no quick fixes in this fight and we are passionate for change—the right change that lasts and brings a difference, not the soundbites and empty promises that seem to emanate from other parties in the chamber. The real significance of Monday's publication is that it shows where we are making progress; where we need to make faster progress; and where we still need to focus our attention to tackle deep-seated, persistent poverty. No one should doubt the size of the challenge, nor our enthusiasm for taking it on. In a short space of time, 70,000 children have been lifted out of poverty; unemployment is down to its lowest level for a generation; youth unemployment has  been reduced by a staggering 70 per cent; and 75,000 new jobs have been created in Scotland. As Sam Galbraith's announcement has just demonstrated, through our £24 million proposals for relief of water and sewerage charges for many on low incomes, we are working to join up our policies and help those who are most in need. That will help further to reduce poverty among pensioners and will build on the £350 million package that we have announced to tackle fuel poverty and on the Chancellor of the Exchequer's very welcome additional commitment to pensioners. The basic pension increase alone will be worth £3.6 million a week to Scotland's 900,000 pensioners, which means an extra £187 million in total in the first year. In addition, 185,000 Scottish pensioners will benefit from the increased minimum income guarantee.

Frankly, I would have thought that after the numerous parliamentary questions that Fiona Hyslop has lodged, she would have been able to piece together that information.

Well, I have certainly signed off those answers. We are serious about our commitment to pensioners. The issue is not about missing millions, but about providing pensioners with warm, decent, affordable housing and central heating and a good quality of life. I had hoped that the SNP would welcome those measures. The report plays a groundbreaking and powerful role, in that we now know that, despite our progress, there are nearly one in three children in poverty; one in five households where no one has employment; and neighbourhoods where inequalities in health and services continue to blight people's lives. That is a scandal; it is a shocking waste of potential that the Executive cannot, and will not, tolerate. Through our strategy, which brings focus, and  through our measurements, which provide the facts that no one knew before, we can turn Scotland's poverty legacy round. We must turn it round for future generations of Scottish children. No longer will a child be born into, or live or die in, poverty. That is our mission. We now have a detailed picture of the things that matter. We have detailed information on the background of students so that we can track whether our schools, colleges and universities are working to increase opportunities for all and not just for the few.

We measure poverty using three statistics, all of which were recommended by the European Statistical Programme Committee, which enable comparisons to be made across the board. The first measure is 50 per cent of median income, which works out at £116 a week. The main measure on which we base our findings is 60 per cent of median income, or £139 a week for a couple without children and £205 a week for a couple with two children aged between five and 11—if the detail is wrong, I will be happy to come back to the member. The third measure is 70 per cent of median income. We examine a basket of measures; we believe that that is important to ensure that we do not miss anything. I hope that the member welcomes that. We also have details on other important issues such as how the worst areas of unemployment compare with the average, so that we can track whether our policies on work are reaching into the most disadvantaged communities, and on whether the combination of police services and safety design makes our older people feel more secure in their homes and communities. There has been progress, but not yet enough. We need to drive social justice forward. We recognise that it takes time for programmes to have an effect and that data lags mean that much of our work has yet to be reflected in the data in the report. For example, the UK Government's national minimum wage and the working families tax credit were both introduced after the income data in the report were collected. The data on exclusions and truancy from schools date from before our welcome initiatives on alternatives to exclusion and home-school links. In addition, the data in the report do not reflect the outcome of the recent spending review, which was significant because we put social justice at the heart of our spending plans for the next three years. We have committed an extra £6 billion  better to target inequalities. Spending on health will increase by 15 per cent, on education by 17 per cent and on social justice and housing by 20 per cent. Our spending on enterprise, transport, justice and rural development will contribute directly to our social justice targets and milestones. Those substantial increases in investment in social justice include investment in some of our most challenging milestones, such as action on drugs, on excluded young people and on tackling rough sleeping and homelessness. Parliament will be aware that I announced an extra £12.5 million last week to sort out Glasgow's hostel problems and that we have already allocated £5 million this year to tackle the use of bed-and-breakfast accommodation. Other programmes will start to have an effect. We are building on the early success of the sure start Scotland programme to provide early care and family support for vulnerable children under the age of three. We are extending free part-time nursery places to all three-year-olds. We are promoting health improvement for children by funding the provision of fruit for infants and children at school. In addition, we are investing record sums in education, reducing class sizes and appointing 5,000 extra classroom assistants. We faced massive data gaps when we embarked on the exercise. Unsurprisingly, we inherited hardly any information about poverty, income or inequality in Scotland. Those subjects clearly did not matter to previous Administrations. We are filling those gaps, one of which is the need to improve the understanding of rural poverty in Scotland. Ross Finnie has set up a working group to consider that matter. In the meantime, we are keen to encourage qualitative as well as quantitative debate and have included in the report a number of independent articles from distinguished academics to develop our thinking. The opinions expressed in those articles are those of the authors and not of the Executive, but I hope that members agree that the themes of rural poverty, participative methods for measuring poverty and the role of services in disadvantaged areas are topical and substantive. I hope that all members will welcome those additions to our debate. The union with the rest of the UK gives us the economic strength and stability to make record resource commitments to progress social justice in the next three years. However, we have to use the resources of the union in partnership with communities. Tackling social justice requires a joined-up approach.

I do not know how much more joined up it is possible to get. We are investing £6 billion extra on issues that matter, such as working together to tackle child poverty, achieving full employment, and providing dignity and security in old age. Those are the joins that matter and that will make a difference to the lives of people in Scotland. I am conscious of time, so I will finish by confirming that our commitment to tackling poverty in Scotland is backed by resources. On Monday, the First Minister, Henry McLeish, announced the £70 million children's change fund as a key part of our strategy for tackling child poverty and deprivation. The fund will be established to support integrated services and new approaches for the most vulnerable children and young people, thereby improving their life chances and preventing them from falling prey to exclusion. It will bring much-needed extra focus to our support for children who are in need. By pooling resources from the education department, the health department and the justice department, we will be making available more than £70 million to resource the fund. Jack McConnell will take the lead and will consult the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, health boards and the voluntary sector about how the fund is administered and linked in with other initiatives. It is right that we focus on the care and well-being of children. We are building a future for our children and a future for us—a future where our children will not live in poverty, and where we have confident and successful children in every part of Scotland. We are starting to make progress in turning round the deeply damaging legacy of poverty that we inherited. The first annual report, containing our targets and our milestones, is our means of tracking progress year by year. It is a measure of the failure of our predecessors that, although we have achieved a lot, there is still so much to do. We are targeting our resources on disadvantage and we are working with partners in local government, voluntary organisations, the business community and communities across Scotland. We  are putting in place the programmes and policies that will end child poverty in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Executive's publication of the Social Justice Annual Report 2000 ; notes the progress which is being made in tackling poverty and social exclusion, and reaffirms its commitment to creating a fairer society in Scotland, where everyone matters.

It is unacceptable that people should be homeless at any point in the year. Our target is that by 2003 no one should have to sleep rough. We have increased funding for the rough sleepers initiative to £40 million to extend the provision of services for rough sleepers and to increase the attention that is paid throughout the year to preventing rough sleeping.

We are aware of the campaign by the rough sleepers unit. Our priority is to ensure that by 2003 no one has to sleep rough. Our approach in Scotland is to find solutions by involving those who have experience and knowledge of the problems. We are not targeting particular groups, such as beggars—we should address the underlying reasons for their situation. I reassure Kenneth Macintosh that our approach in Scotland is different.

On no occasion have we  threatened to withdraw funding from voluntary organisations in Scotland. We respect and value the contribution that the voluntary sector makes to Scotland and, indeed, we respect the fact that voluntary organisations will criticise us occasionally.

I am pleased to be able to bring before Parliament the report of the Glasgow street homelessness review team, which has been conducting a fundamental and strategic review of efforts to tackle the problems of street homelessness in Glasgow. Members will recall that last November my predecessor, Wendy Alexander, announced the establishment of the review team. The report sits very much in the context of the wider work that the Executive is carrying out—through the homelessness task force and the rough sleepers initiative—to tackle the scourge of homelessness, especially street homelessness in Scotland. We recognise that the problem of rough sleeping is most acute in Glasgow. That is compounded by the continued existence of wholly inappropriate and unacceptable hostels in which many people who would otherwise be homeless are accommodated. Those hostels have been described by many as more frightening and dangerous than sleeping rough. It is clear that Glasgow's old and out-of-date hostels are part of the homelessness problem—they are not part of the solution. I will give members an idea of the scale of the problem—the figures are truly stark. In Glasgow, an estimated 6,500 people experience street homelessness every year. Of those, 2,500 are homeless for the first time and the rest have continuing or repeat experience of street homelessness. About 1,000 of the total are women. Many of those people have complex needs—the problem is not simply about bricks and mortar. In Glasgow, 41 per cent of young single homeless  people have drug problems. Alcohol addiction is a serious problem that affects 61 per cent of homeless people in older age groups. About 50 per cent of the homeless people that were surveyed have physical health problems and there are high levels of neurotic disorders and other mental health problems. Almost all homeless people are unemployed. Hostels were never designed to cope with the problem—they are too big and too basic and they are outdated. Despite the best efforts of staff, conditions are getting worse. About a third of those who sleep rough in Glasgow have been barred from hostels and many others would rather sleep rough than use them. The report found that an exceptionally high proportion of Glasgow's young population is presenting as homeless during the course of a year. Of the 6,500 people who were identified as being street homeless, more than 2,000 are under 24 years of age. We tend to deal with that group—as we do with others—by accommodating them in large and understaffed hostels where they are prey to drug dealers and money lenders; where they feel less safe than they do on the streets; and where their temporary experience of homelessness can quickly become a lifestyle. We must put a stop to that. Although there has been a considerable increase in investment in services in Glasgow through the rough sleepers initiative—more than £12 million through to March 2002—we recognised a year ago that a thorough and fundamental review of the current efforts to address street homelessness in the city was needed. The review needed to be focused on the particular issues that affected homeless people in Glasgow and it needed to involve all the organisations that contribute to overall homelessness provision. We brought together health, housing and social work departments, Glasgow's voluntary organisations, Strathclyde police, Shelter Scotland, the Big Issue and academics who have specialised in researching and understanding homelessness, to consider service provision from the point of view of the needs of the individual and to make recommendations on that. The team, which was led by the Executive, set out to identify what needs to be done to improve the provision of accommodation, especially hostel accommodation, and to improve and increase the availability of social and other support for people who are homeless or who live in temporary hostel accommodation. The review team reported on its work through the homelessness task force. I am pleased to present that report to Parliament today, with the Executive's endorsement of its conclusions and  recommendations. The report contains many challenging recommendations on prevention of street homelessness and alleviation of it when it occurs. The review team rightly highlights the need for more to be done to prevent people from arriving on the streets in the first place. However, the report underlines the need for an effective and multidisciplinary response once people are on the streets. It clearly sets out the inadequacy of current resettlement arrangements, under which people end up in inappropriate hostels with little or no prospect of being helped to move on to something more secure. The report recognises that present levels of personal support are inadequate, despite the considerable efforts of many people in the voluntary and statutory sectors. In June this year, we informed Parliament of the emerging conclusions of the review—that there should be a rolling programme of hostel closures in Glasgow to rid the city of such outdated large institutions. We identified £2 million to be used to begin to implement that programme. The recommendation and the reasons why such action is necessary are set out clearly in the report. The large hostels, which are so much a part of the street homelessness problem, must be closed down. Long-term hostel residents should, where possible and appropriate, be moved into supported tenancies. I stress that that will be done where it is possible and appropriate—we recognise that it must be done with care and sensitivity. Much smaller, highly supported units will be developed where there is a need for such accommodation. In addition, greater emphasis will be placed on providing people with the help and support that they need in mainstream tenancies. By developing small supported and responsive units, we can deal more effectively with individual needs and we can prevent institutionalisation of individuals—which is all too often a feature of the current provision and regimes. We recognise that there will be a need for highly supported accommodation units for some people, particularly people who have acute and chronic needs. The report recommends that such units should be small and focused in their purpose. We must move away from the situation where vulnerable young people live in close proximity to people who have severe and chaotic behavioural problems. There must be a new process of comprehensive assessment at an early stage and there must, where necessary, be linked provision for very short-term temporary accommodation. The key will be to ensure that the assessment is comprehensive and multi-disciplinary. It is not  good enough that people are assessed four or five times by different agencies and for different purposes. The needs of the whole person should dictate the support and services that that person receives. Assessments should measure employability and basic skills so that people can be helped back into meaningful employment. However, even with such assessments, there is a risk that some people will need greater personal support to give them the confidence and knowledge that will enable them to identify the choices and opportunities that are available to them. Many people will have become disconnected from the family and community support networks that we all rely on from time to time. The report has recommended that a pilot project should be set up, which will connect homeless people with a personal assistant or a befriender to provide that support. We will establish such a pilot project and we will assess its success before we consider how it might be applied more widely. So much needs to be done to prevent people from ending up on the streets in the first place. A key recommendation of the report is that, as an immediate priority, all the relevant authorities should examine what more can be done to prevent people who leave care, prisons and other institutions from becoming homeless. The homelessness task force is taking forward that issue in the wider context of homelessness throughout Scotland, but there are clear actions that can be taken in Glasgow that will prevent homelessness and reduce the numbers of people who come on to the streets. It is also essential that we address the need to improve the services that are available to homeless people and the accessibility of those services. Health services, including addiction services and other support services, need to be brought in and delivered effectively to street homeless people. In the short term, those services will be developed for and delivered to hostel residents. As the hostel closure programme proceeds, an essential element of the process will be to ensure that an individual's connections with support services are not disrupted. We have already approved the establishment of a hostels addictions team as part of the rough sleepers initiative. That team will ensure that the services that people need are available where they are needed. Even if we develop and build on partnership working—which has evidently contributed to the production of the report—and the joint working that provides so many good examples of cross-sector projects in Glasgow, we need to make a step change in our efforts. That way, we will be able to make a significant impact on the problem of street  homelessness. As the review team identified correctly, the problem of street homelessness in Glasgow will not be solved overnight, nor will it be solved if we continue with the current policies within the current framework at current funding levels. A major long-term programme is required, which will need to be funded. The hostel reprovisioning programme in itself is ambitious, but it is an absolutely necessary element of the plan. I am therefore pleased to announce that—in addition to the £2 million that we have made available this year—the Executive will make available a further £12.5 million in the next three years to provide for that programme. In addition to the services that are funded under the RSI, Greater Glasgow Health Board is planning additional mental health, addiction and physical health services to benefit those who sleep rough or who are at risk of doing so. We also announced the national health service funding for next year under the new Arbuthnott arrangements. Greater Glasgow Health Board received a 7.7 per cent increase—£60.5 million—which gives it a hospital, community health and prescribing budget of £846 million. The Executive continues to act to ensure that the health needs of rough sleepers are addressed effectively. There has been much activity during the past year, but we recognise that many fundamental problems have yet to be tackled. By taking forward the actions that are proposed by the review team, we can begin to tackle the fundamental structural problems that stand in the way of long-term success. The homeless people of Glasgow deserve nothing less.

I thank Fiona Hyslop for her initial comments. It is important that Parliament concentrates its efforts on tackling homelessness and rough sleeping, which is homelessness at its most acute. I will answer her questions and attempt to give her the detail that she seeks. My understanding is that there are about 2,200 hostel beds in Glasgow city in a combination of council, voluntary sector and commercial provision. We make it clear that our strategy is intended to achieve replacement of all inappropriate hostel provision in Glasgow, not only council hostel facilities. However, the problem is acute in some council facilities. The pace that we intend to set is that we should achieve reprovisioning over five years. We know that reprovisioning takes time. If we consider the experience of Loretto Housing Association in reprovisioning of the Great Eastern Hotel, we start to understand the complex arrangements that must be made to protect the needs of individuals who are involved in the process. We have planned a time scale of five years and we will make £12.5 million available over three years, as Fiona Hyslop rightly said. We must examine the total cost over the five years and we are already modelling figures to ensure that there will be adequate financial cover. The money is new and was identified during the spending review. I confirm that it has not been taken from any other allocation. The project is complex and we will sit down with all the partners to take it forward. We intend that the Glasgow review team will continue as a steering group, because we welcome the advice and assistance that we have received from the council, the voluntary sector, the Big Issue  in Scotland and Shelter Scotland. Those organisations have experience of how such programmes play out on the ground. In addition, we are moving to appoint a project manager to ensure that the work is taken forward  cohesively.

Bill Aitken is absolutely right to say that the Dickensian conditions that exist in Glasgow are no longer appropriate. We must do something about those conditions urgently. I assure Bill Aitken that I am aware of the complexity of the needs of the rough sleeping population, both in Glasgow and throughout Scotland. However, I am also aware that hostels contribute to the problem of homelessness—about 60 per cent of the hostel population have been previously barred from hostels because of their behaviour. I offer Bill Aitken the absolute assurance that we will not close down any hostels until appropriate accommodation is put in place. We do not wish to contribute to people ending up on the streets—we want to ensure that people make a smooth transition to more appropriate accommodation. Last night, I visited supported accommodation in Moffat Street in the Gorbals, where I met some former residents of the Great Eastern Hotel. The services that are provided in that supported accommodation were very impressive, in that they are focused on the needs of individuals—whatever their problems—rather than on the needs of the service deliverers. That approach not only helps the residents to sustain tenancies, but addresses the underlying problems that contributed to the  residents' sleeping rough in the first instance. I assure Bill Aitken that our plan is to provide small-scale supported accommodation for people who have acute and chronic needs and to wrap services around them to prevent the recurrence of rough sleeping.

I would welcome a meeting with Frank McAveety. He does not need to ask me formally for a meeting—I would meet him if he were to ask me informally. Frank McAveety is absolutely right to pinpoint the fact that the £12.5 million has the potential to be used in much wider circumstances—indeed, it is meant to be used for much more than simply the provision of council accommodation. We are acutely aware that accommodation in some voluntary sector hostels is not appropriate. Mr McAveety highlighted the Bellgrove Hotel as one of the most appalling examples of inappropriate provision. The Bellgrove Hotel is a commercial hostel in Glasgow where about 115 people live in what I consider to be dismal and totally unacceptable conditions. In order to deal with inappropriate accommodation, our strategy must be to create alternative appropriate provision, so that people do not have to live in places such as the Bellgrove Hotel, where the provision that is available raises an issue of human dignity.

I will clarify the figures. Provision of hostel beds in Glasgow stands at about 2,200, with an average 90 per cent occupancy rate. The overall number of people who end up sleeping rough or in hostels on more than one occasion is counted as 6,500 in any given year. However, that figure represents a much smaller number of individuals who repeatedly end up on the streets. Part of the current problem with hostels is that they are like a revolving door. People get a place in a hostel, they misbehave—their chaotic behaviour can have other underlying causes—and they get barred and end up back on the streets. We need to address the underlying problems, rather than simply creating more revolving doors. We are convinced that the extra resources that we have put into the rough sleepers initiative—£40 million—will help us to improve provision. We are convinced that the co-operation that exists between local authorities, health boards, the voluntary sector and others who work in homelessness provides a well-resourced framework that can meet our commitment that no one in Scotland should have to sleep rough by 2003. It is incumbent on the Executive and Parliament to do their utmost to ensure that that commitment is met. Like Robert Brown, I am aware that Christmas is coming up. It is a cold time of year, when it is a tragedy to be homeless. We are working with the relevant agencies on the ground. We are conscious that Edinburgh needs to reprovision its hostels quickly and that it needs to make interim accommodation available. We are also aware that, in Glasgow, the Big Issue in Scotland works well for people over the Christmas period. We are interested in the plans that are in place, but we remain absolutely committed to ensuring that nobody in Scotland has to suffer the indignity of sleeping rough.

We acknowledge the acute problems that exist in Glasgow. However, I stress that overall unemployment levels have dropped substantially. Since 1997, when the Labour Government was elected, youth unemployment has come down by 70 per cent and long-term adult unemployment has come down by 50 per cent. Those are significant figures, but I recognise that we must connect the most disadvantaged areas to that economic growth. Some areas of Glasgow have significant problems and the role of the Glasgow Alliance—which works in partnership with all the key agencies in the city—is to ensure that people are connected to opportunities and that new opportunities are created for the city. I know that the new Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning takes a specific interest in Glasgow and I shall be working closely with her to ensure that the future of the city is bright.

I should point out that, since Labour came to power, the number of children in poverty in Scotland has dropped by 70,000, which is welcome. I accept that the essence of the problem is the revolving-door syndrome and I accept that homeless people slip through the net and end up sleeping rough. To stop that happening, we have aligned programmes such as the new futures fund with people in hostels. We are ensuring that the new comprehensive assessment package includes an assessment of skills, ability to work and training needs. We want to work with people to secure and sustain gainful employment for them. We are mindful of the fact that, for many homeless people, securing and sustaining employment is critical to their future progress. That is very much part of the current assessment package.

I hope that the member recalls the central heating initiative that was announced to this Parliament and will take 144,000 Scots out of fuel poverty, 70,000 of whom will be pensioners.

I am not surprised to see that Mr Harding is blushing—I would be embarrassed to say what he has just said. Does he think that it is politically correct that the Executive wants to tackle the fact that 2,242 racist incidents were recorded in Scotland last year? Does he think that that 76 per cent increase is politically correct?

I wonder whether Bill Aitken is aware of the difference between positive discrimination and positive action. Is he also aware that positive discrimination—which he has just described—is unlawful?

For the sake of clarity, I should explain that the £5 million is for below-tolerable-standard housing, a significant majority of which is occupied by ethnic minority communities. A responsible Executive should do something about that situation.

I am conversant with section L2 of schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998. Will Fiona Hyslop be good enough to recognise that we have used one of the duties on public authorities in that section through the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000?

I would like to take members back to 1 July 1999. In his outstanding address at the opening of this Parliament, Donald Dewar said: "we will never lose sight of what brought us here: the striving to do right by the people of Scotland; to respect their priorities; to better their lot; and to contribute to the commonweal. I look forward to the days ahead when this Chamber will sound with debate, argument and passion. When men and women from all over Scotland will meet to work together for a future built from the first principles of social justice" .  That was a mission statement for the Parliament. However, it was more than that, because it captured the aspirations of the people of Scotland for something altogether better and different: a Parliament where their needs and priorities would be recognised and considered. It was a statement that embraced the hopes of all the communities of Scotland—communities of both interest and place—for something altogether more inclusive. Equality is one of the founding principles of the Scottish Parliament. From the outset, there has been an expectation that the Parliament would address the issues of inequality and injustice, counter the effects of discrimination and prejudice and seek to bring inclusivity to the new democracy. The Executive has made an equal commitment to work to meet that expectation. We stated our commitment to equality for all in our programme for government. We established an equality unit and immediately we began to develop dialogue with the equality interests on the action that needed to be taken. We continued support for the women in Scotland consultative forum and established the race equality advisory forum in November 1999. In our statement to Parliament last December, we committed ourselves to developing a strategy for addressing inequality and the Parliament affirmed its support for our approach. That was not meant to be a quick fix or a short-term exercise; rather it was a search for lasting solutions built on firm foundations. Since last December, we have been involved in widespread consultation and dialogue to shape the strategy and draw up an action plan.  We had a good response to the consultation on "Towards an Equality Strategy", which was circulated widely. We had direct input from grass-roots equality organisations through a series of events in the summer. We also welcomed the frank and open discussion with the Equal Opportunities Committee on the development of the strategy. Therefore, with the help of many individuals and groups—including those new to engagement with the Government and those with years of experience—we have produced our strategy: "Working together for equality". It is the first equality strategy for Scotland. We are grateful for the time and effort that so many people gave to the process and for the guidance of many organisations and individuals who have worked hard over the decades to combat injustice and unfairness and to progress equality in Scotland. In its delivery, just as in its preparation, the strategy will depend on a fruitful partnership with a wide range of bodies and interests in the public, private and voluntary sectors. Our vision is of a just and inclusive Scotland. However, that cannot be achieved whilst many in our communities experience discrimination, prejudice, exclusion and disadvantage. It is incumbent on us to tackle those issues if we are to become a truly modern and progressive society. To those people who shout that the strategy is merely political correctness, I say that if we are to deliver social justice for all Scotland, part of our work must be to address the underlying inequalities in our society. This is not a marginal activity; there is a clear need for action. Let me make that statement real for members. One in five households in Scotland includes someone with a disability. We know that disabled people are much less likely to be in employment than are non-disabled people and that when they are in jobs, they often earn less. Despite the real improvements that have been made over recent years in tackling the physical barriers that prevent disabled people from travelling, working and generally participating in everyday life, there is no doubt that much still needs to be done. People from our ethnic minority communities are more likely to earn low wages and to experience poor housing conditions. For some, life in Scotland today can mean enduring verbal and physical violence and harassment. In 1999-2000 police in Scotland recorded 2,242 racist incidents—a 76 per cent increase on the previous year. That is clear evidence that in Scotland we have a problem that we must address. The tragic murder of Stephen Lawrence was a watershed in race relations in Britain, and we welcome the increasing awareness of institutionalised racism and its impact.  Women make up 52 per cent of the population, yet still they do not have equal pay. That is despite 30 years of equal pay legislation. We know that women are more likely to live in poverty and to earn low pay. The list of disadvantaged groups does not end there. The elderly, the young, lesbians, gays and travelling people can all experience discrimination and exclusion. Some people may experience discrimination on the grounds of their religious beliefs and observances. There is no doubt that there is a major job to be done. "Working together for equality" sets the framework for advancing work in these areas. Our task in the coming period will be to move from planning into action. The strategy is overarching and long term. It is set in the context of our devolved responsibilities and emphasises the scope for achieving change through policy and practice. It sets out clearly how we will work to fulfil our vision of fostering respect and understanding of our diverse communities, encouraging and enabling everyone to live, work and take part in society to their full potential, free from prejudice and discrimination and, above all, working to empower all our communities. The strategy centres on three strategic objectives. The first is about making better policy and delivering better services. The second is about promoting equal opportunities and tackling discrimination. The third is about the Executive being a good employer. Those objectives will drive the Executive to deliver an equality agenda by improving its policy making, programme development, service design and delivery and spending plans; by promoting and influencing change; and through its role as an employer, in which it can develop good practice and seek to be a model of equal opportunities policies and practice. We have identified a range of actions to deliver the objectives. They are shaped by the very clear messages that we received during the consultation. For example, there was widespread support in Scotland for the mainstreaming of equality. We all recognise the diversity of our population; we recognise less readily the consequent diversity in its needs and aspirations and the variation in the impact of decisions and policies on different groups. Mainstreaming equality means taking those differences into account. It means that equality issues will be integrated into policy making, legislation, spending plans, service design and programme development. It means addressing equality issues from the start—not as an add-on or as an afterthought. People want to see their needs catered for in the mainstream of policy, not just through sporadic  initiatives or short-term projects. We can make a difference to the lives of the people of Scotland if that perspective is brought to our daily business. We were urged to be strategic but also to outline clear actions with time frames.

We are taking forward our mainstreaming work in two pilot areas that were identified in the strategy document. One is housing and the other is the schools division. The focus of our attention in developing the guidance, tools and mechanism is on those areas, with a view to spreading it across the Executive. I will be happy to hear the detail of the point that the member has raised. I have tried to explain the process of how we intend to take mainstreaming forward. During the consultation, we were urged to ensure accountability and measurement of progress. This is an especially strong personal commitment. We simply must deliver, and to show that we have done so we need appropriate indicators and the frameworks for monitoring and evaluation. We will produce an annual equality report to Parliament. We will expect reporting frameworks to be developed across the public sector. The consultation emphasised, as many members have done, the need for appropriate data, information and research to inform our equality work. The Executive is committed to providing better statistics about different equality groups. Only by doing so will we start to have policy making based on evidence. We have published a very useful guide to sources of equality statistics. We plan to produce a series of equality statistics fact cards as part of the guide to sources of statistics. We recognise the value of the gender audit, which was published by Engender over a number of years. The Scottish Executive will now publish a compilation of gender disaggregated statistics in spring 2001. We are keen to consult a wide range of equality statistics users as to the usefulness of publishing statistics in various formats. We will also discuss the gaps in data and the priorities for filling them. We will start that process with a seminar for equality statistics users. We will develop a research strategy to support  mainstreaming. It will aim to ensure that all research projects commissioned by the Executive include equality categories as part of their data collection and analysis where that is possible and appropriate. The need to work in partnership and in collaboration with other bodies and groups was identified. Equality is not just the responsibility of the Executive, or of this Parliament, but of us all. While the Executive aims to lead by example, it expects to work in partnership to roll out the strategy across the public sector and beyond. The importance of training and awareness raising to the effective mainstreaming of equality and promotion of equal opportunities was also highlighted. We will put training initiatives in place in the Executive and we will examine how best to raise public awareness.

The financial structures are clear. The equality unit has always been meant to be strategic. It will have a budget and I will provide the chamber with details of that later in my speech. Mainstreaming will fail if it is owned by a small, strategic unit in the Executive. It is owned by the entire Executive, by every department and every minister so that there is political commitment and commitment from senior management to making this happen.

I will continue. One of the key messages to emerge during our consultation was the need to find better ways for people to get involved and more effective ways to consult and engage with communities. If the changes we want to make are to be real and relevant to people, we must ensure that we listen and, more important, that we hear their voices. We intend to draw on the valuable comments that were made during the consultation in scoping our proposals for better dialogue and communication. As part of that process we will review the women in Scotland consultative forum and the lessons learnt from the work of the race equality advisory forum. The Executive is a big employer and we have identified in the strategy the importance of being a model of good practice. We are committed to equal opportunities, but there is more that we can do. The Executive is finalising its diversity strategy, which aims to increase the diversity of its  work force and to manage and value diversity in the Executive. We have identified as a first step an extensive list of actions to be taken. They range from supporting networks for ethnic minority and part-time staff to developing further family-friendly measures in the area of child care and extending equality monitoring to all key personnel processes. Actions will include promoting the increased development and availability of alternative working patterns. We are making targeted efforts to increase the number of people from ethnic minorities applying to join the Executive and have appointed an outreach worker to take that forward. The diversity strategy will complement the equality strategy and aims to ensure that staff in the Executive are better equipped to meet the challenges of the future. Promoting equal opportunities and tackling discrimination head on will be an important feature of the strategy. We will discuss with a variety of interests how we will raise public awareness and build respect for others. It is widely recognised that there is under-representation of women, people from ethnic minority communities and people with disabilities in the public appointments system. A strong focus on equality and diversity is needed at the appointment process stage and at the post-appointment level. Ministers are currently considering changes in the light of responses to the consultation paper "Appointments to Public Bodies in Scotland: Modernising the System". The development of an effective mainstreaming programme and the delivery of a long-term equality strategy require resources. Where mainstreaming is in place, equality will be resourced through departmental allocations. However, we acknowledge that resources must be made available to initiate action and to provide the tools, guidance, training and mechanisms necessary for implementation of the strategy. I am very pleased to announce that we have doubled the resources that are available. On top of our annual programme budget for equalities of £0.5 million we have added a further £0.5 million for 2000-01 and for each of the next three years, for a programme of equality development. The money will be used to develop an equality communications strategy, including a framework of national guidance on translating and interpreting; to develop effective mechanisms of consultation and dialogue with communities; to support departments in the development of mainstreaming; and to develop research and information to support the mainstreaming of equality. In addition, we will devise equality performance indicators and monitoring and evaluating frameworks and we will promote equal opportunities for all across Scotland.  I said that the strategy is overarching and applies to the needs of all equality groups. In addition, we will look at the action required to address the needs of specific equality interests. The race equality advisory forum was established last November to advise the Executive on a strategy for race equality and the action required to tackle institutional racism. The forum will report shortly and the Executive will then be able to take matters forward. We are also considering how to take forward the recommendations of the disability rights task force. We will consider the issues that are of relevance to other equality groups in the period ahead. We have titled our strategy "Working together for equality". We did so advisedly. There is indeed much that we can do as an Executive and as a Parliament, but we can do much more with others. We want the strategy to be rolled out widely and a strong partnership to be developed with the statutory equality bodies, public bodies, the private sector and the voluntary sector—as well as communities themselves. We will listen and learn from others and will recognise the importance of their contribution. History has taught us that the impetus for change lies outwith government. The cause of freedom—the cause of equality and justice—has been advanced over the years through the campaigns, struggles, and courage of people such as Nelson Mandela, Martin Luther King, the Ford machinists who campaigned for equal pay and Rosa Parks, the mother of the civil rights movement. That cause has been furthered by the dedication of the thousands of others who have sought to progress equality over the years. It will be advanced in the future by the activities of those who work daily with the reality of discrimination and injustice and of those who experience it. We need to listen; we need to learn. We also need to act. By implementing the strategy outlined in "Working together for equality", our policies and programmes will be more responsive to the needs of all our communities. Respect for diversity and difference will be fostered and new partnerships for change will be forged. That sits firmly with our drive to achieve social justice. If we do not tackle inequality in our society now, we will exclude future generations. We in this Parliament can start the process of change. The equality strategy is a first step in making a real difference to the lives of people across Scotland. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment to ensuring that people are treated as equal individuals regardless of, for example, their background, gender, ethnicity, sexuality, any disability, age or religious belief; commends the strategy set out in Working Together   for Equality and the Scottish Executive's commitment to address inequality, prejudice and discrimination through an inclusive, participative and mainstreaming approach, and calls upon other organisations to do likewise in working to attain equality of opportunity for all.

I assume that Mr Harding is referring to "Housing Trends in Scotland: Quarter Ending 31 March 2000", which we published on 26 October. The Executive is committed to ensuring decent, affordable housing for all. Our priorities for this term are attracting new investment, empowering tenants, reducing fuel poverty and tackling homelessness. We are working with local authorities and other partners to deliver those priorities.

I am going to enjoy jousting with Mr Harding in the coming months. The legacy that the Tories left us was one of disrepair and under-investment. We have slowed down the number of people who make homelessness applications in Scotland. In Fife, a decrease has been recorded. We should therefore be congratulating local authorities that are trying to make inroads into homelessness in Scotland.

I also look forward to jousting with Mr McAllion in future, although I hope that it will be good-humoured. We are examining housing benefit issues closely, in the context of stock transfers. We want to ensure that we get the best deal for tenants. A review of housing benefit is being undertaken as part of the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions green paper on housing. The Executive will respond to that.

I thank Linda Fabiani for her question. The increase in homelessness has slowed considerably. Overall, there is only a 0.5 per cent increase across the board; in the last two quarters it has decreased dramatically. It is rather early to draw firm conclusions from that. However, I suggest that a downward trend in homelessness in Scotland is to be welcomed.

The Scottish Executive regularly receives representations from individuals and organisations on the allocation of SIP funds in Glasgow.

I would be interested to hear more about the concern that the member raises. We are keen to ensure that social inclusion partnership moneys are well targeted, which is why it is appropriate that the applications that we receive are scrutinised with care. However, there should be no unnecessary delay in the process.

The Executive's targets and milestones for measuring progress in tackling child poverty were set out in our social justice strategy. The first annual report, published later this year, will detail the progress made against the various indicators. The member may be interested to know that the number of children in households with very low earnings has already started to fall. We expect that 100,000 children in Scotland will have been lifted out of poverty by 2002.

I certainly offer that assurance. The Executive is not complacent about the task ahead. However, the UNICEF information dates from 1995 and shows the legacy of two decades of the Conservative Government, under whose regime the number of people living in poverty doubled and the number of children living in households with low incomes more than doubled. There is a legacy of poverty, neglect and decline.  The Executive, working with the UK Government, will reverse that.

Benefit uptake campaigns are being funded to a much higher level by the current UK Government than they have ever been in the past. Local government and the voluntary sector have key roles to play. Let me challenge the assumption that this is simply a matter for the UK Government. The Scottish Executive has a key role to play in terms of education, health and enterprise. We are committing £1.5 billion to initiatives to tackle social exclusion and to lift people out of poverty. I stress that, by working together, both Governments will succeed in ending child poverty in 20 years.

I am conscious of the time, so I will try to be brief. Voluntary action, volunteering and community action are essential to the Scottish Executive's vision of creating an inclusive and mutually supportive society. We want to empower our communities, to make it easier for people to get involved, to strengthen their desire to get involved and to encourage more and higher-quality opportunities for participation. The active communities initiative is a UK cross-Government programme first launched by the Prime Minister in January last year with the aim of promoting a step change in public involvement in the community. Scotland was represented on the UK working group by Liz Burns, the director of Volunteer Development Scotland. I welcome Liz to the public gallery today. At the time of the launch, ministers agreed that there should be a clear and distinctive identity to the programme in Scotland, building on existing work and taking account of our social justice agenda. As a result, the Scottish active communities working group was established to advise on the development and implementation of the strategy in Scotland. Chaired by Laurie Naumann, it brought together an extensive range of expertise from across the public and voluntary sectors. The working group identified four key objectives that underpin the strategy: first, to bring about a change in attitudes towards community activity; secondly, to increase the number of volunteers; thirdly, to draw in people from a wider range of backgrounds; and last, to act with other initiatives to promote a community empowerment approach. That provides us with a focus and a starting point. It assesses where we are and where we want to get to. We wanted a strategy that would take account of particular Scottish circumstances, such as the better developed infrastructure of the voluntary sector and our compact with the sector. We wanted a strategy that would be cross-cutting, recognising the role of central and local  government and the voluntary and private sectors. We also wanted a strategy that would be widely understood and disseminated and capable of commanding broad ownership and support. The culmination of the working group's considerable time and personal effort—the report "Supporting Active Communities In Scotland"—was published earlier this year for consultation. At this point, I wish to record my personal thanks, and the thanks of the Scottish Executive, to members of the working group for their efforts. Aside from the written consultation, which generated 140 responses—a summary of which is available on the Executive's website and from the Scottish Parliament information centre—there was a convention in Edinburgh and consultation roadshows in Castle Douglas, Dundee, Glasgow and Inverness. Many voluntary organisations held their own consultation events to discuss the strategy and I am grateful for their efforts. Overall, the responses were generally positive. At one event that I attended in my constituency in Dumbarton, I heard someone remark that it was refreshing and long overdue that a strategic approach was finally being taken to developing active communities. The responses highlighted a number of issues: the need to cast the definition of volunteering and community participation as widely as possible; the need to balance a grass-roots or bottom-up approach with driving change through Government and voluntary sector networks; the need to ensure that we set realistic targets and time scales and monitor progress; the need to co-ordinate and link with other initiatives; the need to engage the public, private and voluntary sectors in taking forward the strategy; and, of course, the need to ensure adequate resourcing. Although the strategy focused in the main on excluded groups, there is a need to recognise and support the voluntary and community work that is carried out by Churches and faith groups and in areas where volunteering is strong, such as sports and the arts. In responding to the active communities strategy, the Executive is not starting from ground base zero. There is considerable commitment and support for the voluntary sector and volunteering on which we will build. In Scotland, we already have a strong and firm foundation, with some 600,000 people regularly giving of their time and effort, but we know that there are as many people again wanting to get involved, waiting to be asked. We need to harness that potential and to provide opportunities for more people to participate in their communities. The Executive is committing some £6 million in support of the voluntary sector and volunteering  infrastructures, with core funding for national bodies such as Volunteer Development Scotland and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations as well as support for the networks of CVS Scotland and volunteer development agencies. We are also supporting the millennium volunteers project, a programme for government commitment that will see 1,000 young people each undertake 200 hours of voluntary work that will enhance their self development and benefit their communities. Other programmes that assist the development of volunteering and community activity include the unemployed voluntary action fund and the ethnic minority grant scheme. Last year, to support the active communities initiative, we funded five demonstration projects on volunteering, covering ethnic minority volunteering, rural volunteering, volunteering by disabled people and volunteering among older people. Those projects will help us to learn how best to involve people and to remove barriers to participation. Yesterday, I was particularly pleased to meet Mrs Pettigrew at CSV Scotland. Mrs Pettigrew is a rather remarkable woman. She is 106 years old and Scotland's oldest volunteer. I can safely say that she was more alive than some of us. The project with which she volunteered involved older people and younger millennium volunteers doing reminiscence work and developing photographic archives. The Executive endorses the draft strategy. We have been much impressed by the enthusiasm and commitment of those who have responded and we will match that. The Executive is the subject of a number of the action points, one of which is that a Scottish minister should be the active communities champion. I am delighted to have been asked to take on that role and it is my intention to report progress to Parliament annually. While I commend the strategy to public, private and voluntary sectors alike, I am conscious of the need to provide guidance and support to make it a reality. Equally, a number of salient points that we wish to take on board were made by organisations during the consultation phase. For that reason I am announcing the establishment of an active communities forum that will oversee the implementation of the strategy and advise ministers of progress. Details of the composition of the forum will be provided to Parliament shortly. In addition, I am pleased to announce an initial package of measures totalling £650,000 to move the strategy forward. It consists of £100,000 to establish an active communities development unit, based in Volunteer Development Scotland, which will be tasked with taking forward many of the practical action points. Secondly, £100,000 will  promote volunteering and community action among older people, building on the work of CVS Scotland and Age Concern. A further £130,000 will support the Scottish employee volunteering initiative, the production of the media resource kit and TimeBank's campaign work in Scotland. I said that the active communities strategy is aimed at involving excluded groups. One of the most excluded groups in society is people who are housebound. We shall fund a feasibility study to examine ways of enabling those who are housebound to participate in volunteering and in other community activities. The package of £330,000 I have outlined is a first step in taking forward the strategy and a measure of the Executive's commitment to developing active communities. We shall announce the allocation of the remaining £300,000-plus for further projects during the year as ideas on taking forward the initiative develop. Active communities, of place and of interest, are important across the whole range of areas for which the Executive has responsibility, whether it is education, health, housing, our cultural heritage or sport. The strategy will help us to build on the tremendous contribution that has already been made by the voluntary sector and volunteers across Scotland to build strong and active communities and bring about a positive view, at all levels, of volunteering and community action. The benefits to the individual and to society are self-evident. Every man, woman and child has something to offer their community. The challenge for us all is to build strong and active communities that support our vision of a Scotland that is characterised by social justice and opportunity for all. I commend the active communities initiative to Parliament.

I congratulate Tricia Marwick on her new responsibilities. I look forward to working with her in future. She raises the essential point, which is that volunteering and community action are very much part of the fabric of community life in Scotland. We were concerned to involve people from the voluntary sector and directly engage volunteers—and, equally, to involve people from the public sector organisations that need to learn that message. The active communities forum will have a balanced composition, but I am happy to give an assurance that the majority representation will come from the voluntary sector. The £650,000 is part of the £6 million that we commit to supporting the voluntary sector and the volunteering infrastructure. Today, we are announcing the detail of how that money will be committed in line with the action points that were raised in the strategy.

I can assure Cathy Peattie that we are clear on the need to ensure that there is a bottom-up approach to taking the strategy forward. An important part of that is building the capacity of the voluntary sector on the ground. Key to that will be local volunteering development agencies  across Scotland—which we support to the tune of £1 million a year—and councils for voluntary service. As Cathy will know, we are undertaking a review of councils for voluntary service with a view, first, to completing the network to ensure that there is one in every area of Scotland and, secondly, to putting them on a stable funding regime. The review presents an opportunity to consider the role and the potential of councils for voluntary service in local communities. That also feeds into the strategy.

I am curious about how long it took Bill Aitken to work out his joke.

It was spontaneous? He should not give up the day job. The £100,000 for the active communities development unit is essential. I take issue with Bill Aitken when he says that it is simply for bureaucracy. The work of the unit will be strategic in putting forward guidance to a number of public sector agencies and to the private sector, to try to progress the essence of the strategy. The success of the strategy will depend on how successful we are in progressing the detailed action points around that, but equally around the media strategy group that will be set up to take forward some of the work. It is £100,000 that is well invested—the unit could not be described as a bureaucracy.

We are keen to consider active communities beyond the concept of volunteering, which is why we are taking a community empowerment approach to the matter and why we are trying to put it within the wider social justice agenda. Fiona Hyslop will be aware that over the summer, culminating in a seminar in the late summer or early autumn, we will discuss directly with social inclusion partnerships and the community representatives on them what additional support they require, not only in travel and child care, but to be equal partners at the table. That feeds into the strategy—close connections will be made between the two. Fiona Hyslop is right—our negotiations with TimeBank were not all that we would have wanted them to be. Negotiations have continued and there is a much better relationship now. Indeed BBC Scotland is keen to take forward some of the volunteering initiatives and to present volunteering as new, exciting and part of the fabric of Scottish life. I am convinced that the minor difficulties that existed have been resolved. Although benefits are reserved, I understand that the Department of Social Security is keen to encourage voluntary work because of its value to the individual and the community. Steps have been taken at an operational level and more can be taken. Jobseekers allowance, income support and incapacity benefit permit unlimited voluntary work, within certain conditions. We need to consider whether those conditions present barriers. That is one of the action points arising from the strategy that the active communities forum will take on board.

I entirely support foundations of that kind that engage young people in learning, volunteering and developing a range of life skills. To a large extent, such foundations exist because of charitable giving. In recent budget announcements on gifts of money, Gordon Brown has made us one of the most favourable countries in Europe for the voluntary sector. There is now more encouragement through taxation for people to dig deep and dig often in their pockets and to support foundations such as the one Hugh Henry refers to.

Robert Brown will be aware of our compact with the voluntary sector, which clearly sets out the responsibilities of the Executive and its agencies on funding. To supplement that, on 13 June we published good practice guidance notes. It is of course one thing to issue guidance and another to monitor and follow up progress. There is an opportunity, as we report progress on the compact to Parliament annually, to see how we have done and to look at areas for improvement. I see my role as champion for the active communities initiative as working alongside those with expertise who will be represented on the active communities forum. It will be about saying that volunteering has a special place in Scottish society, not just in its traditional and well loved forms but as a wider approach based on principles of community empowerment. We know that strong communities give rise to stronger individuals. That is the kind of vision that I will be promoting as the champion.

I cannot take the excitement, Kenny. I assure Kenny Gibson that the Executive is committed to a bottom-up approach. Community planning represents one opportunity. Another opportunity that we are piloting is locality budgeting in communities such as Easterhouse and Wester Hailes, where the community is sitting down alongside all the agencies providing services in their area to have a discussion about priorities within that area and the reallocation of budgets. I am happy to champion something that is already going on.

I recognise, as Karen Whitefield outlined, that many concerns have been expressed by the voluntary sector, Churches, faith groups and uniformed organisations. That is why we set up a review group that included Volunteer Development Scotland, the SCVO, YouthLink Scotland—which represents the uniformed bodies—and the Scottish Churches to examine part V of the Police Act 1997. The group was set up to examine the costs of the proposed checks and to consider the administrative burden that would have to be borne by small voluntary organisations to comply with the code of practice. Our current deliberations focus on whether there is a possibility of establishing a central register body to assist the voluntary sector, which would be similar to the pre-employment consultancy service model in Northern Ireland. At this stage we have not covered the topic of the cost of checks, although it is in the forefront of our minds, because we must scope the likely demand from the voluntary sector. I assure Karen Whitefield that we are mindful of those issues. However, I stress that having a Scottish Criminal Record Office check does not  replace the need for the voluntary sector to have robust and effective child protection policies.

What is important is not the structure, which in some senses was Keith Raffan's first point, but how we operate on the ground. We must recognise that volunteers are the lifeblood of the voluntary sector. Keith Raffan alluded to the point that co-location of services often exists. There is great co-operation in communities between volunteering interests and voluntary sector interests—whether it be a one-stop shop or one organisation collaborating with another to provide the same services in different parts of the community, which is a model that I have seen elsewhere and which we could usefully examine—because they are mutually dependent Diversity of income is critical. The voluntary sector recognises that and has done a lot of work on donated income; the SCVO set up a working group to examine how to maximise it. The Executive is setting up a community investment fund of £10 million, which will enable social economy organisations with income to tap into a source of loan funding so that they can grow their organisations. We will constantly search for diverse methods of funding. We regularly meet the National Lottery Charities Board, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and other funders to agree ways forward.

That is why we want to talk directly to community representatives in social inclusion partnerships over the summer. I recognise that experience has varied. Some of the older established partnerships are functioning very well. Those with dedicated resources for community representatives are functioning very well, but elsewhere there are struggles, which we want to address. Last year, we gave funding to the Scottish Urban Regeneration Forum with a view to supporting and sustaining networks of this nature. In recognition of the issues that John McAllion raises, we gave additional funding to the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations to develop that network further. We see this a starting point. I hope that in our dialogue with community representatives we can identify key issues that we can address for them.

The Scottish Executive seeks to include the views of the voluntary sector wherever possible in its policy-making process. It is for organisations to decide whether and how to respond on any given issue. It would not be feasible or practical to build a scheme of payments into the consultation procedure.

Many voluntary organisations welcome the opportunity to have an input into developing Government policy and perhaps to change the Government's intentions. The case that Mr Paterson refers to, in relation to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, is a matter for the Parliament, not the Executive.

I start by thanking Elaine Thomson for lodging this motion. This Executive has repeatedly given commitments to promote equality of opportunity for all, specifically gender equality. Building a Scotland that is inclusive is a matter of real importance to us all. Women make up nearly half the work force and almost half the Parliament—I look forward to the day when they actually make up half. More women are working than ever before, which is key to our future economic success. Reducing the gap between men and women's pay is an important part of ensuring that there is a level playing field in the economy. The pay gap in Great Britain has decreased from 20 per cent to 19 per cent in the past year. In Scotland, the pay gap is marginally lower and now stands at 18 per cent, but we recognise that a lot more needs to be done. The gap widens for weekly and annual earnings. That reflects the fact that men work on average 3.9 hours more per week than women, including 1.9 hours more overtime.

Richard Lochhead is absolutely right. There is a unique labour market in Aberdeen, which is reflected in the high wages in the male-dominated oil industry. The Careers Service across Scotland is examining how we can move away from traditional stereotypes and, starting much earlier—in primary 6 and 7—encourage more girls to go into what are perceived as traditionally male occupations. However, the figures mask the fact that the average earnings of women in Aberdeen are £13 per week higher than for Scotland as a whole. Clearly, we need to narrow the gap. Over the past 10 years, women's earnings in  real terms have risen by 24 per cent, whereas men's have risen by 14 per cent. We need to increase that gap in our favour. Manual workers have seen a 7 per cent pay rise and non-manual workers a 17 per cent rise pay rise. That kind of trend tends to favour women. As members will know—Brian Adam mentioned this—responsibility for the Equal Pay Act 1970 rests with the Department for Education and Employment. However, there is much that we can do in Scotland. If the problem is to be addressed successfully, we need to understand the reasons behind the pay gap, which are often complex and influenced by a variety of labour market factors, whether gender stereotyping or occupational segregation.

We are currently carrying out a review of the pay system across the Scottish Executive to ensure that it contains no discriminatory elements and that all staff are treated fairly. Clearly, the examination of performance-related pay will be part of that review. We hope to have the results shortly and I will make them available to Fiona Hyslop. We welcome and support the Equal Opportunities Commission's drive to tackle the gender pay gap through its valuing women campaign and the work of its task force on equal pay. To complement the work of the EOC, the Executive is helping to ensure improvements in education and skills levels, enabling women to stay in or return to the labour market after having children. The Scottish Executive is also committed to raising the educational attainment of all our young people. There is a clear link between the level of education that an individual receives and the level of income that they subsequently earn. There are targets for attainment and we have commissioned research on the relative attainment of boys and girls. As I said, the Careers Service companies are tackling stereotyped images associated with certain careers.  In lifelong learning, the Scottish Executive aims to build a new culture of learning, which cuts across traditional boundaries and reaches people of all ages, backgrounds and capabilities. As a very practical measure, we are committed to improving access to high-quality, affordable day care for children and to ensure that all three and four-year-olds have access to a part-time pre-school education place by 2002. While I am on the subject of children and child care, I must tell Nora Radcliffe that my daughter has not yet seen the adverts to which she referred—my daughter's pocket money bargaining skills, as opposed to her pay bargaining skills, are superb. [Laughter.]  We are working with the UK Government to improve support for women who are returning to the labour market through the new deal for lone parents. We are examining how that might be used to help raise women's overall skill levels. We also need to secure a better attachment to the labour market by making work pay. That is happening through the national minimum wage and working families tax credit, including the child care credit, which help to support families on low incomes. Those measures will directly help women in the labour market. It is estimated that, of the 1.5 million people throughout Great Britain who have benefited from the minimum wage, two thirds are women. I want to share with the Parliament the Cabinet Office report "Women's incomes over the lifetime", which was published this year. It is the first ever report quantifying the financial consequences for women as a result of gender, motherhood, the differences between mothers and fathers, educational achievement and career choice. The research reveals that there is a cost in being a woman—we know that. That is not to do with children or motherhood, but is quite simply about being a woman. As Brian Adam helpfully identified, there is also a cost in being a mother—women spending time away from work and then choosing to work shorter hours. However, I was not sure whether he was suggesting—or indeed offering—that, in future, men should have the babies. The cost of being a woman is estimated at £241,000 over a lifetime and the motherhood gap is estimated at £140,000. There are several reasons for that, including female-dominated employment sectors, where the pay is low, an hourly pay gap and the fact that women, even when they do not have children, on average work fewer hours than men do. However, it is the level of education that has the biggest single impact on women's incomes over their lifetime. The labour market has changed radically since the Equal Pay Act 1970. I assure Elaine Thomson  that we are currently considering better disaggregated data, with a view to informing our policies and programmes. Let me cite the example of the £1 million that Henry McLeish announced for microcredit schemes, specifically aimed at women starting in business. The knowledge economy represents real opportunities for women, which we must harness. The Scottish Executive will play its part in assisting the UK Government in addressing that, not just for the current generation, but for future generations of women.  Meeting closed at 17:39

Thirteen Executive ministers have given a firm commitment to Volunteer Development Scotland to give at least one hour of their time, to participate in volunteers week. In addition, it is intended that a group of ministers will take part in a joint volunteering opportunity in the summer, which will help to inform the development of the active communities strategy.

For the first time in my life, I agree with Phil Gallie. [MEMBERS: "Oh."] It is all right—I will not make a habit of it. Phil Gallie has provided me with an opportunity to place on record  the thanks of the Executive and the Parliament to the many volunteers who contribute to communities across Scotland daily, whether in the health service, in child care or in environmental work—the list is endless.

Absolutely. There are currently about 600,000 people in Scotland who volunteer regularly, not just during volunteers week, but throughout the year. There are an equal number who want to volunteer and are just waiting for the chance.

The Scottish compact sets out the principles that underpin the relationship between the Government and the voluntary sector. As part of its implementation, good practice guidance on funding will be published next week. The Executive is committed to creating a more stable funding environment for the sector, including the provision of three-year funding packages where appropriate.

I am happy to give consideration to the principles that Ian Jenkins has outlined. We want to encourage the voluntary sector to identify a diversity of funding sources rather than to rely on one source. Those sources should also be sustainable, which is why the Executive is not only moving towards stability of funding for three years, but considering alternative funding sources such as the new community investment fund.

As Annabel Goldie will know, we have set up a review group to consider the charging structure and the efficiency of the mechanisms that will operate in the voluntary sector as part of the Scottish Criminal Record Office checks. That review group is working hard, and includes representatives of Volunteer Development Scotland, the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and Youth Link Scotland. At this stage, it is too early to report back on our findings to the Parliament, but we will do so in due course.

Yes. I give Jamie Stone an assurance that I shall do that. We had a useful meeting with councils for voluntary services from rural areas, and recognise that they have a key role in building the capacity of the local voluntary  sector, especially in rural areas. That will be a feature of the CVS Scotland review.

It is a tragedy, and an indictment of our society, that too many people have experienced sleeping rough, without the possibility of finding accommodation. The reasons for that can be varied, and they are often complex, but that will not deter this Executive from tackling the problems head on—problems that are associated not just with bricks and mortar, but with alcohol and drug addiction or with being caught up in prostitution.  Those problems are exacerbated by isolation, loneliness and increasing exclusion. This debate has recognised the problems of rough sleeping, especially in our two major cities, Edinburgh and Glasgow. Recent research tells us that here in Glasgow, of people living in hostels, 42 per cent of 16 to 24-year-olds and 45 per cent of 25 to 34-year-olds have slept rough on at least one night in the previous 12 months. Tackling rough sleeping must be, and is, a top priority for this Government. We have set ourselves a tough target, and rightly so. We aim to ensure that no one has to sleep rough by the end of this Parliament. That is precisely why we are focusing our resources on addressing the problems of this most socially excluded group. We are ensuring that all those who are involved with the homeless target their resources in a co-ordinated way to ensure that those resources are used to best effect. In Glasgow, those measures are being enhanced by the work of the Glasgow review team, which is developing, in partnership, a strategy for tackling street homelessness in the city. The review team is tackling, head on, the problems of the present provision of hostel accommodation in Glasgow. Too many people are living in poor hostel accommodation, with no one addressing their support needs. They are at risk and they are receiving very little help and encouragement to move out of those hostels into independent accommodation. We will put that right. We need to help those who can to move out of the hostels, and we need to provide more intensive support, in more appropriate accommodation, for those whose needs are more complex. We need to do more than just tackle the problems of accommodation. We recognise the importance of involving the health service, the social services, the police and the prison services in order to make a difference. We need to break the cycle that often exists: rooflessness leading to criminality, leading to prison, leading back to rooflessness. We have the opportunities to intervene, and we need to ensure that those interventions are effective. We have taken all our partners with us in the fight against rough sleeping. We have involved local authorities, the voluntary organisations, the health boards— [Interruption.]

Thank you. I just try to talk over it. In the effort to tackle rough sleeping, we have involved everybody. We are all committed to the  delivery of sound and truly cross-cutting conclusions. I would like to deal with some of the points that have been raised. I was amused by Bill Aitken. Yes, the Conservatives started the rough sleepers initiative. Yes, they put in £4 million in 1997-98. Contrast that figure with the £20 million—five times more—put in by this Executive in 2000-01.

No, I will not. Bill Aitken also raised the issue of tenancy support. The need for such intensive support will be a key part of the review team's next phase of work. The SNP contribution was again disappointing. There is a depressing degree of consistency about it. The SNP wanted to talk about figures, so let us do that. There was £26 million in the RSI budget when we took over—there is now £48 million, an 85 per cent increase. The SNP is silent on what it would do. The long list of what we are doing includes £708,000 to "Link Up", run by Turning Point, to tackle drugs, equipping 250 furnished flats, developing a homeless action team and rent deposit schemes.

The rhetoric has come from Mr Quinan's benches; the action has come from ours.

I find myself increasingly agreeing with Keith Raffan, which I am sure is detrimental to his career. The SNP— [Interruption.]

Thank you. The SNP has demeaned and discredited itself today. It has no answers, no solutions—only sniping. The difference between the nats and the partnership Government is that we believe in delivering. We believe in dealing with the problem and not constantly sniping. Robert Brown asked about the £12 million new money. It is in-year and the projects are predominantly capital based—£4 million of that money comes from mainstream health resources and we hope to extend that in future. Robin Harper and Donald Gorrie made absolutely correct points about focusing on prevention. We recognise the cost in human terms of someone becoming homeless or sleeping rough. I promise that we will focus attention on that. Today we have demonstrated our commitment and that of all our partners to thoroughly tackling the problem. In October we announced an  increase of 40 per cent in the RSI budget; today we allocated £13 million of that money to Edinburgh and Glasgow to get to the heart of the problem, to tackle rough sleeping.

There was plenty of opportunity during the debate.

Today we also announced an extra £12 million. From the start of the rough sleepers initiative that is 85 per cent more. It is new cash to tackle the health problems of rough sleepers; new cash to replace Glasgow's unsuitable hostels; new cash to end the problem of unsuitable, temporary bed-and-breakfast accommodation, particularly for families. It means more resources going where they are needed, and going now. Let no one be in any doubt that the Executive's commitment to ending the need for anyone to sleep rough in Scotland is absolute.

rose—

Will the member give way?

rose—

rose—

It is a matter of fact that, for 2000-01, planned expenditure on housing will be £579 million; for 2001-02 that rises to £597 million. I challenge Tricia Marwick to name one project that has been cut.

Does Bill Aitken agree that the number of applications—45,000—does not reflect the number of homeless people? Does he further agree that the homelessness task force is seriously considering the matter and has produced a report to resolve the issue of homelessness in Scotland?

We have consulted on the findings of the review of the councils for voluntary service but have not yet issued our formal response. Discussions are taking place with the network to find the best way forward to develop the CVS network and to help it to contribute to our shared objectives.

Although I was trying, in Duncan Hamilton's interests, to speak extraordinarily slowly, I take the point that there needs to be a balance between a minister having very long answers and the time needed to catch one's breath. I am very aware of the concerns of rural CVS services; in fact, I am meeting Highland CVS to discuss those points. We are taking some time to consider the findings, because we want the right answer, not necessarily a quick one.

I caught most of it. I agree that CVSs have a crucial role to play at a local level in supporting and developing the voluntary sector and in working within the partnership arrangements that we have with local authorities, health boards, trusts and the voluntary sector.

Arrangements for monitoring the performance of social inclusion partnerships were set out in the monitoring framework, published in December 1999. The framework requires partnerships to monitor their progress according to a number of key measures. Specifically, partnerships have been asked to disaggregate all information by gender so that the impact of their regeneration strategies on the quality of life of women in target areas can be assessed.

That is why we introduced the monitoring framework. In addition to that, the Scottish Executive has an annual appraisal of all SIPs in which we can take on board those points. I entirely accept the need for dialogue with all communities that social inclusion partnerships represent and with the women who form the backbone of a substantial number of community organisations and regeneration initiatives.

I am not aware of the article to which Mr Paterson refers, but I shall address his point about women in social inclusion partnership areas. Communities in SIP areas have a significant number of problems. Through a process of dialogue and consultation, we aim to arrive at strategies and projects to address them. In the Glasgow area, for example, funding has been given to the greater Easterhouse child care project and mobile crèche, to Drumchapel Women's Aid and to the greater Pollok out-of-school care consortium. That is making a real difference to the lives of women on the ground in social inclusion partnership areas.

I am pleased to open this debate on the Race Relations (Amendment) Bill on behalf of the Executive. This is an important opportunity to put on record the fact that establishing race equality and tackling racial discrimination are fundamental to the Executive's commitment to the promotion of equality of opportunity for all. The proposed changes to the Race Relations Act 1976 that are being considered at Westminster reinforce and extend the Executive's remit to tackle discrimination and to promote race equality. By agreeing to the Executive's motion, this Parliament will send a strong signal of its commitment to race equality and the new framework. The Executive firmly believes that no institution in Scotland can afford to ignore the findings of the Macpherson inquiry into the murder of Stephen Lawrence and the evidence that proves that racism exists here in Scotland. That is why the Executive set up the race equality advisory forum at the end of last year. The forum's remit is to provide the Executive with advice on a strategy to address broad racial equality issues, to develop action plans to eradicate institutional racism, and to advise on better ways in which to consult people with ethnic minority backgrounds. Its members have been working extremely hard and will report formally to the Executive later this year. The forum is also working alongside the steering group that is chaired by the Deputy First Minister, which was set up to oversee the implementation of the Executive's action plan in response to the Macpherson report. Together, their work will inform the broad range of activities in hand, to take forward the Executive's commitment to promoting race equality and to tackling institutional racism. I want to place on record the Executive's particular appreciation of the dedication and hard work of the  forum, the steering group and the Commission for Racial Equality. Their contribution is proving to be invaluable and, as ever, thought provoking. We knew that it would not be easy to secure the deep-rooted change that is necessary to eradicate racism and discrimination. However, I am confident that, through the efforts of individuals such as the members of the forum and the steering group, we will continue to move in the right direction and that we will do so—and this is important—in closer partnership with communities. Our efforts will depend not only on the few with whom we have been able to work in those groups; we are also seeking to develop the Executive's lines of contact with the full range of interests that are dedicated to tackling racism. Vital to that will be work to engage with grass-roots black and ethnic minority interests across Scotland. That is part of the development of the Executive's equality strategy and comes from the work programmes of the forum and the steering group. I shall say why the Executive considers it appropriate for this Parliament to agree unequivocally to the principles embedded in the Race Relations (Amendment) Bill, the UK legislation that is the subject of today's debate. As I said, the bill makes changes to the Race Relations Act 1976. Members may wish to refer to the Executive memorandum, which provides a useful outline. The bill's main purposes are: to extend the 1976 act in relation to discrimination and victimisation by public authorities; to place a statutory duty on specific public authorities to promote race equality; to make chief officers of police vicariously liable for acts of racial discrimination by police officers; and to amend an exemption under the 1976 act for acts done for the purpose of safeguarding national security, thus remedying a provision thought to be incompatible with the European convention on human rights. The UK Government brought forward a number of amendments in committee at the House of Commons. They include a new general duty on specified public authorities to make arrangements to ensure that their functions are carried out with due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful racial discrimination and to promote equality of opportunity and good relations between persons of different racial groups. The wording of the new general duty largely reflects the wording in section 71 of the act that places a similar duty on local authorities only. The amendments to the 1976 act provide the framework within which the new duty on public authorities to promote race equality will operate. The amendments set out the general duty on public authorities, give ministers the power to  make regulations imposing further specific duties to back up that general duty, provide for the CRE to issue codes of practice giving guidance to public authorities on how to fulfil those duties, and provide a compliance and enforcement mechanism giving the CRE the power to issue a compliance notice and, ultimately, apply for a court order. The new general duty on public authorities to promote race equality will impact on devolved areas of responsibility. The powers in the new section 71(2), as inserted by clause 2 of the bill, fall within the terms of the exception to the equal opportunities reservation in the Scotland Act 1998. The Executive has therefore agreed that, in relation to certain Scottish public authorities, the bill will confer regulation-making powers on Scottish ministers in relation to that general duty. The new power to make regulations imposing specific duties on public authorities is to ensure the better performance by authorities of the new general duty to promote race equality. Much of the detail of how the general duty will operate in practice will depend on the content of the regulations.

The Scotland Act 1998 is clear on the powers of the Scottish Parliament in relation to equality of opportunity. The mechanism by which legislation is undertaken is part of the UK-wide framework and that power rests with Westminster. We have the power to promote equal opportunities and to place duties on devolved areas to carry out that promotion. I hope that that gives the clarity that is sought. There will be consultation between the UK Government and the Scottish Executive on what should go into the regulations. We will contribute to UK discussions and undertake similar discussions with Scottish interests such as the race equality advisory forum and community groups. We see that combined approach as the most effective way of ensuring that, in the implementation of the new arrangements, full account is taken of Scottish circumstances and interests. We will aim to get Scottish solutions tailored to our circumstances within a UK framework of principle, firmly in favour of a UK-wide commitment to delivering on race equality. The amendments give the CRE the power to issue codes of practice to provide guidance to public authorities on carrying out their new duties. The UK ministers, in deciding whether to approve  or reject such codes, will be under a duty to consult Scottish ministers. They will also be required to consult Scottish ministers before the codes are enforced. The Scottish Executive is keen to ensure that Scotland has a modern and effective framework within which its commitment to promoting race equality can operate. The provisions in the bill offer an early opportunity to reinforce and further promote race equality in Scotland and I therefore welcome this legislation. I move, That the Parliament agrees the principles contained in the provisions of the Race Relations (Amendment) Bill including the power to impose duties on public authorities so far as those provisions relate to matters within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or confer functions on the Scottish Ministers.

It gives me great pleasure to speak—not as a minister, I hasten to add, but as someone with a special constituency interest—in support of the National Parks (Scotland) Bill that has been proposed by the Executive and to commend the minister for introducing it so early in the life of the Scottish Parliament. Many members will know that my constituency includes a substantial portion of the first proposed national park—Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to my Westminster colleague, John McFall, and to the Friends of Loch Lomond, some of whom are here today. They have campaigned tirelessly over many years for national park status for the area. Without a doubt, the area is one of outstanding natural beauty. It is enjoyed by many people across Scotland and, indeed, the world. The Friends of Loch Lomond recognised that, and they sought to conserve and protect the environment for future generations to enjoy. For me, this bill and this debate are a tribute to their vision and commitment. Designation as a national park will allow for the protection and management of the area, balancing local interests with the wider public concern of protecting what is clearly a significant national asset. It is essential that we safeguard our natural heritage for future generations. However, that is not the sole aim. The social and economic well-being of park areas is also important. I am clear about the need to harness the economic development potential offered by designation as a national park, but recognise that any development must be truly sustainable. We must balance the need to protect the environment with the need to create employment opportunities. We must ensure that that is done sensitively to ensure that we do not compromise the long-term sustainability of the natural qualities of the area. We recognise that tourism continues to be important to the economy—£2.6 billion a year, supporting 178,000 jobs. The potential to create tourism-related employment in the context of the national park is evident. Already, local agencies are working together to maximise those opportunities. One such example is the Lomond shores project at Balloch, which is a world-class visitor attraction at the gateway of the future national park. I shall deal briefly with the planning function. Having spent a short period of my life in Windermere, I am aware of the need for the park authority to have responsibility for planning and development control functions in the area. I welcome the fact that the bill allows for national  parks in Scotland to be planning authorities. By doing that, we will avoid some of the mistakes that have been made in England. Is it also the intention to enable the park authority to regulate water traffic, in particular high-speed power craft? That would be a significant advantage in Loch Lomond and would assist in maintaining a sensitive balance between recreational opportunities and environmental protection. The bill provides us with a unique opportunity to conserve our natural heritage through integrated planning and management of areas of outstanding beauty. It is long overdue and much welcomed. I commend the bill to the chamber. When the minister introduces subordinate legislation to designate Loch Lomond and the Trossachs as the first ever national park in Scotland, my colleague Sylvia Jackson and I will celebrate, as will people in our respective constituencies.

I have listened intently to the debate, not just today but over the past week, and I regret the content of some of the contributions from the SNP. At last week's question time, Mr Salmond claimed that this was an affront to Scotland. As we have seen today, the SNP line has changed, but that change is superficial. This is not an affront to Scotland; it is an affront to all women and to all people who abhor violence. There is widespread concern about and opposition to the Home Secretary's decision to grant Mike Tyson an entry visa to Britain, in this chamber and beyond. The views of this Parliament, of women's groups and of many people in Scotland have been clearly expressed. However, instead of debating the real issue of women being subjected to violence, the underlying agenda of the SNP's motion is a sterile constitutional debate. It is a debate not about violence against women, but one in which the SNP uses this emotive and distressing subject to secure some perceived constitutional advantage. That is politics at its worst. If newspaper reports are to be believed, Gil Paterson is now actively seeking a woman who has been raped to come forward to front the SNP's campaign for a judicial review. He wants a high-profile woman, but to use a survivor of rape in that way is deplorable. I find his actions shameful and I suggest to him that this is not a game.

Let me say quite clearly—

Let me say—

Mr Paterson is quite clearly quoted in the press and I have yet to see a rebuttal from the SNP. This is not a constitutional issue; it is a moral issue. As we all know, immigration matters are the responsibility of the Westminster Parliament. It has already been acknowledged that this is a matter to be decided by the Home Secretary in accordance with the law. I was particularly struck by Muriel Gray's article in The Sunday Herald , where she said: "It's okay for English women who have been the victims of domestic violence to feel undermined by the acceptance of Tyson—but not in Scotland". She is right. This is not about Scotland; this is about women in Britain. It is about our right—the right of all women—to live in peace without the fear of violence or abuse. That is the society that we should strive to create and that is the climate that the Scottish Executive is trying to create—using real actions, not words. We have established the first ever national domestic abuse development fund with £8 million to address gaps in provision in local communities, so that women and children, wherever they are, can access services.

No. We have created 123 more refuge spaces across Scotland, increasing capacity by a third. We are working with the Zero Tolerance Trust in our schools to change the attitudes of children and young people towards violence and to prevent it from happening in the first place. We are using the media—

I have already said no.

We are using the media and advertising to get the message across that domestic abuse is unacceptable and will not be tolerated. We are reviewing the law to afford more protection to women. Soon, we will be launching a  national telephone helpline so that help is instantly available whenever someone needs it. Those are practical and worthwhile measures that start to tackle the cause and the effect of violence and abuse. This Executive is determined to create a climate in which violence will not be tolerated and in which women and children can live their lives without fear of violence and abuse. This is no longer an issue that we can sweep under the carpet. There is a long way to go, but the practical measures that I have mentioned can create the basis of improved provision, protection and our ultimate goal of prevention. That is not what the SNP has debated. What we have seen is political opportunism—checkpoint Alex checking every visa application and every safety certificate, two sets of border controls and demands for border guards and immigration controls on the M74. If Mr Salmond was so concerned, why did he not do something about this earlier? After all, he is still an elected Westminster MP, so why did he not represent Scotland's interests there? Let me share with the chamber the total hypocrisy of the SNP's position. Fact No 1 is that two early-day motions were tabled on 18 January of this year, which both rightly opposed Mike Tyson's entry to Britain to fight in Manchester. A selection of MPs supported them, including Tony Benn, Ernie Ross, Ray Michie, Norman Godman, Audrey Wise, Jenny Jones, Maria Fyfe and many more. Were any SNP members among them? Just one. Let me give the SNP the benefit of the doubt; after all, it would have perceived the issue as very much an English one and not about women and violence. However, fact No 2 is that on 16 May an early-day motion was tabled by Maria Fyfe, MP for Glasgow Maryhill. It, too, opposed Mike Tyson's entry to Britain, this time to fight in Glasgow. Some of the MPs who supported that motion were Jenny Jones, Jackie Ballard, Michael Connarty, Tony Worthington, Malcolm Savidge, Ernie Ross, John Maxton, Ian Davidson, Norman Godman—the list goes on. As of yesterday, not one SNP member was on the list—where were they all? I understand that Alasdair Morgan and John Swinney were dispatched on the last day to sign up and save the SNP's honour. As we have heard, Roseanna Cunningham was at the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, but where were the rest of the SNP members?

I am winding up. I have been told to wind up.

Is this debate about the SNP's concerns for women or is it mere political opportunism? Despite claims from the SNP that the debate is about domestic violence, the SNP's trails in the press, its actions and its motion tell us something different. If the SNP was so concerned, it would have, as it suggested in the motion, used every possible means of stopping Mike Tyson. Why did the SNP not press the case at Westminster, as many Labour and Liberal Democrat MPs did? Phil Gallie consistently asked why that was so. We did not get an answer. This is the first time that I have seen SNP members so quiet and ashen faced—surely they are not on the run from Phil Gallie. Margaret Curran is absolutely right that morality—

Morality does not stop at the Scottish border. This issue affects all people in Britain. We must tackle all forms of violence against people, especially against women and children. That is a job that this Parliament and this Executive will do.

ICTs have a major role to play in improving access to the wide range of education, training and employment opportunities necessary for social and economic inclusion. They also enable sharing of information, development of community interests and the delivery of more accessible and efficient public services, meeting the needs of the most disadvantaged.

Mr McNeil's proposal is worthy of further consideration. The Executive is undertaking a range of activities in ICT. In new community schools, we are promoting IT access for the whole community. By 2002, colleges, schools, public libraries and community centres will all be connected up to the national grid for learning. In social inclusion partnerships, 90 ICT projects are under way—all with internet access—and there are partnerships with the business community. I will know that we have succeeded when I see Mr McNeil himself surfing the net. [Laughter.]

I welcome the Ayrshire electronic community project, which my colleague Wendy Alexander visited on 3 May. It provides services online across agencies directly to local communities, which is critical. The digital Scotland  task force report is due out at the end of the week and contains a section that deals specifically with social inclusion. I commend that report to members.

I say at the start, in response to a point made by Alex Salmond, that no one in the Executive, nor indeed a member of staff of the Executive, has briefed the press this afternoon; it is for this Parliament to hear first any view from the Executive. Let me say clearly—some colleagues on the SNP benches are perhaps hard of hearing—that the Executive is entirely opposed to the present system of poindings and warrant sales as a means by which to recover debt. We are committed to the abolition of poindings and warrant sales. For that reason, my colleague, Jim Wallace, has asked me to advise the chamber that he will call on the Parliament to agree to the withdrawal of the Executive amendment. [Applause.] I thank the chamber for its evident support for the Executive's position. In this debate, we have heard many horrifying examples of the application of this form of diligence, which, without doubt, is truly archaic, inhumane and deeply offensive.

This form of diligence has no place in a modern, progressive society, and I hope that everyone in the chamber believes that it must go. I joined the Labour party because it consistently championed this and similar causes, as have other parties represented in this chamber, not only because of its fundamental belief in social justice and the decent treatment of all people, but in particular because our roots are grounded in protecting the worst-off people in our society. I will turn to the principles underlying the Executive's position. First, we agree that the current system of poinding and warrant sales must be abolished. It needs to be replaced by a modern system that protects those who cannot pay and that ends the indignity and public humiliation that some of our people have to suffer. Secondly, we recognise that there are people, including businesses, who can pay but do not. There are people who abuse the system and we should have no patience with them—they should be pursued vigorously. However, as the committees recognised, abolition is to be supported, but the immediate implementation of abolition by itself may cause unintended negative consequences. The committees have recommended that an alternative, humane diligence against moveable property is found. I sense that Mr Sheridan, in his welcome comments about his pride in Johann Lamont's contribution at the Local Government Committee, accepts the need to put an alternative in place. The Executive is committed to doing just that. We will establish a working group to consult widely on developing an alternative system of diligence and will introduce legislation to Parliament in 2001-02. Thirdly, and perhaps most important for me, we will consider improving debtor protection and debt arrangement schemes. It is essential that we build on the excellent work of voluntary organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland and Money Advice Scotland in debt counselling. It is essential that we help people to manage their debts more effectively and prevent them from getting into debt in the first place.  The disadvantage of the bill's approach is that it does nothing to help those who cannot pay to get out of their debt. Indeed, it might make it more difficult for those in need to obtain credit. It exempts those who can pay but will not pay, including business debtors. As members have heard, the financial implications for the public sector could be significant—loss for local authorities of £120 million has been mentioned—but that is not a reason to preserve the status quo. We can learn from the positive examples of local authorities, such as West Dunbartonshire Council, that have sought alternatives to poindings and warrant sales. That good practice will be drawn on and analysed in the context of the working group's deliberations. We are not asking the working group to examine poindings and warrant sales. We are committed to the abolition of poindings and warrant sales. The group's purpose is to find a more humane alternative and to consider how best to protect people. That is the territory that the working group should be in. It should examine money advice services, credit unions and other preventive measures. I do not share Roseanna Cunningham's concerns about working groups. Members of her party welcomed the outcome of the homelessness task force report. Let us be open and inclusive. Let us design a new system together. There is much in Mr Sheridan's bill to be commended. The Executive, by withdrawing its amendment, wants to take these issues forward in collaboration with the Parliament. The Parliament is of one mind: poindings and warrant sales must go. They are offensive and inhumane. We can send a signal about that. Let us abolish them. Equally, we must acknowledge our responsibilities as a legislature to put in their place a workable, humane system that will protect those who cannot pay and that will ensure that those who can, do.

Credit unions have been highly successful at extending low-cost financial services to their communities, particularly to those who are not well served by mainstream financial services providers. In addition, they promote self-help, develop skills and commitment in their volunteers and provide a channel for enterprise.

The health check programme, to which the member referred, was designed by Glasgow City Council, with contributions from the Royal Bank of Scotland, to provide development assistance for credit unions and to ensure that they increase their potential and are sustainable. A self-help toolkit will be developed and we intend to roll that out across Scotland.

Let us see how I get on—I will speak slowly. I say that in case members think that I am having difficulty in stringing my sentences together. I am grateful for the views expressed during the debate. I am also genuinely grateful for the support that has been given to the principles of the bill and for the recognition that speedy passage of the bill is necessary to keep to the census timetable. I will deal with some of the specific points that were raised. I agree with Irene McGugan that the household survey will be useful in identifying factors that link ethnicity, religion, social inclusion and equality, but that the size and location of different religious groups will be most effectively assessed throughout Scotland by the census. On the vexed issue of the length of the census form, we have always said clearly that cost is only one of the factors that must be considered—it is not the be-all and end-all. It is crucial that we consider the effect that an over-long census form might have on overall response rates. The form for the 1991 census was 12 pages long. The new form will be almost double that. The form must not exceed 20 pages in length—all our research tells us that that would result in a dramatic fall in the response rate. This is probably an historic occasion because it  is the only time that I have found myself in agreement with Brian Monteith. Given that he spoke for only about a minute, however, it was incredibly hard to do otherwise. I think that Brian was trying to put me on the spot to see how inventive I could be at filling in time. I do not normally refuse opportunities to speak and I was truly surprised that he had so little to say, as I am conscious that politicians sometimes like the sound of their own voice too much.

Absolutely.

At the risk of being boring, I could not agree more with Trish Godman. Given that I might have responsibility for summing up in that debate, the thought of its lasting three hours when we can barely sustain an hour's debate today does not exactly fill me with joy. As some of the business managers are present, I am sure that they will take that on board rather than have me suffer any further. I shall raise the issue with them. I agree with Karen Whitefield and Michael McMahon. The first census of a new millennium is indeed a landmark census. I also agree that the process highlights the role that the Equal Opportunities Committee played in informing the Executive so that we could arrive at the right conclusion. As Johann Lamont said, the views of representatives of the black and ethnic minority communities were significant. Johann helpfully raised the point of language. Members will not be surprised that I sympathise with her view that language should not be gender specific. I am delighted to tell Johann that, although the Census Act 1920 refers to "he", our census bill refers to a "person". I am sure that she would like to intervene to welcome that.

I agree with what Johann  Lamont says. In her speech, she also made some serious points about Engender. For those who are not aware of its work, I should explain that Engender provides useful statistics, which, because there was a vacuum of figures on gender, it presented to the Equal Opportunities Committee. The equality unit will be developing that work; it is discussing with the central statistics unit how we can gather gender-disaggregated data in future. The census itself will collect information on gender, which can be cross-referenced. That will be critical in informing policy development. Shona Robison raised some valid issues about equality proofing. Our equality strategy, which is the subject of consultation at the moment, will address those points. We are not restricting options to what was in the paper that was circulated for consultation. We would welcome fresh thinking but, as I said, the length of the form is critical and affects not just cost, but the overall response rate. I enjoyed Brian Adam's contribution, but I will not address the points that he raised, because it is not the purpose of today's debate to deal with the precise form of the question or questions on religion that are to be included in the census, subject to the passing of the bill. Following the undertaking given last month, the registrar general is currently consulting on the form of the questions on religion and on ethnic group. I encourage Brian Adam to contribute to that process. Copies of the consultation paper have been sent to all those who have expressed an interest in the matter. Although the deadline for responses is 17 March, the Equal Opportunities Committee is looking for a day or two's grace to get its response in. I am sure that that will be acceptable, provided that that period is not more than a day or two, as the speedy passage of the bill would be most helpful. There are limits to the length of the census form. Response rates will fall; costs will rise. The constraints within which we are working are clearly set out and explained in the paper. Let me repeat the following key points. The Executive has listened carefully—

My understanding is that we gave a commitment in the debate on 16 February  to consider gathering information on income, for the valid reasons that Euan Robson gives. That commitment was set out by the Deputy First Minister, and we will return to it in due course. The Executive has listened carefully to the considered views voiced by the Equal Opportunities Committee and others about the inclusion of a question on religion in the 2001 census. In particular, the Executive recognises the need for the religion question, which will provide benchmarking information to improve our social inclusion policies and our interventions. We wish to see robust social inclusion policies that are designed to prevent discrimination against religious groups. Accurate information is critical to that; we need the evidence to get the policies right. The question or questions on religion will also provide information to help to improve services to minority religious groups, and will be of assistance to local authorities, health boards and other service providers. Members of minority communities consider religion to be an important aspect of their identity. As more people are identifying themselves in terms of their religion or culture than ever before, it is appropriate to look at new ways in which to collect information from groups such as Muslims and Sikhs, for whom religion is an important cultural attribute. The bill is the first step in fulfilling the undertaking that we gave in the debate on 16 February, which was to modify our earlier proposals set out in the Census (Scotland) Order 2000. That is because, to enable a religion question to be asked in Scotland, it is necessary to amend the primary census legislation, which is the Census Act 1920. The bill has just two sections. It will enable a voluntary question or questions on religion to be included in any future census in Scotland. Of course, the Executive is alive to the fact that religion is a sensitive issue, hence the voluntary nature of the religion question. That will be made clear on the census form, so that the individual completing the form will be aware of that fact. It is essential that the timetable for the census on 29 April 2001 is not placed in jeopardy. I seek the Parliament's agreement to the general principles of the bill.

Sisters, on behalf of the Executive, I welcome this debate on International Women's Day and echo the thanks to Patricia Ferguson for initiating it.

There are indeed some—I concede that—but I am disappointed to say that I would not count them all as my brothers. [Laughter.]  This day is intended to symbolise how far women have come in their struggle for equality, peace and development across the world. It provides a clear opportunity for women to unite, to network and to mobilise for meaningful change. However, what lies behind those words? Women's inequality damages all societies. It represents a huge loss of potential, the costs of which fall on men as well as women. The Scottish Executive understands that and we are determined to do all that we can to promote equality of opportunity for all. As Susan Anthony said way back in 1897, there will never be complete equality until women themselves help to make the laws and elect the lawmakers. So, how far have we come? We have 48 women  MSPs, which is 37 per cent of the Parliament. We have achieved critical mass, but what is important is what we do now. We must build on the work of women in the past, such as the Pankhursts, because not only can we now elect the lawmakers; we are the lawmakers. It is not enough, however, for us just to be here. We must ensure that we deliver and impact positively on the lives of ordinary women throughout Scotland and throughout the world. As part of our contribution to marking International Women's Day, ministers have announced a number of initiatives that address women's concerns. In addition to the new £8 million package of funding to tackle domestic violence, earlier today I announced the establishment of a national helpline. The line, sponsored by Thus plc, will offer a vital service to victims of domestic abuse. The service will be available not just when we run advertising campaigns, but 365 days a year. That is just a beginning. The Executive will continue to do what is necessary to raise awareness of the scale and nature of the problem and to ensure that women are offered all necessary protection. I also announced that Lesley Irving would be joining the Scottish Executive on secondment from Scottish Women's Aid, initially for a year. Lesley's experience will be very useful in driving forward our programme to deal with violence against women and in preventive work, especially with younger people, with whom there is the potential to create a long-term positive impact on attitudes to domestic abuse. This morning Henry McLeish announced new funding of £1 million to extend a micro-credit scheme for women entrepreneurs across the Scottish Enterprise network. Small businesses are an important part of Scotland's economic prosperity and it is vital that we encourage more women to set up their own businesses. That funding will, I hope, assist in removing some of the barriers that women face in accessing start-up finance. In promoting equal opportunities, we must ensure that, as an employer, the Scottish Executive is setting a positive example by developing a balanced work force. Jack McConnell, the minister with responsibility for modernising government, today reaffirmed the Executive's commitment to ensuring that it is among the leaders in equal opportunities practice in Scotland. Sam Galbraith has outlined what the Executive is doing to help mothers back into work. One example is the Childcare Link, a freephone information line that provides general advice and information on child care issues and that will give parents the information that they need to make  informed choices about child care. Sarah Boyack has announced that the Executive recently commissioned research to explore how the transport system meets or fails to meet the needs of women and to identify practical solutions to make transport more accessible and safer for women travellers. Wendy Alexander announced that the Scottish Executive was helping to publicise the Scottish Trades Union Congress conference "Valuing Women in Work", which will focus on ensuring that the STUC's campaign for advancing women's position in the workplace reaches as wide as possible an audience. The pay gap between women and men begins at age 20 and widens thereafter so that a 50-year-old woman—this is what I can look forward to—can expect to earn only half as much as a man of that age. If we are to create a society that is based on social justice, we must ensure that such issues are addressed. The Executive is committed to improving Scotland's health; initiatives are being progressed by Susan Deacon on a number of fronts. One of our main priorities is tackling the health of women and young children through breast screening clinics and through working to reduce the proportion of women who smoke during pregnancy—the list goes on. From the contributions to the debate and our own experiences as politicians—and, more important, as women—we recognise that women experience discrimination and inequality in a range of areas. As Margaret Curran said, we must not be complacent. Although much is being done, we all recognise that there is a great deal more to do. We need to start here, thinking not just about what we do for women in Scotland or across the UK and the world, but about what we need to do to change the attitudes of men, including some men in this Parliament. The Executive sees equality as central to its work in developing a fairer, more inclusive Scotland. It is not an add-on or an optional extra. We need to ensure that equality is at the forefront of the minds of every policy maker, legislator and service provider. We have come a long way since the days of the suffragettes. We have universal franchise, the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and the Equal Pay Act 1970, but we have the opportunity in this Parliament to build a Scotland that is characterised by social justice and equality. As Harriet Beecher Stowe wrote, women are the real architects of society. We owe it to the women of Scotland, and we owe it to our daughters, to build a society in which all women can play an equal part.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

None. The closing date for applications is 3 March 2000. The money will be disbursed from 1 April, as previously announced in the chamber.

I will try to be brief. This is not a matter of spin, but a matter of fact. We announced in the chamber that we would make additional moneys available for something that this Administration cares deeply about. I am aware of the situation in Glasgow Women's Aid from press reports, but we must bear in mind that funding of local provision is a matter for local authorities. [Interruption.] If Sandra White will let me finish—  [Interruption.]

Glasgow City Council received not only a 2.9 per cent increase in its settlement for 2000-01, but an additional £8.7 million deprivation allowance for next year.

I echo the comments that have already been made and commend Winnie Ewing and Cathy Craigie for bringing this matter to the Scottish Parliament for consideration. The Executive recognises the depth of feeling that surrounds the status of BSL among its users. We are committed to supporting comprehensive and enforceable civil rights for disabled people. I understand that David Blunkett referred to BSL in his recent letter to the Disability Rights Commission concerning its remit and priorities. I also understand that Margaret Hodge, the minister with responsibility for disabled people, will contact the commission to examine the status of BSL. As many people here will be aware, the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 requires employers and service providers to make reasonable adjustments to ensure that disabled people are not disadvantaged at work or elsewhere. The provision of interpreters is an example, according to the act, of such an adjustment. The final report of the disability rights task force was published in December. It recognised specifically the needs of deaf people who communicate through BSL, and the need for BSL users to be supported by suitably qualified interpreters. The report contains recommendations in devolved areas. We will look to involve all sectors of society—but disabled people in particular—in our consideration of the report as it affects Scottish interests. We are keen to hear from all those who have an interest in equality for disabled people, particularly regarding the recommendations in devolved areas. The Executive will discuss, with disability groups, the best way in which to facilitate that process. The Scottish Executive is keeping in touch with the Department for Education and Employment, to ensure that its consideration of the issues is informed by concerns that are aired in Scotland, and that it takes account of distinct Scottish circumstances. So, what is currently happening? The Scottish  Executive provides grant aid of more than £100,000 per year to several organisations that represent deaf people. Additionally, there is approximately £32,000 for training and development of BSL interpreters. Over and above that, the social work services inspectorate report, "Sensing Progress", which was published in 1998, recommended ways to improve communication with deaf people and those who are hard of hearing. Following on from that, the Scottish Association of Sign Language Interpreters has been commissioned to develop a training strategy—initially for social work staff—in BSL and in other forms of communication.

A piece of work is currently being undertaken by the Department for Education and Employment—with the Royal National Institute for Deaf People and the Council for the Advancement of Communication with Deaf People—on proposals to address the shortage of interpreters. That goes directly to the valid point Dr Ewing made. We await that information, to establish what can most usefully be done to move forward on some of these issues. Research has also been commissioned to identify the distribution and level of demand and the specialist skills of interpreters in England, Scotland and Wales. The draft report is expected in the spring and will highlight variations in the number of interpreters available in different areas. We are aware of—and commend—the work of the many voluntary organisations, including the British Deaf Association, which works to promote deaf people as equal partners in society and campaigns for official recognition of BSL. The European Parliament passed a resolution on sign languages for deaf people at the end of last year. It—and an earlier resolution—calls on the European Commission to make a proposal to the Council of Ministers on official recognition of sign language used by deaf people in member states. That is an issue of interest to many member states, including ours. The Commission is still to make a response, which we await with considerable interest and impatience. I welcome the presence of BSL interpreters today. I understand that they are provided by the Edinburgh and East of Scotland Deaf Society. I  am sure that deaf and hearing-impaired people will also appreciate it. We should also be aware of other provisions made in the Parliament for people who are hard of hearing, including the T-loop system in the chamber and infrared systems in some of the committee rooms. Ultimately, it is a matter not for the Executive but for the Parliament to consider how best to take forward its provision for deaf people and whether signing should be integrated into meetings of the Parliament. I am sure that the Deputy Presiding Officer will take this matter forward. From an equality perspective and the perspective of the Executive, I would encourage the Parliament seriously to consider this issue. The Scottish Executive is committed to equality of opportunity for all and that, of course, includes equality for people with disabilities. We are in the process of consulting on the development of an equality strategy for the Executive. I encourage people to respond. In support of our commitment to equality for those who are deaf and hard of hearing we will continue to review and develop services, such as training and provision for BSL interpreters in Scotland.

I am winding up now. We all want a just and inclusive society in Scotland, which—as Winnie Ewing said earlier—enables all our citizens to achieve their full potential. The Executive recognises that lack of access to information and services that hearing people take for granted contributes to a feeling of isolation and social exclusion. I give an undertaking that we will examine the issues that have been raised today, particularly interpreting, which makes a practical difference to people's lives and is fundamental in terms of the Executive's commitment to social inclusion and equality.

I am familiar with the concerns that have been raised about the draft census order because of my equal opportunities responsibilities. It is evident to everyone that the Executive has listened carefully to what the Equal Opportunities Committee has had to say. We are grateful to the committee for stressing the contribution that the census can make to equality proofing and social inclusion policies. Although the debate has tended to concentrate on three or four particular census questions—and I shall come back to specific points made on those—we must not lose sight of the whole census  package. The census is probably the most important source of social and socio-economic statistics. Its special value lies in producing data for small areas; that helps those who have to plan and deliver local services, such as health, education, housing, transport, social services and community care. We have taken account of the Equal Opportunities Committee's view that census users will need to make fuller use of information about ethnic and religious groups in future. To include a question on religion, we will need to pass primary legislation to amend the Census Act 1920. To enable us to achieve that without putting severe strain on the census timetable, I hope that members will accommodate the fast-tracking of that legislation, allowing the draft amendment order to be laid at the earliest date. The census is feasible only if we use self-completion forms; interviewer completion would not be practical. Someone needs to view the operation from the form-filler's point of view, remembering that completion is compulsory. In reply to Elaine Smith's point, I must tell members that we intend to provide assistance in the form of a helpline and a minicom number for the hard of hearing. We will liaise with the voluntary sector to ensure that we promote the census properly. A form that is longer than three pages per person will affect response rates. The changes that we have announced today on religion and ethnic group will need to be accommodated within that constraint. Des McNulty, Tommy Sheridan and others argued for a question on income. While we recognise the strength of the case that such a question would allow for useful cross-referencing, there was clear evidence from tests carried out by the registrar general that inclusion of such a question risked alienating the public, lowering response and so reducing the effectiveness of the whole census. Mr Sheridan is not entirely correct in his assertions. I agree with the need for improved data for social inclusion purposes, but there are alternative sources that can give that information: the DSS small area income data; Inland Revenue data; the Scottish household survey, which asks specific questions on income that are then cross-referenced to information on health, education and so on; and new modelling techniques. I give an assurance that we intend to pursue the objective of producing and disseminating data by the time those census outputs are available in 2002 and 2003. I hope that that gives the assurance wanted by Des McNulty, Sylvia Jackson and others. Kate MacLean and the Equal Opportunities Committee argued for a question on language  spoken in the home, but the real need is to identify a lack of ability in English where that may affect the delivery of services. Tests have shown that a question on language spoken in the home does not work as a proxy for that information, since many fluent English speakers use a different language in the home. I give my guarantee to Kate MacLean that the household survey, boosted to examine ethnic minorities in Scotland, will cover that specific point. The Commission for Racial Equality, the race equality advisory forum and others will be involved in pulling that together. I am also happy to guarantee that the Equal Opportunities Committee will be consulted on that. I emphasise that the Executive provides support for the Scots language and recognises the role of Scots in our cultural life. This issue is not about recognition of the Scots language or—I say to Brian Adam—about understanding the Scots language. The term Scots means different things to different people. The sampling that was undertaken underlined that and showed that the data we would get would be unreliable and could not be used with accuracy for planning purposes. I should clarify the issue raised by Malcolm Chisholm and Brian Adam. I guarantee the inclusion of a question on language spoken in the home in the ethnic minority boost of the Scottish household survey. However, Scots are not an ethnic minority. I would like to reassure the public about how we collect, store and use all the information collected in the census. Census information is used only for statistical purposes. The Census Act 1920 makes it a criminal offence for census office staff, or agents providing services to the registrar general, to pass on information to anyone other than people employed by, or providing services to, the registrar general for purposes covered by the act. The forms will be kept secure for 100 years. There are no security concerns. If the census is to proceed as planned, it is important that we do not annul the draft order today. If the order were annulled, which is what Irene McGugan's motion would do, we would have to recommence the whole procedure and it is not clear that we could hold the census on the planned date. The census will provide vital information for the work of this Parliament as well as the wider community. The draft order fixes the date of the census and the basic data to be collected. We have said how we plan to accommodate members' concerns. We will lay an amendment order to include a question on religion when the necessary change in primary legislation has been made. We will also expand the ethnic group question on the basis of the consultation that I outlined earlier.  I am unclear about the SNP's position. When the Executive listens to the Equal Opportunities Committee and reviews the matter, are we to be condemned or congratulated? We have listened and where a case has been made we have acted. I move, That the Parliament approves the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2000 to the extent that it relates to the following particulars in Schedule 2— (a) in item 1, the words "indicating whether an individual form is being completed by that member"; in item 2, the words "and relationship to the first person mentioned in the return, and, as the case may be, where there are 5 or less persons in the household, the relationship of each of the previous persons mentioned in the return and where there are 6 or more persons in the household, the relationship of the sixth and subsequent persons to the two previously mentioned persons in the return"; in item 6, the words "and if married whether first or subsequent subsisting marriage"; items 7,11,12,13,14,16,17; in item 18, the words "or was on a Government sponsored training scheme"; items 19, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32; and items 1, 2 and 3 of Schedule 3 to the draft Order.

The Scottish compact, which sets out the Executive's commitment to recognising the value of the voluntary sector, was endorsed by the Scottish Parliament on 3 November. The compact is being implemented across the Executive, along with associated good practice guidance for departments.

As Tricia Marwick will appreciate, there is a 3.4 per cent increase in revenue funding for local government in 2000-01. It is for local councils to establish their priorities for that expenditure, but I strongly encourage them to ensure that the voluntary sector is adequately funded at a local level.

We have worked closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in developing the guidance and in ensuring that it is implemented on the ground. We do not want the voluntary sector to bear the brunt of any changed priority expenditure decisions that are made by local government.

For the purposes of accuracy, it might be worth reviewing when announcements about the repeal of section 28 were made. The announcement was made first to the Equal Opportunities Committee on 28 September 1999. Does Mr Monteith acknowledge that the Executive has used the passage of the local government bill as a vehicle for making it explicit that there would be a review of the national five to 14 curriculum guidelines, and that the Executive has undertaken to consult with parents on the matter? That review had started when the announcement was made.

rose—

rose—

Will the member give way?

I hope that this will be a helpful intervention. As Michael Matheson is a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, he will recall that, in September—well before the date on which the Minister for Communities addressed the Local Government Committee—I gave a clear indication of the Executive's intention, which he welcomed at the meeting.

The Coalfields Regeneration Trust will spend £4.5 million in Scotland over the next three years. That, of course, is in addition to the Executive's programmes to tackle the problems of deprived areas and to promote social inclusion.

There was a question in there somewhere, to which my response is absolutely not. The £4.5 million is in line with our share of the population, the number of collieries and the number of people still working in the mining industry. The Coalfields Communities Campaign has made representations to the Department of Trade and Industry—members will appreciate that this is a reserved matter—which Helen Liddell is currently considering.

I thank the member for pointing out an example of the significant regeneration of a former coalfield area. Let me put the matter in context, as it is not just about the Coalfields Regeneration Trust. In December and again this week, Jack McConnell announced a special deprivation allowance, which will target eight former coalfield areas and which represents an additional £5 million in 1999-2000 alone. In the social inclusion partnerships, which also cover several coalfield areas, there is a further £5 million.

I met Tony Smith and his colleagues in Dublin last month and heard about how the credit union movement in Ireland has grown over the past few decades and about the factors underpinning its success. We will use that information to determine how best the Executive can support the credit union movement here in Scotland.

I join Cathy Jamieson in welcoming George Foulkes to the gallery. George and I shared a platform not too long ago at a Burns supper that happened to coincide with his birthday, when he turned 58. [Laughter.] I am getting my own back. I would welcome the establishment of a credit union in this Parliament, and I shall have meetings with MSPs later today to progress the matter.

As part of our work to address financial exclusion, we are keen to ensure that, throughout Scotland, everyone will have equal access to quality money advice services. Currently, we are discussing with Money Advice Scotland its plans to establish a national money advice and debt counselling telephone hotline.

I was going to establish from Christine Grahame whether there was some linkage to the question of a telephone debt helpline.

The Executive is firmly committed to tackling financial exclusion wherever it occurs. I am concerned to hear that there are problems in any area of Scotland. That is why we are keen to examine a helpline that will cover everybody, including those people in rural areas. I hope that Christine Grahame will welcome that.

The member will be pleased to hear that I have met the Association of British Credit Unions Ltd and the Scottish League of Credit Unions on a number of occasions. I understand that the Scottish League of Credit Unions was consulted by the Treasury. As an open and accessible Executive, we will continue to do that.

Scottish Executive ministers are advised by members of the rough sleepers advisory group, which considers each application for funding on its merits. Bids for rough sleepers initiative funding are supported by information from a range of sources, including street counts and user questionnaires.

Mr Quinan is well aware that RSI applications are considered by an external panel, which assesses the validity and robustness of bids. It is incumbent on members to be accurate about statements made to the Parliament and I would be grateful if Mr Quinan showed some responsibility in that respect.

Perhaps Mr Quinan should have contacted West Dunbartonshire Council to ascertain accurate information before taking part in the debate on housing at the beginning of January. I would like to correct one of his inaccuracies. He was wrong in asserting that I appointed one of the members of the rough sleepers advisory group. I remind Mr Quinan that that appointment was made in February 1997 and that the Scottish Parliament elections took place in May 1999. I regret that I do not have that degree of influence.

We deeply regret the fact that people died over the winter as a result of rough sleeping. For that reason, the Scottish Executive is committed, as part of the programme for government, to end rough sleeping by 2003. To reinforce that commitment, and to ensure that we deliver on it, we have increased that budget by 40 per cent.

I welcome the opportunity to give endorsement to the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Bill and to send it to Westminster with the full support of the Scottish Parliament. It is the best way to ensure equalisation of the age of consent across the United Kingdom at the earliest opportunity. Today's debate has been in part on criminal justice matters, but equally it underscores the Scottish Executive's broader commitment to promoting equality of opportunity for all. We intend to support that commitment by the adoption of a strategic approach to equality within the Executive and by developing our wider strategy through consultation and dialogue with all interests. The recent publication of our consultation paper, "Towards an Equality Strategy", will give all those in our society with an interest in equality issues the opportunity to contribute to developing a strategy  for the new Scotland: a Scotland characterised by social justice, tolerance and inclusion. The Scottish population is vibrant, diverse and multicultural. However, all too often those whose culture is not part of what might be described as the mainstream face exclusion, discrimination and harassment. We know that those in the gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender communities face exclusion because of their sexual orientation. That is not acceptable in a modern, democratic society. As part of developing the first equality strategy for the Executive and the Parliament, we have an opportunity to address inequality and exclusion and to cultivate an environment that celebrates diversity, fosters tolerance and promotes understanding. We reject attitudes that isolate or exclude and are committed to equality of opportunity for all. One area that has excited much recent interest, where we have already taken action, is the repeal of section 2A of the Local Government Act 1986. It has been raised today—let me remind members what that legislation says. It prohibits local authorities from "intentionally promoting homosexuality or publishing material with the intention of promoting homosexuality" or—and people forget the second part— "promoting the teaching in any maintained school of the acceptability of homosexuality as a pretended family relationship". That legislation is unjust and reactionary—time has also shown that it is unusable. Nevertheless, its very existence has legitimised intolerance and prejudice against homosexuals. It has also acted as a constraint  on the  development of best practice in sex education and action against bullying. Repeal of section 2A will be included in the ethical standards in public life bill, which we will bring before the Parliament soon.

No, and I will take no lectures from Mr Gallie on consultation. The Executive listens to the people of Scotland. Seventy-five per cent of a total of 2,329 responses were in favour of repeal. Is Mr Gallie listening to them? We recognise that some parents might fear that repeal will result in homosexuality being promoted in schools. They can be assured that the Executive is adamant that repeal of section 2A should not lead to what is termed "the promotion of homosexuality". We will contact all directors of education, setting out clearly the intention behind repeal and its implications for sex education in  schools and providing an overview of the current guidance. Before repeal of section 2A comes into force, we will conduct a detailed examination of existing guidelines and revise them if necessary. On a point of listening, let me ask whether Mr Gallie will listen to the Scottish Parent Teacher Council, which is in favour of repeal, when it points out that there have been no prosecutions under the legislation. Terms such as "promote", "acceptability" or "pretended family relationship" have never been clarified in law. Because of that, teachers have been uncertain about how they might deal with homosexual issues if they arose. The debate is about the nature of Scotland. I want a Scotland that is characterised by tolerance and social justice; a Scotland that is founded on the principles of equality; a Scotland that is modern and progressive. I welcome the Scottish National party's support for that progressive agenda and I hope that that same spirit of tolerance and modernisation will prevail when we address section 2A. Lyndsay McIntosh and John Young spoke at some length, but left us unsure as to their views. Do they support equalisation? There was no indication of their position. Support for the lowering of the homosexual age of consent is another part of our rejection of inequality. Homosexual young men are as deserving of tolerance and understanding as anyone and the removal of discrimination against them under the criminal law is a step forward. I say to John Young that the age of consent in other countries is either the same as or lower than what is proposed. It is 14 in Italy and Austria and 12 in Spain. The removal of the criminal liability of a boy under the age of consent who commits homosexual acts with someone over that age is another step forward. The removal of the provision will allow a young homosexual person to seek the advice and help that they need on issues such as how to practise safer sex, without fear of the law. Our proposals do not, as some have suggested, add up to a package of measures to appease what is sometimes disparagingly called the gay lobby. They signal a move towards creating a society in Scotland where diversity is welcomed and in which all can take their place, regardless of sexuality. That is not to say that the proposed changes have not raised concerns. There are those who consider that the lowering of the age of consent will impact on the numbers of those infected with sexually transmitted diseases such as HIV and AIDS. However, I must emphasise that there are no data to support that assertion. Indeed, a recent report from the radical organisation that was  referred to earlier, the BMA, concluded that the average age of people's first homosexual encounter was under 16 years, which is the same as the average age of people's first heterosexual encounter. It is vital that all young people receive effective health education. The introduction of the abuse of trust offence represents another important measure to protect vulnerable young people from unwanted sexual attention. It applies without discrimination to young men and young women, regardless of sexuality, to protect them from those who might seek to exploit a position of trust to secure a sexual relationship. It demonstrates a commitment to protection for young people and should be welcomed by all. As part of taking forward our commitment on that, we will shortly introduce proposals to Parliament for further measures aimed at providing added protection for children and young people in a wide range of situations. The Executive announced in its programme for government the establishment of a statutory index of persons who are unsuitable to work with children. Linked to that will be the introduction of measures to ban unsuitable people from working with, or from applying to work—in either a paid or a voluntary capacity—with children and young people. We expect shortly to be able to issue a pre-legislative consultation paper on the proposals. Members will be aware that we are also planning for the implementation of part V of the Police Act 1997. When that part is implemented, more thorough checks on a person's suitability to work with children will be possible. As Phil Gallie mentioned, the cost to the voluntary sector of the introduction of the legislation will be kept under review, and to that end, a working group involving the voluntary sector has been set up to review pricing. We are also consulting on the proposals for legislation to establish a Scottish commission for the regulation of care, which will regulate care services for adults and children, and to establish a Scottish social services council, which will regulate the social services work force. Those bodies will be able to play an important part in the protection of children and other vulnerable people. In concluding—

It has been rather a long conclusion, but this is a serious point. Let the Parliament raise its sights above the narrow view that is contained in the Tory amendment. The issue is not who changes the law, but that it is changed, and changed quickly. The interests and well-being of the people of Scotland are far more important than constitutional purity, and I welcome the SNP's recognition of that.  The UK Government has clearly signalled its intention to reintroduce the bill, because it regards the bill as unfinished business. It will, if necessary, use the Parliament Acts to ensure that the provisions that it contains are passed. The Parliament Acts mechanism requires that an identical bill be reintroduced. Removal of the Scottish provision would mean that the early opportunity to equalise the age of consent throughout the UK would be lost. Let me remind members of part of Jim Wallace's opening speech. He said that Mr McLetchie responded to the First Minister's announcement by saying that "the Scottish Conservatives, as a unionist party, have no problem in accepting that some acts—even those that cover devolved areas—should be enacted uniformly across the UK."— [ Official Report , 9 June 1999; Vol 1, c 362-63.]  Is there a split? We should be told but, frankly, there are so few Conservatives that it does not really matter. As Kate MacLean said, it is indeed rather bizarre that the Tories should be hiding behind constitutional niceties, particularly as Mr Gallie would prefer to be elsewhere. He might, however, have seriously damaged his chances, given that his pal Edwina Currie first introduced the bill, and that his party leader, William Hague, voted for it. Is Mr Hague wrong? Do tell. Is Mr Gallie so out of step—

Thank you, Sir David. Is Mr Gallie so out of step with Scottish society, or is there a hint—or a suspicion—of intolerance and prejudice behind the Conservative amendment? Let us have some honesty. I will leave others to decide the answer. Let us send the bill to Westminster with our support. It is time for enlightened people in Scotland to join forces to end intolerance, prejudice and discrimination. Let us end them now.

Will the member give way?

As it is me? Thank you. I seek some clarification. Mr Gibson has indicated that he supports single social tenancies, some with right to buy and some without. What would the SNP do for new tenants in both council and housing association housing who currently have the right to buy?

rose—

Will the member give way?

rose—

rose—

Will Fiona Hyslop give way?

Fiona Hyslop made a point about the homelessness task force, which has consulted professionals and homeless people directly. I hope that Fiona welcomes that. Let me remind her, however, that it is not just the Executive's assertion that homelessness has to do with more than just housing; that assertion comes from academic studies. People tell us that underlying homelessness are the problems of domestic violence, substance abuse and alcohol addiction. We must address those to find a comprehensive solution. Does Fiona Hyslop agree?

This issue is clearly one on which many members of this Parliament and many people in Scotland have strongly held views. However, I am disappointed that, having predicated his comments on the clear desire for the need for reconciliation and unity of purpose, Mike Russell turned on both Michael McMahon and Frank McAveety. That set the tone for the rest of the debate. Having said that, I agree with Alex Neil. He is right to say that we must raise the sights of this Parliament. I am grateful to Lord James for what was probably the most interesting history lesson that I have ever received. However, I rush to reject any notion that duelling is an appropriate way to settle issues in the 21 st century. Duelling is a male preserve and, despite my commitment to equal opportunities, I am therefore excused from participation. There can be no doubt that, historically, there has been religious discrimination in this country. Sectarianism is a scar on the soul of Scotland, and it certainly has no place in the Scotland of tomorrow. Our aim and ambition is to end all forms of discrimination: religious discrimination, racial discrimination, sexual discrimination and discrimination on the grounds of disability or sexual orientation. Achieving that is not simply about changing one act that is almost 300 years old.  Michael Matheson said earlier that he never dreamed about being the king, or indeed the queen. I certainly never dreamed about being the king. I am sure that royal marriage proposals are winging their way to Michael as we speak, but how will he feel about the horses and corgis that come with them? The discrimination inherent in the Act of Settlement is truly offensive to many people in Scotland. The fact that it has little practical significance does not negate its symbolic significance. Tommy Sheridan is right to say that the passing of the amended motion will have symbolic significance. However, it is not just a matter of priorities; it is also about competence. Let us get beyond symbolism and talk about areas in which the Scottish Parliament has the influence, the opportunity and the responsibility to get it right. Shona Robison was right to say that we do not have legislative responsibility for any aspect of equality. However, we have a clear role in promoting equality, and key to that is our responsibility to tackle discrimination—through education, health, employment and dealing with poverty. Those are areas for which we have responsibility. Our programme for government set out our pledge to the people of Scotland: our pledge to work together to build a modern, prosperous and socially just Scotland. To make a real difference in people's lives, we must tackle the discrimination caused by poverty. I do not need to remind people that deprivation affects life chances. The fact that child poverty increased dramatically between 1979 and 1996 is a damning indictment of the previous Government. Two in five children in this country are born poor, one in six families are pushed into poverty at childbirth. We have a responsibility to improve the life chances of our children, to end child poverty within a generation, and to build a socially just and equal Scotland that is free of discrimination. In working together for a Scotland without discrimination, we must search for agreement on the most effective way forward. We should not seek confrontation, which will merely make worse the problems that we are trying to solve.

I want to make it absolutely clear  to Alex Salmond, and indeed to Mike Rumbles, that the Executive amendment is not, and I repeat not, an excuse for inaction. I am sure, as members will be aware, that this debate and motion will be considered carefully by Westminster. However, John McAllion is right: the repeal of the Act of Settlement will not in itself end sectarianism, so let us focus on what we can do at our own hand. I am sure that members will agree that discrimination has no place in a modern society. We all believe that. Annabel Goldie was correct in her analysis of the debate. It follows that we would like to see any act of Parliament that contains religious discrimination repealed. In closing, I will focus on the Executive's amendment and the two key points that it contains. First—and this debate has illustrated the point well—amendment or repeal of the Act of Settlement raises complex constitutional issues. At least eight other pieces of legislation would require amendment or repeal. Similar legislation would need to be passed in at least 15 realms within the Commonwealth. There is no doubt that any process of amendment or repeal would be complex, controversial and demanding on parliamentary time—not our time, but the time of other Parliaments. On that point, Mike Russell is wrong. It is interesting to note that he is now an expert not only on constitutional law, but on international constitutional law. Is there no end to his many talents? Perhaps it signals the expansionist plans of the SNP that it speaks for the Parliaments of Canada, Australia, New Zealand and other Commonwealth countries. I am sure that those Parliaments affirm our commitment to equality, but it is a matter for them, and for the whole Commonwealth, not for Mr Russell. Secondly, the Act of Settlement is a matter reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament. That is a matter of act and law, and is laid out in the Scotland Act 1998. No one can dispute that. I say again that the Executive amendment is not an excuse for inaction. The Executive is intent on ridding Scotland of discrimination in all its forms. We believe that the way forward is by a broadly based programme of social justice that tackles poverty and ends social exclusion and discrimination in effective ways. It is a radical programme but, above all, it is a practical programme that we can deliver, one that will provide real change for the people of Scotland. I urge Parliament to support the motion as amended by the Executive.

On a point of order.

But it is because my console is not working.

My console is not working, despite the fact that my card is inserted.

Because the wee light keeps flashing when I press no.

I am pleased to open this debate on equality— [Interruption.]

This is the first time that the Parliament has debated equality and the first opportunity that we have had to elaborate on how the Executive is approaching its work on equality. Today is the start of a much wider debate across all sections of Scottish society. I hope that that debate will stimulate and challenge all, and that everybody will participate in it. Scotland has a vibrant multicultural, multi-faith population, and is rich in diversity. However, our society has not been culturally inclusive or willing to ensure that diversity did not become an excuse for inequality of opportunity. If one is a woman, or is disabled, from a black or ethnic minority background, gay, lesbian, or old, or if one's culture is not part of the mainstream, inequality of opportunity is more often one's badge, and discrimination, harassment, exclusion and poor access to services are a likely legacy. If we needed any reminder of what that means for many people in Scotland, we should consider the evidence. The pay gap between men and women in Scotland stands at 78.5 per cent. It cannot be acceptable that we continue to have that pay disparity at the end of the century that began with clamour and demands for equal pay. It is unjustifiable that those with black and ethnic minority backgrounds experience higher unemployment and lower incomes than the white population. It is also unacceptable that those with disability have diminished access to the labour market and to full participation in it. Furthermore, it cannot be acceptable that so many groups face discrimination and exclusion. Women face real exclusion, but it is often invisible. Women can be barred from full participation in society because of their low relative incomes, their patterns of working, and their caring and domestic responsibilities, and because of discriminatory assumptions that are still made about their role and place in society. A lack of financial  independence and, in some cases, violent and abusive relationships can also lead to exclusion. We know also that those in the gay, lesbian and transgender communities face exclusion because of their sexual orientation. Many experience rejection and alienation and live their lives never feeling that they are able to participate fully. Young people experience homophobic bullying at school and often suffer in silence, unable to confide in family and friends. Others are forced to leave home because their families have found their sexuality unacceptable. Those with a disability will tell us that trying to live and work in a society that is not structured to enable their participation is soul destroying and frustrating, and that is unacceptable. Just last week, I read in the report, "Experiences of Social Exclusion in Scotland", comments by respondents from black and ethnic minority communities. They stated that they "felt that they had been excluded by a society which was geared towards the attitudes and needs of the white majority". They recounted instances of being verbally attacked because of their ethnic origin. They said: "These attacks tended to question their right to exist in Scottish society". We know that racial harassment, racial attacks and racial discrimination are experienced by people in Scotland every day. That is why the Executive is determined to make advances on the issue of equal opportunities and why we are advocating the development of a robust equality strategy. The Executive has consistently stated that it wants a more just and inclusive Scotland, but we cannot achieve that objective if we do not address the issues of inequality in our society. This Parliament endorsed the consultative steering group recommendation that equality should be an underpinning principle of the Parliament in all its work. The Executive has set about its work on equality with commitment and determination. It is a major task, and one that will not be completed overnight. The process of changing attitudes and mindsets takes time and is a responsibility for us all—not just the Government, not just politicians and not just the equality agencies and interests, but all of us. Our approach to delivering on equality must be one of partnership, and that is the basis on which I bring the motion before the chamber today. Last night, the First Minister gave an address at the Equal Opportunities Commission launch of the mainstreaming checklist for MSPs. In his address, he identified three requirements for the successful development of the equality agenda. The first is the need to affirm the Executive's commitment at  the highest level, the second is the need to put in place structures to deliver equality, and the third is the need to develop a robust strategy. Let me say a little about each of those needs. The First Minister and the Executive are firmly and publicly committed to putting equality at the heart of policy making, and are determined that mainstreaming and the promotion of equal opportunities will be key features of our work. The programme for government reaffirmed the Executive's commitment to promoting equality of opportunity. At the end of September, I gave a commitment to the Equal Opportunities Committee that I would go back and outline the progress that we had made, and I fully intend to do that. Several ministers have pledged the Executive's collective commitment to equality and to starting the process to achieve it. As members know, equality is one of the four key principles of the Parliament, guiding our operations and our organisation. The Equal Opportunities Committee is one of the eight mandatory committees and is already making headway in its work under the convenership of Kate MacLean. Although achieving equality in this Parliament is a valuable outcome in itself, it has the added value of stimulating interest, increasing expectations and raising the profile of equality issues in the new Scotland. As pledged, the Executive has established an equality unit in the Executive secretariat, at the very centre of our structure. The unit has three main tasks. First, it will act as a single point for advice and liaison in the Executive. Secondly, it will take the lead on mainstreaming equality in the work of the Executive, to put equality at the heart of all policy development and service design and delivery. Thirdly, the unit will actively pursue the promotion of equal opportunities. We see mainstreaming as the key task because, as the EOC's document, "Questions on Mainstreaming", states, "it puts people, and their diverse needs and experiences at the heart of policy making. It leads to better government. As a process it tackles the structures in society which contribute to or sustain discrimination and disadvantage and the application of a mainstreaming approach can avoid the adoption of policies and programmes which replicate discrimination and exacerbate existing inequalities." The pursuit of mainstreaming and the focus on changing culture and attitudes require a particular strategic approach. The development of the equality agenda in Scotland will help to create fundamental cultural change and a deep-rooted commitment to equal opportunities for all. The evolution of an effective programme for the Scottish Executive requires a partnership approach with all interests, both internal and external. I propose that there be a phased  approach to the Scottish Executive's strategy on equality. The initial phase will run from December to April 2000, and is concerned with establishing the framework for work on equality. In that phase, the emphasis is on consultation and dialogue. The ability to achieve our objective of mainstreaming requires all interests to have shared ownership of the project, and that cannot come about without detailed dialogue and consultation. I see that David McLetchie started the dialogue outside and continued it as he came into the chamber. Because detailed discussion is required, there will be a programme of widespread consultation, culminating in a report to Parliament in April 2000, and annual reports thereafter. That will provide Parliament with the opportunity to review the development of the equality strategy and to monitor progress. This speech will form the basis of our consultation. In addition to the mainstreaming work that we will take forward, the Executive expects work to be done on establishing and improving baseline information and statistics, developing performance management frameworks, and developing and building on internal and external equality networks, consultative mechanisms and communication strategies. We also expect to look at ways of disseminating good practice. Our commitment to equality has been on-going since July, and time does not permit me to elaborate on all the initiatives that have been undertaken, but I will provide members with a flavour of them: the £8 million package that has been announced, to address domestic violence; the £2.4 million given to finance work in ethnic minority communities as part of our social inclusion programme; and the improved provision for child care. Last month, we announced our firm commitment to repeal section 2A of the Local Government Act 1986. Recently, we have pursued work with young and old through the millennium volunteers project and the giving age initiative. The Executive has just published our groundbreaking report, "Social Justice ...a Scotland where everyone matters". The report is about establishing social justice and equality of opportunity as the hallmark of Scottish society and politics. It is about working together to achieve a Scotland where everyone matters. The report "Experiences of Social Exclusion in Scotland", to which I referred earlier, set out in graphic detail the many forms of social injustice that affect our society. It cuts across all kinds of people in all kinds of communities and in all kinds of different ways. The report spells it out clearly  that we cannot simply treat Scotland's people as a uniform group, and that a multi-sectoral approach is needed. That accords with our cross-cutting approach, which the Executive is using to tackle social inclusion, and will also be the hallmark of the equality unit. We have given a clear commitment to improve the level of representation of women, black and ethnic minority people, and disabled people in public appointments. Although significant work has already been undertaken to address the current imbalance, my ministerial colleagues and I recognise that further work needs to be done to attract more candidates from under-represented areas of society. That is why currently we are reviewing systems for appointment and have set ourselves challenging targets. My colleague Jack McConnell has responsibility for the overall system of public appointments, and will be addressing that matter in a statement shortly. We also recognise the importance of improving our consultation mechanisms with appropriate bodies in the field. The Women in Scotland consultative forum, chaired at ministerial level, was set up more than two years ago; the race equality advisory forum has been established and held its first meeting last week. Iain Gray and I co-chaired a half-day seminar to identify issues of concern for disabled people. As we identify the areas of concern, we will identify appropriate ways to consult and actions that can be taken forward. We find ourselves in a significant climate of change. We are not alone in seeing the need to increase the profile of equal opportunities. The UK Government has underlined its commitment to tackling inequality. The Race Relations (Amendment) Bill has been announced and the report of the disability task force is imminent. Last week, the European Commission produced its proposals to tackle discrimination, under the new powers of the Amsterdam treaty. The proposals cover a wide range of issues: racial discrimination in employment; social protection; education; and access to goods and services. The Commission also proposed an action plan for spreading best practice. That is the start of a lengthy process, but I am heartened by those positive proposals from the Commission and the breadth of grounds of employment discrimination that it intends to tackle. We are beginning to witness movement at all levels of government on equality issues. That is to be welcomed. In Scotland, we have an opportunity to craft something unique and at the cutting edge. We have an opportunity to lead the field. We are a new Parliament and a new Executive. For the first time, we have the chance to develop a cohesive  approach to equality work through the strategically placed equality unit. We do not have any precedents; we can make our own blueprint and map our own route. By adopting the motion today and entering into meaningful dialogue, we shall create the opportunity to scope an effective programme for equality into the next century. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment, as set out in Making it Work Together: A Programme for Government, to promote equality of opportunity for all and to do that through an inclusive, phased and participative approach to the development of an equality strategy so ensuring that in developing policy and in service design and delivery concern for equality is at the heart of the matter.

The Scottish Executive and local authorities fund voluntary bodies that provide support and accommodation. The payment of social security benefits to individuals is the responsibility of the Benefits Agency.

The Executive already recognises that fact, which is why we established the domestic abuse service development fund a few weeks ago. That fund will provide an eightfold increase in the amount that the Executive gives to refuges.

I do not doubt the sentiments that Christine Grahame expresses, but what actions does she propose to take? Let us hear what SNP policies are, how much they cost and when they will be introduced.

A great deal has been said today about pensioners' standard of living—but only statements from the opposition parties that add up to a shameful litany of fine words and no policies. No action was proposed by the SNP—its promises hold no water and are guaranteed to create uncertainty and insecurity. We witness an unholy alliance between the Tories, with their dismal legacy, and the SNP. It is an alliance that offers nothing for our pensioners in the future. Neither Alex Neil nor any other SNP member proposed one policy; they just criticised and made promises—after 18 years of Tory Governments that widened the gap between the richest and poorest pensioners to the extent that one in five pensioners lives in a household with half the national average income. I shall return to the essence of the debate and remind members what the Scottish Executive and the Government are doing to tackle the economic, health and care needs of older people. The minimum income guarantee recognises that the gap between rich and poor pensioners has widened dramatically since 1979 and gives most money to help those most in need. Every pensioner will get a guaranteed income—

If I may finish, I will get to that point. Tommy mentioned the link to earnings. The minimum income guarantee restores that link for the 125,000 poorest pensioners in Scotland. I hope that Tommy will welcome that. As a showbiz socialist he will appreciate that, in the words of Ronan Keating from Boyzone, "you say it best when you say nothing at all". Winter fuel payments are up from £20 to £100, a fivefold increase to tackle the Tory legacy that meant that a third of single pensioners were living in fuel poverty in 1997.

We have cut the price of fuel by cutting VAT from 8 per cent to 5 per cent, so our pensioners' money goes further. There is warm deal investment of more than £10 million this year and a further £28 million over the next two years, so 100,000 homes will be upgraded by 2003. A high proportion will be the homes of pensioners as older people suffer most from the effects of cold housing.

I will give way shortly. Free eye tests for all pensioners and free TV licences for over-75s mean that pensioners' money goes further. In Scotland, an extra £300 million is going into community care, half of which will go on older people's services, with £10 million specifically earmarked for the delivery of carers' needs and services. What of the Tories?

We already know that they oppose everything we want to do to make pensioners better off. I will give members a flavour of how they would do that. They introduced VAT on fuel and tried to increase it to 17.5 per cent. They introduced eye test charges for pensioners. They would not have given pensioner households the extra winter fuel allowance, and they would not support the minimum income guarantee. What about the SNP? Fourteen key promises were made in its manifesto, but not one referred to pensioners.

In fact, the SNP manifesto for this Parliament was a pensioner-free zone—no figures, no costs, no ideas, no policies.

I am one of those people who suffers from a lack of sleep, so I have read the SNP manifesto. I can tell the chamber that there was not one item that referred to pensioners.

Perhaps we should search for the SNP's proposals for pensioners in the infamous economic strategy for independence. Were they in there? Nope, the strategy contained nothing extra for pensioners—only forecasts that copy the policies of the Department of Social Security and the Treasury. [Interruption.]

Why does the SNP not give any costed pledges now? The answer is that it has given up its claims of a fiscal surplus of billions and admitted a deficit of billions. That is why it can promise nothing and deliver nothing for pensioners.

The figures in that study are for the period up to 1994. Earlier, Mary Scanlon said that she readily accepts blame for the period 1979 to 1997, when the Conservatives built up child poverty and pensioner poverty. That is why I will not take lectures from her. The SNP has no idea how it would deliver existing levels of pensions and benefits. If that seems reckless to members, it gets worse. Let us not forget, as Des McNulty helpfully reminded us, that, just a few weeks ago, Kenny MacAskill made the staggering suggestion that we should spend £900 million on roads—policies on the hoof from a party on the run. How would the SNP do that? By raising income tax—again? By cutting benefits and pensions? Who would pay for the SNP's proposals? We know who would pay for them—ordinary Scots. Scottish pensioners would pay the price. Some time ago, Margo MacDonald was quoted  in The Express (Scotland) as saying in response to the SNP's proposed tax hike that people on low incomes would lose out.

In terms of policies for pensioners, the SNP had nothing to offer at the election and it has had absolutely nothing to offer since. No policies, but lots of pointless press releases—the poor journalists' fax machines are collapsing under the weight of SNP rant and rhetoric. The latest offering was a press release announcing the need for a shadow minister. It is a shame that the SNP did not discover that need earlier. However, far be it from me to suggest that this is just cheap political point-scoring; not even the SNP could sink that low. What about Tommy Sheridan, who strikes poses but whose party's manifesto does not offer any commitment to restoring the link between pensions and earnings?

I have read the whole of the manifesto, and not one of Tommy's promises—

I did, actually—it was a bit like fantasy football. We have linked the minimum income guarantee to earnings to help the poorest pensioners in society. That is our key priority. It is about targeting our resources on the poorest pensioners. The Executive is clear that older people matter. "Social Justice ...a Scotland where everyone matters", which was launched last week, sets out our targets and milestones in respect of our older people and shows that they are at the heart of government in Scotland. Unlike the SNP and the Tories, not only will we tackle pensioner poverty and quality of life, we will be held accountable to the people of Scotland Disappointingly, the usual attacks were made on the chancellor's announcement yesterday that Scottish Executive ministers are to sit with their counterparts from across Britain on joint ministerial committees to co-ordinate and develop joint working to tackle pensioner poverty.

I welcome that initiative. We know the importance of working together on matters of shared concern and do not adopt an isolationist position. Bringing together ministers, exchanging information and developing co-ordinated policy strategies will deliver the real benefits that we want for our older people. We will have a greater voice in those areas to ensure that  the policies that the Scottish Executive and the Government develop achieve maximum results for our pensioners. Far be it from me to remind Donald Gorrie that his leader, Jim Wallace, supports the establishment of joint ministerial committees. I recognise that memory lapses do occasionally occur. The programme for government, which was produced by Labour and the Liberal Democrats working together, was based on listening to the people of Scotland and delivering what they want.

I thank Mike Rumbles for that intervention. Families need to talk to each other, so I suggest that he talks to his leader.

For far too long, the skills, experiences and insights of Scotland's older people have been ignored. We will invite, value and act on their contributions. Let no one be in any doubt that the Executive is committed to listening to older people, to valuing their contribution and to supporting their needs. The vision outlined in the section entitled "Every older person matters" in our report, "Social Justice ...a Scotland where everyone matters" shows that we want older people to be financially secure and to enjoy active, independent and healthy lives.

That is our goal. We have started to deliver on it. We are the only party that will do so. I would like to believe that everyone in the chamber, including the SNP, shares that goal, but would members trust it with their pension? The SNP has never said how it would pay for a separate social security department in Scotland. It has said nothing about the enormous set-up costs or the running costs and it has given no details about the different types and levels of benefit or about how they would be uprated.

The SNP will get its chance to reply on those issues. Of course, they are not easy, which is precisely why the SNP avoids them. Let us see whether, in the next 10 minutes, the  SNP will address those issues. We all want security in retirement, but the SNP offers pensioners only incompetence and insecurity.

It is a fact that such a target is contained within our programme for government and will affect 100,000 households by 2003 at a cost of about £40 million. Perhaps the SNP should read the programme for government.

I would like to add my congratulations to the many that Cathy Jamieson has already received for securing this debate. It has drawn attention to an important movement in Scotland, which, as we have heard, can make a key contribution to combating social exclusion. As members will recall, last Wednesday we debated "Social Justice ...a Scotland where everyone matters"—the first part of the Scottish Executive's framework for tackling poverty in Scotland. We said that, in the spring, our action plan would set out our detailed plans for meeting the targets and reaching the milestones that we identified in that document. We have heard much in the past half-hour that the Executive welcomes, and many principles that we have absolutely no difficulty in supporting. I  can reassure members that we will consider those ideas in the context of the action plan that we will bring to Parliament. I think that members will agree that the main driver of poverty is worklessness: being without a job for any length of time is the surest guarantee of economic exclusion. We are working closely with Henry McLeish and his enterprise team to promote more inclusive policies and practices. Since its establishment, Highland and Islands Enterprise has had an explicitly social remit. It has three strategic objectives, one of which is strengthening communities. Its priorities for that are: to promote investment in community assets; to develop community strengths and leadership; and to enhance the value of culture and heritage. Within each of those priorities, it sees a significant role for co-operatives, and seeks to support them with financial assistance, where appropriate, and through the provision of practical advice. We have strongly encouraged Scottish Enterprise to follow suit. Its new strategy gives welcome attention to inclusive enterprise policies—indeed, promoting social inclusion is one of its four major goals. Providing support for the development of new businesses in Scotland is a priority. Scottish Enterprise welcomes initiatives that help to produce businesses that are operated by a consortium or a co-operative group. It uses the expertise of Employee Ownership Scotland and other specialist advisers to assist clients who have expressed an interest in co-operatives and mutuals. Over the next year, Scottish Enterprise is committed to developing a clearer focus for creative and innovative business engagement in the inclusion process. We will be considering what more Scottish Enterprise can do to encourage enterprise, particularly in deprived areas, but I believe that we can and should go further. This important debate has yet to involve all those who help to shape our economy. It is a debate about the role of social enterprise, and it involves co-operatives and mutuals as a key element. The organisations that we find in the social economy have some important characteristics. Professor Peter Lloyd, whose research I shall share with members, has called them "partnership driven for social ends". He notes that they have a leaning towards solidarity and democracy, and recognise individuals and communities above giving returns on capital. They are usually locally based, and are usually found identifying solutions rather than identifying markets. Cathy Jamieson is absolutely right: they empower communities and provide a  significant platform for self-help. Let me pepper in a few statistics. The third sector is growing faster than most other parts of the European economy. In Germany, it grew at 11 per cent against 3 per cent in the economy overall; in France, it grew by 16 per cent against 4 per cent; in Italy, it grew by a staggering 39 per cent as opposed to 7 per cent. That is vital in relation to our mission to create new jobs. Enterprise and communities are at the heart of our social justice strategy, and the Scottish Co-operative and Mutual Forum can do much to strengthen the links between communities and the enterprise sector. We need to boost prosperity and allow more people to share in that prosperity. We can do that only by building on the foundations of a healthy economy that generates jobs. I can assure members that more will be done to promote the social economy, including co-operatives and mutuals. We recognise that Government has a part to play and we will offer clear leadership and appropriate support. We value the social economy and will seek to strengthen it. Our aspirations for a stakeholder society are not simply empty rhetoric. I can tell Linda Fabiani that the money that is going into our new housing partnership programme amounts to £333 million. Coupled with the amount available to Scottish Homes, that equates to an increase of more than £200 million. That extra money offers a substantial opportunity to develop housing associations and co-operatives. Let me say a few words about financial exclusion. The need for creative solutions is pressing—and so is time, so I shall rattle on quickly. We are examining financial exclusion and I am pleased that banks are beginning to recognise that they can deliver services to low-income households in disadvantaged communities. The role of credit unions in delivering appropriate and accessible financial services is crucially important. They give the Executive a sound platform for the next phase of our work on financial inclusion, and we are keen to promote their merits and change their image as a poor persons bank. I hope that this Parliament will consider setting up a credit union. Finally, I shall deal briefly with the Scottish community investment fund. It is not just the issue of personal financial services that we want to address. We want to ensure that community organisations established to address some of the issues of exclusion—food co-operatives, child care projects and housing co-operatives—have access to funds. We recognise that encouraging enterprise is vital. That is why we announced an  additional £10 million from banks and from a range of public sector and private sector sources for the first ever Scotland-wide community investment fund. The Executive is serious about tackling poverty and exclusion. We welcome the energy and creativity of the Scottish Co-operative and Mutual Forum in promoting the principles of the movement as a vital component of the social economy. We have a historic opportunity to make the new Scotland a fairer society, in which wealth and opportunity are in the hands of the many, not the few—a key principle underpinning co-operatives and mutuals.

Wendy Alexander has been described as Eva Peron and as Marie Antoinette. The descriptions that I would apply to today's debate are Francie and Josie or Hinge and Brackett—slapstick, knockabout stuff with no substance. We have heard a lot of carping, harping and whingeing, which is disappointing. Was any alternative offered? Where was the substance? I did not hear—

No thank you. I did not hear even one positive action proposed. Lloyd Quinan should stop scaremongering. This is one of the most significant debates that this Parliament has had. It marks the beginning of a new era and a new agenda for social equality and justice in Scotland. In this report, we have set out our vision, our targets and our milestones. The report represents the most comprehensive framework ever for tackling poverty in Scotland. Social justice will be our hallmark and ending child poverty in Scotland our principal goal. That is the commitment that the partnership of Labour and Liberal Democrat makes to the people of Scotland. It is a commitment based on three pillars—education, housing and social justice. All are key values that are shared by the partnership and that have fed directly into the report. To keep our focus firmly on the people of Scotland, we have chosen the life cycle as the framework for our targets and milestones—how we grow up, how we live and work, how we raise families and how we grow old. Because we believe that every community matters, we also have targets and milestones for our work with communities.  Too often in the past, strategies to tackle poverty and injustice have been more about places than about people. If we are to tackle the root causes of poverty and make a real difference to people's lives, we need to focus on people and places. Both matter, and that dual emphasis is reflected in our report. I agree with Keith Raffan—early intervention is crucial. Preventing poverty from occurring is what we are about. We will address the exchange of information on best practice and disseminate that across Scotland. Let us also remember that some groups in our society suffer persistent injustice, which is often exacerbated by discrimination and prejudice. We are working to ensure that equal opportunities are included in all the Executive's programmes. To make good our commitment to equality in "Social Justice", we intend to segregate all the milestones on age, gender, ethnicity and disability. Our commitment that every community matters applies not only to the social inclusion partnership areas, but to other disadvantaged communities throughout Scotland, including isolated, rural areas. We intend our milestones on unemployment rates, drugs misuse, crime rates, the quality and variety of homes, participation in voluntary activities and access to the internet to relate to rural and urban disadvantaged communities throughout Scotland. The SNP amendment was lodged in Mr Salmond's name—it is a shame that he is not here. I point out to the Tories that, in the past 20 years, the proportion of children being brought up in workless households doubled. People from the poorest areas in Scotland are now nearly three times as likely to die early as people from the richest areas. Qualifications are still skewed; more than 4,000 pupils left school in 1997 with no standard grades. I could go on. Do the Tories recognise that picture? They created it; their legacy for Scotland was one of poverty, neglect and decline.

How dare the Tories lecture us today on failing to address the needs of Scotland's people?

In deference to the chamber, I always bring facts before members, not lies. I welcome the SNP's support for our publication.

No. Incidentally, perhaps Lloyd Quinan should read Mr Salmond's amendment; it welcomes our document. I am not surprised by that, because the document is similar to what the SNP proposed in its manifesto, which borrowed ideas from us. We thank the SNP for that flattery. I will quote from that manifesto, because it is evident that it has been a while since SNP members read it. It mentions a "co-ordinated approach"—that is precisely the approach that we are taking. It also mentions the "publication of poverty indicators, to show that poverty is being tackled and eradicated". That, too, is precisely what we are doing. Yet I found no mention in the manifesto of—

I will give way in a second. Perhaps Fiona could answer my question. I could find no mention in the SNP manifesto of full employment or ending child poverty. Are not those policies important to the SNP?

I repeat: ours is the most comprehensive framework of targets that has ever been produced in Scotland to tackle poverty. It has range, focus and clarity. It provides a set of challenging and measurable targets. It drew directly—this is at the crux of the SNP's argument—from the valuable work done by the evaluation framework action team. Virtually all the indicators that the team suggested are incorporated. If Fiona Hyslop had bothered to read the technical document, she would see it all there.   [Interruption.]

Thank you. The action team produced a set of static measures. Our targets are about action, movement and change—change for the better. Fiona Hyslop said that the housing targets that we had set were easy to deliver. Is ending rough sleeping easy? Is reducing the number of families in temporary accommodation who have children easy? Clearly, it is not. The complaints of the SNP ring hollow, but they are consistent with its record of opposing whatever the Government partnership proposes in this Parliament. There comes a time when the new Executive must say, "This is what we stand for and this is what we will achieve. No more revisions and no more delay—the people of Scotland want action." In the spring, the Executive will publish its action plan, in which it will set out how we will deliver our objectives for social justice and defeating child poverty in Scotland. We will set out our programmes alongside those of other departments and agencies. That will show how actions will come together to achieve common aims. The first annual Scottish social justice report will follow. That report will allow the Executive to measure its successes and to face up to any failures. We will monitor progress every year to see whether we are living up to our aspirations, because the people of Scotland deserve nothing less. Those who demanded change and social justice at the start of this century were not deterred by the non-believers and the doubters—neither will we be. They fought long and hard to achieve their goals and so, if necessary, will we. Delivery of social justice is not a short-term fix; it is the priority of the partnership between the Liberal Democrats and Labour. We have the opportunity to deliver a better future for all our children, all our families and all our neighbourhoods. We have the opportunity to deliver a better future for Scotland—a Scotland where everybody matters.

The Executive is seeking other options for female offenders and an inter-agency forum has been established to identify practical alternatives to custody for that group.

Indeed I can, because the forum led by Professor Sheila McLean is looking at alternatives to custody and will specifically address the issue of enhanced services in the community. An immediate change that has already been implemented is the bail retrieval scheme in Cornton Vale, which allows women offenders a second chance of being released on bail and under supervision.

Local authorities are already funded to provide a range of community accommodation for offenders and women, which is given priority as a matter of policy. Some of those hostels may make  provision for children, too.

I recognise the deep-seated problems that women in Cornton Vale—particularly those with children—experience. Already, family visits take place in far more relaxed settings, with appropriate child care support. Special provision is made for mothers and babies to be located together. Nevertheless, the Executive would be happy to consider further what can be done for women offenders with children.

We have commissioned the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland to monitor the use of anti-social behaviour orders under the Crime and Disorder Act 1998, as well as the extended powers of eviction for anti-social behaviour in the act. The outcome of the survey should be available in March next year.

The Executive is very aware of and deeply concerned about the misery that anti-social behaviour causes to individuals, to families and to wider communities—which is precisely why we introduced anti-social behaviour orders in the first place. As I said, the Chartered Institute of Housing is monitoring usage for us. It is monitoring  the anti-social behaviour orders applied for, those granted, and those that have subsequently been breached. We have heard informally of several successful applications by local authorities, with the first in Dundee and several recently in Edinburgh. We encourage local authorities with such problems in their area to make use of the orders.

Naturally, I share Fiona's concern about racial harassment. I hope that members support the fact that such harassment is not welcome in the Scotland of tomorrow. We must examine the implementation of the current anti-social behaviour orders. We will then be able to review the matter and come back to Parliament.

From 1 December 1998, section 23 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 dealt with anti-social behaviour orders in relation to owner-occupiers. People can lose their homes if they suffer a custodial sentence and do not have the means to repay their mortgage, if drugs are involved or because of confiscation. Such provision already exists.

I apologise in advance, because I am loaded with the cold. If I have to stop occasionally, I hope that members will understand. The motion that we have discussed this evening is at the very heart of community safety and the vital social welfare of young Scots. I welcome this opportunity to close the debate on behalf of the Executive. I join in the chorus of thanks to Mr Gallie for congratulating the excellent work of a Labour-controlled local authority. Cathy Jamieson is right when she says that it will continue to be Labour controlled. The debate has been considered. It is clear from the many and varied speeches that Mr Gallie's motion has struck a chord with a great many members. We will take away some points and chew on them further: others I will respond to in the closing minutes. I sense members' concern about not only the seeming ease with which children and young people can get hold of age-restricted goods such as alcohol, tobacco, solvents, fireworks, knives  and videos, but the potentially damaging effects that those products can have on the individuals concerned. Often, the impact is felt beyond the individual. Other family members and the wider community are affected, particularly where anti-social and criminal behaviour arises as a result of youngsters getting hold of such products. Retailers who sell age-restricted products are, of course, still primarily responsible for ensuring that such goods do not get into the hands of those deemed too young in law to purchase them. The proof-of-age card not only enables retailers to ensure that they do not breach the law, but assists people who, although of age, appear too young to buy age-restricted products. Although this is the first scheme of its kind operated by local government in Scotland, there is excellent evidence from similar schemes run elsewhere in the UK that suggests that where these cards have been introduced, the number of complaints about illegal sales has decreased. The Executive, therefore, is happy to commend South Ayrshire Council for taking the initiative and launching its proof-of-age-card scheme, which will enable all retailers in the council's area to ask for the same proof-of-age card. A standard policy of no proof, no sale, gives retailers confidence in complying with the law. Ultimately, of course, the scheme's success will depend on the collaboration and commitment of the local business community, trading standards, the police and schools. From what I have learned about the scheme, it is clear that the council has worked hard to get everyone on board; I am certain that that bodes well for the scheme's success. Locally driven, multi-agency work such as this will be most effective. As Cathy Jamieson said, young people were themselves involved in the implementation. Such schemes are attractive to young people, particularly those of age who, when asked, cannot prove their age, and those who do not look their age. I have to admit, I did not think that it was a problem for most of us sitting round this chamber, aside from Elaine Murray. Schemes such as this set up a key barrier to illegal use by young people and exploitation by retailers. The illegal sale of all age-restricted products is to be abhorred. As the motion suggests, alcohol and tobacco are probably the two products that give rise to most concern. Under-age smoking and drinking is, of course, nothing new. Children smoke and drink for all sorts of reasons; some do so to show their independence, others do it because their friends do. Some children smoke and drink because adults have told them not to. In short, there is no single cause.  For some youngsters, early experimentation is nothing more than that, but unfortunately—for an increasing number—that first puff or drink leads to a lifetime of problems associated with alcohol and tobacco. We know, for example, that 82 per cent of adults start smoking in their teens and that a third of teenagers buy alcohol for themselves. There is increasing evidence to suggest that people are presenting with alcohol problems at an earlier age, sometimes in their early 20s. There is evidence to suggest that youngsters who smoke and drink are more likely to dabble in drugs. For some teenagers, heavy frequent drinking goes hand in hand with the use of illegal drugs. Smoking is the most preventable cause of ill-health in Scotland. It results in 13,500—that is one in five—deaths every year, and 33,500 hospital admissions. The message on smoking, therefore, is quite unambiguous: "Don't do it." Alcohol, on the other hand, in moderation and at the right time and place, can be included in a healthy lifestyle. However, excessive drinking carries a heavy toll in illness, accidents, anti-social behaviour and criminal acts of violence. Its costs—in personal, social and economic terms—are great and are too often hidden or unheeded. Research tells us that alcohol misuse is linked with crime, lower achievement, poor mental and physical health, family breakdown and poor employment prospects. Sadly, the age of 14—yes, 14—appears to be an alcohol milestone, with most teenagers having begun to drink by 15. Not surprisingly, the Executive is, therefore, concerned about the upward trend in the levels and frequency of drinking and smoking among 12 to 15-year-olds. We are giving a high priority to tackling this problem. We have set targets to achieve a reduction in those levels and we are taking action to improve the situation. Tougher enforcement of illegal under-age sales is another plank in our strategy. We are working closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Association of Chief Police Officers and trading standards representatives in Scotland to achieve that. We would encourage wider adoption of proof-of-age-card schemes, such as the one launched in South Ayrshire. At UK level, agreement has been reached with the National Association of Cigarette Machine Operators on a code for their members that would provide clear guidance on the siting arrangements that are expected. On alcohol, there are several measures in place to address young people's drinking. For example, many councils have introduced public bylaws to curb drinking by young people in public places. Powers are now available to the police to confiscate alcohol from under-18s in public places. Those measures are having a positive effect in reducing the incidence of  intimidating behaviour on street corners. Those sanctions are backed by the criminal law, but it is not our intention to make criminals of people—young or old—who drink in public places. We want to reduce or eliminate the nuisance element and petty crime associated with it. We want the streets to feel safer for the general public. The absence of threatening groups on street corners and in public parks goes a long way towards that goal. From a health policy point of view, if more young people are drinking less alcohol, the health risks associated with alcohol consumption will be substantially reduced. The Government has recently moved to introduce legislation to ban the sale to children of butane gas cigarette lighter refills. That blocks a potentially dangerous loophole and reinforces existing laws forbidding the sale of volatile substances to children. To complement those enforcement initiatives, we have set up the Scottish Advisory Committee on Alcohol Misuse to drive forward implementation of a new alcohol misuse strategy.  Much else is being done to reduce levels of smoking and drinking by children and young people. Local enforcement policies on illegal sales of alcohol, tobacco and other age-restricted products are particularly effective when backed by a simple and acceptable way for young people to prove their age. That more than anything removes doubts and arguments and gives retailers confidence in complying with the law. The Scottish Executive commends South Ayrshire Council for taking the initiative, and I for one would be pleased to see other councils follow its excellent example. I can assure Donald Gorrie that I will examine the ways in which the Executive can further promote such schemes. The more difficult it is for under-age users to access potentially dangerous products, the more the young people affected and Scottish society will ultimately benefit.

The distribution of expenditure from the  domestic abuse service development fund will be determined by the success of individual local authorities in bidding for grants. Full bidding guidance will be developed and circulated very shortly.

I advise Mr Paterson that the full package is £8 million. We are putting money specifically into the three Ps—prevention, protection and provision.

Working together is a key element in achieving better government. In the Executive, the  new ministerial committees handling cross-cutting issues are having a significant impact on key priorities. At a local level, community planning is an example of councils working in partnership with other agencies to develop a common vision and improve the lives of the people they serve. The Scottish Executive will be working closely with local government to develop guidance and support for councils across the country.

"Modernising Community Care" sets out ways in which local authorities, health boards, national health service trusts and Scottish Homes can work together more effectively on projects such as joint commissioning and pooling of resources. If organisational or administrative barriers such as those that Johann Lamont has described are present at a local level, health ministers will be interested in the details of the situation. I understand that the health ministers are meeting with local authorities tomorrow to discuss how to take forward that shared agenda.

The compact that the Parliament endorsed yesterday sets out a new way of working between the Executive and the voluntary sector and between other agencies and the voluntary sector. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is producing guidance on the matter, and I hope that the related discussions will take place at a local level.

I give the member that assurance and take his suggestion further. We also want to engage with the many voluntary organisations that work with women.

That initiative is still on-going. The five pathfinder councils shared their experience of community planning with other local authorities in March 1999, and we are in the process of asking other councils to submit their proposals to the Executive.

As I said in my original answer to Johann Lamont, "Modernising Community Care" is about looking at pooled budgets and joint commissioning. The health ministers will be taking that agenda forward.

The Scottish Executive places particular importance on its relationship with the voluntary sector. I know that this Parliament also values the voluntary sector, and acknowledges its significant contribution to Scottish society. In this debate, we have the opportunity to outline  our thinking in taking that relationship forward, recognising the central role that the voluntary sector has in policy development, service provision and community empowerment and, indeed, recognising the sector as an economic force in its own right. We need to put in place the foundations to realise our shared vision for Scotland and create a framework to sort out institutional relationships, enhance local capacity and establish a solid platform from which the sector can grow and flourish. Clearly, given the importance that we attach to the voluntary sector, and given that the public and voluntary sectors find their respective interests overlapping more and more frequently, there are benefits in setting out the principles that should underpin the relationship between the two sectors, when they choose to work together. We talk a lot about partnership, but we have to mean it. We have to understand each other's working methods, strengths and constraints. That means giving recognition to the third sector through a new relationship. The focus of this debate is on a new way of working with the voluntary sector. We aim to do that through the Scottish compact. As many of you will know, the Scottish compact was launched exactly a year ago by Sam Galbraith and enshrines the mutual commitments to partnership working on the part of central Government and the voluntary sector. The compact applies to all central Government departments and agencies. It was developed by a joint working group drawn from across the Scottish Office and the voluntary sector in Scotland, and was subject to wide consultation before it was published in October 1998. The compact is one of four: England, Wales and Northern Ireland each have one. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the voluntary sector are working on equivalent guidance for use at local level. Partnership can, of course, be based only on shared values. The compact is built on those shared values: a democratic society, the rights of individuals to associate freely in pursuit of a common purpose; active citizenship that recognises that the participation of individuals is a key mechanism in our drive for community empowerment; pluralism; and equality. We share the common commitment to quality of services; to collaboration to address people's often complex needs; and to sustainability, the ability to address today's needs without damaging the interests of future generations. The objectives of the compact are to encourage good practice and co-operative methods of decision making and to nurture the voluntary  sector infrastructure. We also want to encourage voluntary organisations and charities through co-operation and training; to encourage volunteering as an expression of active citizenship; and to recognise the specific needs and special contributions made by groupings within the sector, such as the black and ethnic minority voluntary sector, organisations for disabled people and voluntary groups in rural areas. The compact was also designed to ensure that we in government measure and recognise the things that really matter; that we co-ordinate the relationship with the sector across public bodies; and that we take carefully into account the impact of policy changes on the sector. The compact aims to deliver benefits by enabling the voluntary sector to have a voice in the development of public policy and by making Scottish Executive departments, agencies and non-departmental public bodies responsive to the needs, and the potential, of the sector. It achieves that by strengthening the dialogue between Government and the voluntary sector, providing channels of communication for its wider constituency. The compact will assist us in developing our strategic thinking and long-term vision; more important, if the sector is directly involved in the design of policy, we are more likely to get it right. The sector has been concerned that its independence should not be threatened by co-operation, collaboration and partnership with the Government. Let me make it absolutely clear that the Executive has never, and should never, seek to own the voluntary sector. That would run counter to our whole thinking about how society should work. All our policy themes—active citizenship, individual participation, volunteering, the giving age, active communities and community empowerment—depend on the freedom and independence of individuals and organisations. The compact defends the independence of the voluntary sector, and emphasises its value as both critic and policy advocate. Let us be crystal clear on this point. We support the sector's right and, indeed, responsibility to challenge Government when we get it wrong. I would expect nothing less. Of course, as it stands, the compact is simply a statement of principles. Those principles have to be put into practice. To flesh out the Government commitments to the voluntary sector contained in the compact, good practice guides for Scottish Executive departments and the agencies to which I referred previously are in the process of being drafted. They will provide guidance on such issues as funding, consultation, policy proofing, partnership working and cross-departmental working. As members will know, we have been taking  other measures in the Executive to assist our new relationship with the voluntary sector. Action to strengthen the role of the voluntary issues unit within the Executive has been long campaigned for by the sector under the leadership of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations. As the Parliament is aware, we have relocated that unit to within the Executive secretariat to work exclusively on voluntary sector issues and to champion a more strategic approach to funding and promoting the interests of the sector across the Executive. That signals the central place that the sector has in our thinking. This time last year, of course, it was not possible for Scottish Office ministers to make future commitments on behalf of the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive. However, it was hoped that the Executive and the Parliament would endorse the compact or draw on it to develop their own agreement with the voluntary sector. The Scottish Executive has endorsed the compact. My purpose in inviting Parliament to do likewise is to give fresh impetus to the relationship between central Government and the voluntary sector and to signal our commitment to working in partnership with it. This will send a signal of the importance that Parliament attaches to joint working, which lies at the heart of building the new Scotland. The compact must be only the beginning of a process, a starting point for the really hard work, when we must all learn to understand and accommodate each other's working practices. The compact will really succeed if it not only sorts out relationships between Government and the voluntary sector but helps to build stronger and better relationships at local level. We welcome the work that COSLA has been doing on voluntary sector policy statements and guidance on funding. Those will help to build the new partnerships at local level that we are so anxious to achieve, because it is at that level that the real benefits of our community empowerment approach will be delivered to people. That leads me on to the issue of infrastructure support at the local level. While the Scottish Executive already supports the voluntary sector infrastructure with core funding to national voluntary organisations, we also recognise that voluntary and community groups need continuing infrastructure support locally. For that reason, we already provide funding to infrastructure bodies in Scotland at the local level, but there are gaps. Arrangements are in place to ensure that every local authority area has a volunteering development agency by the end of March 2000, providing support for and encouragement of active citizenship. There are gaps in the network of councils for  voluntary service. We want to make sure that community activists in all parts of Scotland have a local CVS to turn to for support, so we have commissioned a review of the present CVS infrastructure. We aim to ensure that crucial services such as training, management support and help with funding applications are put in place. The steering group has representatives from the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and the Councils for Voluntary Service, Scotland, to ensure that we understand the issues. Our success will be measured by how well we reconcile the different needs of the sector, across urban and rural areas, within a more secure strategy that sets the standards for the years to come. The voluntary sector is changing and we all need to recognise the nature of that change and be willing to promote it. The review is in the fast track, and I have this week received the first part of the consultants report. The report by Eglinton Management Centre is tasked with addressing the role of the CVS in building community capacity, developing organisational measures to strengthen the network to support the role of the individual CVS in capacity building, and finding out whether the present structure of funding can be improved. The review will also develop qualitative performance measures, building on the work of CVS Scotland. Let me share with members some of the emerging conclusions. The interim consultants report has recognised the passion and commitment that is common across the CVS network, on which we want to build.

Sometimes I find it difficult to determine whether the member is a member of the Scottish Parliament or a councillor on Glasgow City Council. However, the compact sets out quite clearly the relationship that we want, not just from the Scottish Executive's point of view but from the viewpoint of local authorities and the wider community.

No, I intend to carry on. I was at  the point of sharing with members some of the emerging conclusions of the review. In fairness to the work of the CVS network, it is important that I put these comments on record. I said that the interim consultants report recognised the passion and commitment that is common across the CVS network. Its recommendations include the development of the role of the CVS, refocusing their activity to promote and support capacity building in the community. It also recommends reorganisation, where appropriate, along community planning boundaries on a federal or confederal basis; developing a shared funding approach that brings together the Scottish Executive and a range of key agencies; and the possibility of developing a wide-ranging training programme for staff and volunteer managers of the CVS and other agencies. The review made proposals that should enable the network to build the capacity of the sector and of the local community and to work with local social inclusion agencies to develop their agenda. A further report on performance management will be available at the end of November, and I have asked the consultants to do some further modelling on funding arrangements by the end of the year. These recommendations will be considered in detail, and I will bring back the conclusions to Parliament for discussion. Let me turn now to charity law, as it is of key importance to the voluntary sector and to charities that we get right the legal framework in which they operate. I will give members a little background. Charities that operate in Scotland are regulated under a number of pieces of statute that have been in operation for some time. The main provisions are in part I of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990. Public charitable collections are regulated under section 119 of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, and educational endowments are governed by the Education (Scotland) Act 1980. Aside from the plethora of acts, there is a need to assess the effectiveness of the present legislation. Members will be aware of the work of the charity law research unit at the University of Dundee, which has been researching and examining the effectiveness of the existing legislation. The research has been completed and the unit is close to providing the Scottish Executive with a final report. We are already aware of the key themes and likely recommendations of the Dundee research. We have also been in close touch with the voluntary sector. We feel confident that now is the time to start setting up the mechanisms to meet this partnership's commitment to the voluntary sector. Therefore, I am delighted to announce today the establishment of an independent commission to review and reform  charity law in Scotland. Although the Dundee research will be a key tool for the commission, its starting point was the existing legislation. We need to move forward. The voluntary sector and charities are changing. Their contribution to the social economy accounts for 5 per cent of gross domestic product and the sector employs 100,000 people. The commission will need to address that and other issues, such as setting the right level of accountability to the donating public without placing too heavy a burden on the charitable sector. Charities also require definitive advice and information and the commission will want to examine how best that might be done. In due course, I will make a further announcement to Parliament setting out the chair and membership of the commission, its detailed remit and the timetable for action. The Scottish Executive cares about the voluntary sector. The third sector is about empowering communities. That is our starting point. The sector is at the sharp end of the problems that exist in society today. Voluntary organisations work with the poor, to tackle the roots of exclusion and to empower communities to plan their own futures. Voluntary organisations frequently speak for those at the margins of society. The sector has values, which we as a Government also hold. Let us recognise the significant contribution that the voluntary sector makes to Scottish society and, today, let us set in place the foundations on which the sector can grow and flourish. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the significant role played by the voluntary sector in service delivery, its commitment to the social economy and its growing role in policy development and in strengthening communities, and in recognition of the commitment to the voluntary sector welcomes and endorses the Scottish Compact which has been developed in partnership with the sector, as this will provide the basis for a shared understanding of the relationship and responsibilities between the Scottish Executive and the voluntary sector to their mutual benefit and serve as a firm foundation on which to build for the future.

A wide range of information on poverty and social exclusion in Scotland is currently collected, some of which is on a specifically Scottish basis. Our targets for tackling poverty and on social inclusion in Scotland will be published soon.

Unfortunately, Mr Neil operates on muddled information. We will have distinct targets on devolved aspects of tackling poverty. However, we must be clear and not mislead people by setting distinct targets for areas of policy for which the Executive is not primarily responsible. This is too important an area to fudge. It will take Edinburgh and London working in partnership to ensure that, within a generation, no child will have to grow up in poverty.

I am delighted to move the motion on behalf of the Scottish Executive. I am especially pleased that once again the Parliament has an opportunity to debate a topic that is rightfully one of the top priorities of the Executive. Many members will recall the members' business debate secured by Maureen Macmillan on 2 September—indeed, such was the interest and commitment that a motion was passed to extend the debate for a further half hour. What struck me then—and I think that those who attended the debate will agree—was the enormous amount of cross-party support in our Parliament for the important work being developed by the partnership to improve the range and standards of provision in Scotland for women and children experiencing domestic abuse. In that same spirit of consensus, the Executive will accept the Opposition's amendment. The amendment outlines the exact work programme of the Scottish Partnership on Domestic Abuse, and we have no difficulty in supporting its sentiments. However, I want to make a plea that, when we talk about these issues, we move on from campaigning rhetoric to discuss the reality of the strategic action that the Parliament and the Executive are beholden to take. That aside, I am pleased to accept the amendment. All of us continue to be shocked at the extent of domestic abuse and at the real and disturbing effect that such violence has on children who are caught up in it. However, domestic abuse is not peculiar to Scotland, nor is it a modern-day phenomenon. Sadly, the problem has been rooted in society for centuries and has an international dimension. We have an opportunity—indeed, a responsibility—to create a climate in Scotland that will not tolerate violence, particularly domestic violence. Many years before coming into Parliament, I  worked in a voluntary capacity for women's groups and I was, and still am, a great supporter of organisations such as Women's Aid, Rape Crisis and the Zero Tolerance Trust. The services provided by some of those organisations are often an oasis in a desert of despair and hopelessness for many women seeking to escape. Today, I would like to extend my support and thanks to all those volunteers who do such a marvellous job. [Applause.]  We are all too well aware that many women's groups experience difficulties. Women's Aid, in particular, has expressed its concern that there is no consistency of approach and therefore no security on offer to allow it to plan for the future and to improve the quality of services and expand their range. Those matters have exercised the Executive's mind and I hope that today's announcement will both produce acceptable arrangements to improve the current position and provide tangible and necessary support to develop the work outlined by the Scottish Partnership on Domestic Abuse. On 27 September, I attended the most recent meeting of the Scottish Partnership on Domestic Abuse, at which the main topic of discussion was its draft work plan, which had been widely circulated for consultation. The final version was submitted to Scottish Executive ministers on 14 October. I am pleased to announce that the Scottish Executive has approved the work plan and has invited the partnership to proceed with the many tasks that the plan contains. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the partnership, chaired by Anne Smith QC, for the work that it has done so far. I was able to see at first hand the committed and professional way in which those involved go about their business, and I have full confidence that the next important phase of their work will be delivered with the same commitment and professionalism. During the debate on 2 September, Maureen Macmillan highlighted the plight of women in rural areas. It is clear that women in outlying islands and other remote areas face the greatest difficulty in gaining access to the services that are vital to their needs. We know that there are gaps in provision and that there are inconsistencies in the way in which such services operate. That is precisely why the work of the partnership is so important. With regard to service provision, the bases of statutory services are generally found at a range of locations throughout rural areas. Nevertheless, the very size of such areas means that many communities will be distant from outlying services, which makes access to emergency services extremely difficult for women who experience abuse.  Community issues such as lack of privacy and lack of confidentiality bring other problems. I am very concerned that in some of the remote and rural communities, there is often an acceptance and tolerance of domestic abuse, which frequently results in the isolation and marginalisation of those who attempt to address the problem. I am pleased that the partnership will specifically address the wide range of issues that affect women in rural as well as urban areas. I want to refer to the issue of prevention and education. Recent research carried out by the Zero Tolerance Trust suggests that one in two young men and one in three young women believe that it is acceptable to hit a woman or to force her to have sex in certain circumstances. Such ideas and beliefs, which underpin and legitimise violence against women and children, including domestic abuse, must be effectively challenged if we are to achieve a society in which relationships are based on equality and mutual respect, and a culture in which abuse is not tolerated. The long-term aim of public education and preventive work must be to eradicate domestic abuse from Scottish society. That aim will not be achieved overnight, but the Scottish Executive must and will pursue it. To support that important work, I am pleased to announce details of a funding package that the Scottish Executive believes will begin to improve local circumstances, particularly when service levels are not adequately meeting the needs of victims. Women taking the crucial—often brave—step of getting out of their ordeal must not be denied the comfort of the proper range of professional support services. Women need to have full confidence in those to whom they turn for help. If we fail them then, their hopelessness returns, often with even more dramatic effect, for it becomes far more difficult to attempt to escape for a second or third time. That plays into the hands of perpetrators, who can continue their serial abuse, safe in the knowledge that the system has failed the victims and their children. We must never forget that the victim never deserves what has happened to them and that it is never their fault. No one deserves to be abused and there is no excuse for domestic abuse. I know that there are pockets of excellent service provision. The local authorities that have made it a priority should be commended, but the position in Scotland is far too patchy, inconsistent, unco-ordinated and lacking in focus—we know that from the work of the partnership. We also know that there are particular problems in rural areas, with ethnic groups and with those who are disabled, and, of course, that the impact on  children is traumatic, distressing and often long-lasting. The funding package that I announce today aims to improve local circumstances significantly. First, we are setting up a domestic abuse service development fund, which will operate from April 2000. Additional resources of £3 million—new money—will be pumped into the fund over the next two years. Local authorities will be invited to apply for grants that will be directly linked to the work of the Scottish Partnership on Domestic Abuse. To access the fund, local authorities will be required to submit detailed proposals on how the funding will be used to improve service provision. Local authorities will be required to set out their plans to develop or improve multi-agency arrangements. In particular, we will want to know how they will interface with local voluntary agencies that are involved with women and children who experience domestic abuse. Importantly, applications will be partnership applications—local authorities will not submit applications in isolation and without the necessary consultation. They will be required to demonstrate their commitment to tackling domestic abuse, by match-funding the grants that they seek. Over the next two years, there will be £6 million to begin properly to address the dreadful plight of those in our communities who are suffering, often in isolation and silence. That is not all that I can present to the Parliament. I can announce new arrangements with Scottish Homes that will complement the measures flowing from the development fund. Those arrangements have a direct impact on women's refuges and move-on housing. In Scotland there is a shortage of places in refuges to which women who are suffering from domestic abuse and their children can go for security, help and assistance. In the early 1990s, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities estimated that there was a need for one refuge space for every 7,500 people. That indicates a need for more than 650 places in Scotland, whereas only approximately 360 refuge places are now available—that falls some way short. A survey of service provision to women experiencing domestic violence carried out in 1997 identified the limited availability of refuge spaces as one of the key constraints facing Women's Aid groups, so that emergency accommodation was not always available near to where the women seeking help lived. There is also a recognised need for more accommodation that allows women in refuges to move on to a house of their own and to start to rebuild their lives. I am determined that we should make progress  in that area, and I have asked Scottish Homes to allocate up to £2 million of its development programme over the next two years to fund capital projects to create additional refuge places—150 to 200 new bed spaces. That is a substantial increase in the investment made by Scottish Homes, reflecting the priority that we believe should be attached to meeting the need. Creating more refuge spaces and move-on accommodation is not just a question of bricks and mortar; I will be looking to local authorities in particular to provide help with funding the support staff who will be required. I expect Scottish Homes and local authorities not just to work closely together but to work with other interested parties such as Women's Aid groups and housing associations to develop projects that address priority needs. The increased funding from Scottish Homes, combined with some of the extra resources available from the development fund, should help to ensure that we make real progress towards addressing the shortage of accommodation in some areas for women and children escaping from domestic abuse. The package that I am announcing means that £8 million will be available over two years to improve local arrangements for assisting women and children who are victims of domestic abuse. What we have today is a good starting point on which we can build for the future. The Scottish Parliament must play a significant role in ensuring the best possible service for women and children experiencing domestic abuse. We will do that in partnership with local government, Scottish Homes and the voluntary sector. I am confident that it will be an effective and strong partnership to deliver our commitment. Today the Parliament sends out a strong message, from the Executive, from the members of Parliament and from the people assembled in the gallery, that we will not tolerate domestic abuse in the Scotland of tomorrow. I move, That the Parliament supports the final Workplan prepared by the Scottish Partnership on Domestic Abuse and welcomes the establishment by the Scottish Executive of a Domestic Abuse Service Development Fund to improve local arrangements for assisting women and children who are victims of domestic abuse.

Not being small-minded, and not lacking in grace, let me start by thanking Andrew Wilson for providing the Parliament with an opportunity to debate this important matter. I am sorry that some members are disappointed that neither Jim Wallace nor, indeed, Angus MacKay, is here before them. However, given Andrew's recent elevation to the ranks of Scotland's top 10 eligible bachelors, perhaps he will be excused from responding to debates in future.

That is a shame. Any disappointment should not lead members to question my commitment to this subject. I have not received a copy of the letter to which Andrew referred, but I will nevertheless endeavour to respond to the points that he raised. Before I do that, it might be helpful if I set out the background to the implementation of part V of the Police Act 1997. The current system of providing access to information on the criminal records of people working with children has long been acknowledged as inadequate. While arrangements are in place to cover those who work in the public sector, the absence of checks for volunteers has been of particular concern. At the same time, it is recognised that any major expansion of the existing arrangements would require significant additional public expenditure. Part V of the Police Act 1997 was designed to address some of the shortcomings of the current system and to expand considerably access to criminal record checks. The policy and legislation that we have inherited provide for those new checks to be self-financing, with those requesting the check paying a fee to cover the cost of producing it. However, this is a devolved matter; as such, it is appropriate for this Parliament to take a fresh look at the issue. That is the strength of the devolved settlement. I should say to Keith Raffan that I am not sure whether this is a partnership line rather than a Liberal line. Three levels of checks are available. First, criminal conviction certificates, which are available to everyone, will show any convictions that are unspent under the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974. Secondly, criminal record certificates are for those whose occupations are exceptions to the  Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, such as doctors and solicitors. Significantly, those certificates will show all convictions, whether spent or unspent. Last, enhanced criminal record certificates are primarily for those involved in regularly caring for, training, supervising or being in sole charge of children. The legislation provides for the individual to pay the fee for the certificates, but there is nothing to prevent organisations from reimbursing individuals where they consider that to be appropriate. The checks will not be mandatory, and in the case of voluntary bodies it will be for them to decide when a check is required. The Scottish Executive plans to draw up guidance on the use of the checks, but that guidance would be non-statutory and bodies would still have to develop their own policies for dealing with positions in their organisation. In Scotland, the Scottish Criminal Record Office is already well established as the vetting authority, and it will be expanded to deal with part V. On current estimates, the demand for checks could increase by as much as 10 times; a large project is under way to equip SCRO with the staff, machines and accommodation it will need. However, because it is very difficult to assess the likely demand for certificates, we plan to commission further research into that critical area. Demand will have a direct impact on the cost of issuing certificates. I stress that we strongly support the work of volunteers and would not want the cost of checks to discourage people from volunteering to work with young people and children. The services that volunteers provide in voluntary organisations covering a wide variety of areas—including the scouts, guides and caring organisations—enhance the lives of many people. At various stages, estimates of the costs have been made. When the legislation was being passed, the Administration of the day suggested that the cost of enhanced checks might be about £10. That figure has been used subsequently, and we have no basis at this stage to expect it to be any higher. In "Making it work together", we made strengthening the infrastructure of the voluntary sector and volunteering a priority. We are therefore concerned about the possibility that having to pay a fee for a criminal record check could put people off volunteering and that the cost of reimbursement could put pressure on voluntary organisations' resources. For that reason—as Jim Wallace announced earlier today in his reply to Keith Raffan—we have decided to set up a review group to consider all the charging issues in detail, examine the scope for flexibility and seek positive solutions for the future. Leading figures from key voluntary organisations will be invited to join the  review team, which I will chair. Last month, I made a strong statement to the Parliament about the voluntary sector. I emphasised that the Scottish Executive is committed to developing a new relationship with the sector. I pointed out that the sector is playing a key role in supporting a range of policies. I also said that I was strongly committed to supporting and developing volunteering as a vital example of active citizenship. I meant what I said. Next month, I will ask the Scottish Parliament to endorse the Scottish compact, which sets out the principles that underpin the new relationship of positive partnership with the sector. One of those key principles is that, in the process of policy making, the impact of changes in policy and procedure on the voluntary sector and volunteering are considered and taken fully into account. I think that that is precisely what we have done by establishing the review group. I am committed to working with the voluntary sector and volunteers on issues of mutual interest in a productive partnership which accurately reflects the needs of both parties. Those are not just fine words. Today's announcement of a review of charging makes it clear that the commitment is real. There are no easy answers. Charging for criminal record checks has been considered previously. Hard choices will need to be made about priorities. However, I am confident that by working together we will find a way froward. As the minister with responsibility for the volunteering sector and chair of the review group, I am determined to find a way forward and I will carefully consider what has been said today. The review has been welcomed by the sector. It is about partnership with the voluntary sector, which does not simply want money all the time. It wants to work towards a solution and does not want an uncosted, underdeveloped proposal. I reject the contention that Fiona McLeod made at the end of her otherwise useful speech, because I believe that the Executive does care. I must take this opportunity to stress the importance of considering criminal record checks in context. A clear criminal record check cannot be treated as a guarantee that a person is suitable to work with children. The certificates can form only part of a thorough vetting process. Nor should a conviction automatically mean that the person is unsuitable—Keith Raffan is right on that point. This sensitive information needs to be handled carefully and we are working with representatives of the organisations that will make use of the checks. We must use the legislation to improve the protection of vulnerable children—Cathy Jamieson  is right, and that is our primary concern—but we will do so in consultation and partnership with the voluntary sector, in the spirit of the compact.  Meeting closed at 18:03.

The Scottish Executive values the significant role that is played by the voluntary sector in tackling social exclusion. That is one reason why we provide £283 million of support to the voluntary sector each year. As part of the Scottish compact, we are proposing good practice guidance on three-year grants and funding core costs to improve stability.

It is for social inclusion partnerships, which include representatives of local government, the voluntary sector and the community, to determine on-going needs. In an ideal situation, we would support continuity of funding. However, we also need to reflect local needs and circumstances, and social inclusion partnerships are the best way to do so.

I would like to make an intervention that I hope will be helpful and give Mr  Gallie some reassurance. The compact starts by guaranteeing the independence of the voluntary sector, and the compact will be in place only when both sectors choose to work together.

Will the member give way?

I have two questions, as Mr Quinan refused me the opportunity to ask a question earlier. First, the compact is endorsed by  the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, Volunteer Development Scotland and the Council of Voluntary Service Scotland, which represent the main infrastructure bodies of Scotland. Should we not trust them to guard the sector's independence and interests? I regret that he attacks a fundamental document, which has been jointly agreed. Secondly, will Mr Quinan comment on why the returns to the Scottish Executive of Angus Council, which is an SNP-controlled local authority, show £2.5 million of support to the voluntary sector in 1996-97, but £54,000 in 1997-98?

And the SNP's priorities.

Indeed, I do not.

In my speech, I want to draw attention to the importance of the voluntary sector in Scotland today, to highlight some important measures that we have already put in place to help strengthen its role and to outline where we intend to go from here. The voluntary sector has a long and proud tradition in Scotland. More than 50 per cent of the adult population has had some involvement in volunteering, and 25 per cent of the population volunteers on a regular basis. That is a powerful indicator of the Scottish people's commitment to helping others in their communities. There are more than 44,000 voluntary organisations, 27,000 of which are registered as charities. The sector has an annual income of more than £1.8 billion a year, which represents 3 per cent of Scotland's gross domestic product. It provides 100,000 jobs—4.5 per cent of the total number of jobs in Scotland. However, the spread across Scotland is not even, and we are examining that. Rural areas have the highest number of voluntary organisations per head of population, whereas the older industrial areas have the lowest. The role of voluntary groups and volunteers has enormous potential to help us to achieve our shared goals of promoting community development and active citizenship. Our challenge is to build on that foundation. I want to say a little about the policy context in which we are working. Our programme for government, "Making it work together", recognises the key role that the voluntary sector plays in tackling poverty and in regenerating communities. However, the sector's importance goes far wider than that. With their diversity and strong base in disadvantaged communities, voluntary organisations are well placed to support a whole range of polices aimed at improving the lives and opportunities of ordinary people in Scotland. Two principal policy aims will drive our agenda. First, recognising and acknowledging the role of the sector in the implementation of policy objectives, the Scottish Executive will develop a productive relationship that accurately reflects the  needs of both parties. Secondly, strategic decisions on support for the sector will focus on the fact that volunteering and the voluntary sector are at the heart of community development—one of our key emerging priorities. The specific objectives that flow from those aims are to strengthen the infrastructure of the voluntary sector and of volunteering as a priority, and to develop the existing role of the voluntary sector across a wide range of the Executive's policy areas, including community care, child care services, housing, employment, criminal justice, rural policy and health. We will also maximise the part that the voluntary sector plays in our social inclusion and regeneration policies. We have already taken specific steps to support our commitment to the voluntary sector. First, we have committed ourselves to promoting a new way of working. There are already close links between Government and the voluntary sector, but we mean to build them into a close working partnership between the two sectors for the future. The foundations have already been laid with the Scottish compact, which was launched in October 1998. The Scottish Executive wants to give that a fresh impetus; later in the autumn, we will ask the Parliament to endorse the compact so that we can send out a clear signal of its commitment to work in partnership with the voluntary sector. Secondly, within Government we are giving a much clearer direction to our work with the voluntary sector. We have made important changes in the way in which the Scottish Executive is structured. The voluntary issues unit will in future have a far more strategic role. It has been located in the centre of the Administration, where it is well placed to reach right across the Executive. It will work to raise the profile of voluntary issues in discussions about Scottish policy. That is what the voluntary sector has campaigned for, and that is what we have delivered. The Executive has acknowledged the crucial role that the sector can play in both the development of policy and the delivery of responsive services. Thirdly, we mean to create a stable infrastructure to support voluntary and community action at all levels. The Government has committed £1 million to support the infrastructure for volunteering and we are creating a network of local volunteering development agencies. More than 92 per cent of the population of Scotland already has access to a local volunteering development agency and we have provided the funds to create an agency in each local authority area by March 2000. We are also addressing the problems of the uneven spread of the voluntary sector across Scotland, which I mentioned. Last month, we  announced a review of councils for voluntary service. That review will consider how the network might contribute to building the voluntary capacity throughout Scotland in relation to the priorities that I outlined. I know that funding is a continuing concern for many voluntary groups. The Scottish Executive provides a substantial amount—more than £283 million—to national voluntary organisations and to the infrastructure bodies that support local groups. In that way, the Government complements the work being done at community level by local authorities. The Executive recognises the need not only to provide the resources but to have a funding strategy in place that promotes future stability. It is for that reason that we intend to work with the voluntary sector to prepare a code of good practice on funding. That will form the basis of a more strategic and co-ordinated approach within the Executive.

I can assure the member that we will be working closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to deliver that. A number of councils lead the way in good practice. The Executive will also work with other major funders, such as local councils and the National Lottery Charities Board, to provide a more stable funding framework. We are committed to undertaking a comprehensive review of charity law to reform existing legislation and create a framework that is fit for the 21 st century. We have a number of key strands already in place to support our commitment to the sector. In addition, I have recently made announcements aimed at boosting two new programmes for the voluntary sector. The first is called the giving age. In Scotland, the initiative is being taken forward by the Scottish giving age working group which is preparing a strategy that will be published next year. The strategy will have community empowerment as both its underlying philosophy and its ultimate aim. I have announced more than £250,000 of new money to support that initiative. The second new programme is millennium volunteers, which sets out to encourage young people aged between 16 and 25 to develop their personal skills in a way that will result in lasting benefit to their communities. I was pleased to announce more than £400,000 of grants for new  millennium volunteer projects earlier this month. I said that we wanted the voluntary sector to have a central role in our policies for community action and active citizenship. Both those new programmes promote that aim. I believe that, in Scotland, policy makers are at last recognising the key role that communities can and should play in shaping the delivery of their services and in building community capacity to determine and tackle local priorities. Many policies have adopted a much clearer focus on communities. They include: social inclusion partnerships; the national strategy of tenant participation; communities that care; initiatives at the edge; and the "Improving Health" white paper. The list is endless and all the policies have active communities at their core. The initiatives demonstrate the potential of the voluntary sector and volunteering in its widest sense to boost efforts to put active citizenship at the centre of policy development. In considering the role of the voluntary sector, we too often assume that its contribution is limited to the sphere of social policy. The evidence is growing that the sector makes a significant impact in the economic field, too. I have already referred to the 100,000 jobs that the third sector provides, but I have not yet said that the sector enjoys the fastest job growth of any sector in the European economy. Work done in the Highlands and Islands suggests that the social economy accounts for an annual income of more than £200 million. That represents a significant contribution to sustaining the economic life of those rural communities. A 1997 study into employment in lowland Scotland found that total paid employment in the sector was roughly equal to that in the Scottish electronics industry, one of our main growth sectors. There are more social economy jobs in Drumchapel than there is employment provided by the Great Western retail park. When we look at the future potential of the voluntary sector, it is crucial that we recognise and support the role that it increasingly plays in the social economy as a direct contributor to our economic prosperity. The Scottish Executive has made it clear that it values the role of the voluntary sector. We will bring forward the compact to promote partnership working, give a commitment to a fairer funding framework and guarantee the sector's independence to speak out. We will build a stronger infrastructure and involve it directly in policy making. In the past, the relationship between Government and the sector has often been unequal but, with these initiatives, we are redefining that relationship. The Scottish Executive is firmly committed to working in partnership with the voluntary sector. I  look forward to working with the Parliament and with the Social Inclusion, Housing and the Voluntary Sector Committee to promote policies designed to help voluntary organisations flourish in Scotland in the 21 st century. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's recognition of the important role of the voluntary sector in Scottish society through the contribution it makes to economic prosperity, promoting social inclusion and encouraging active citizenship; endorses the Executive's commitment to create a stable infrastructure in which the voluntary sector can flourish, and welcomes the firm intention to work in partnership with the sector in delivering the Programme for Government.

Schemes are currently administered by local authorities. We shall consider appropriate ways to encourage their improvement and integration for pensioners and people with special needs.

The Executive is keen to make progress in such matters and is giving active consideration to establishing, with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, a joint working group to examine ways in which we can harmonise the schemes.

This debate has highlighted the problems  of homelessness in Scotland, from homelessness that we do not see—families sharing houses, friends sleeping on floors—to the most obvious and extreme example of people sleeping in doorways and parks in the cold and the wet, as Lloyd Quinan has described. If this Government is successfully to address the problems of those who are excluded from society, it must address the most extreme form of exclusion, which is exclusion from a home. I recognise Tricia Marwick's deep personal commitment to this issue. I assure her that we recognise that homelessness is much more than rough sleeping. Homelessness is a top priority for this Government. We have set ourselves a tough target: to ensure that, by the end of this parliamentary session, no one has to sleep rough. However, we believe that that is achievable and we are taking action to ensure that it is achieved. That is why we have earmarked £30 million to fund this initiative, and why Wendy Alexander announced yesterday an additional £6 million over the next two years. I welcome the broad support from the SNP for that measure. We are focusing resources on the problems of this most socially excluded group. We are ensuring that all those who are involved with the homeless target their resources in a co-ordinated way and use them to best effect. Rough sleeping is at one end of the spectrum of homelessness. We have set up the homelessness task force to take a comprehensive look at the problem. The task force represents a wide range of experience of tackling the causes and the effects of homelessness. It is important that we not only understand the problems and identify practical measures to address them, but listen to homeless people, as, frankly, they are the real experts. The task force will consider the causes of homelessness, examine current practice and make recommendations for action. We made it abundantly clear that setting up a homelessness task force is not an excuse for inaction. The Government is determined not only to tackle the problem of homelessness, but to do so in a way that is practical, sustainable and, above all, deliverable. It is essential to have input if we are to identify solutions that work and will continue to work. As a number of speakers have said, it will be important to take local authorities with us in all that we do, because local authorities are best placed to address the problem at a community level. A number of local authorities are putting in place strategies to achieve local co-ordination of social work services, housing, and education policy, as well as effective liaison with health services and  close collaboration with the voluntary sector. In our broader homelessness strategies, we are drawing on the lessons that have been learned from rough sleeping initiatives. It has been made abundantly clear that we are considering legislative change. Much of the legislation that we have is 20 years old. A number of organisations have already made proposals to the task force for changes. I reiterate my welcome for the SNP's broad support for the Executive on this issue, but I believe that, in its amendment, it has got a number of things wrong. The Government is committed to publishing a draft bill and is committed to bringing forward housing legislation. I say to Fiona Hyslop that it would be foolish to rush to publish a draft bill by the end of the year, as the substance of such a bill is too important to get wrong through insufficient preparation. Let us make sure that we get this right. Homelessness cannot simply be solved by passing legislation. We can ensure that the legislative framework gives homelessness the priority and urgency that it merits, but, please, let us not do so in a piecemeal way; let us tackle this problem comprehensively. In its response to the green paper, Shelter said that it wanted "an initial six month period identifying and acting on urgent issues, and then a longer phase of up to two years setting out a rolling programme of legislation". The work of the homelessness task force and the announcement by Wendy Alexander will do just that. I have been told to wind up, so I will use my time effectively. I agree with the Conservatives that the statistics are damning, but those statistics were the result of Conservative policy, as they relate to the period in which the Conservative party was in office. Too much of Scotland had the wrong houses, of the wrong quality and in the wrong places. There were high levels of unemployment and high levels of family breakdown. I am confident that our actions will reduce the incidence of homelessness. However, we are not complacent. In conclusion, our commitment to the prevention of homelessness is absolute. We will assist the member's bill to help people facing house repossession. We have provided additional funding to tackle the root causes of homelessness. Much remains to be done, but there is no doubt that our pledge that no one will need to sleep rough in Scotland by the end of the parliamentary session is a challenging one. We mean to deliver: for the vendors of The Big Issue , whom I have met, for the Edinburgh Cyrenians and for all the homeless people of Scotland.

Refuge spaces for women and their children fleeing domestic violence are provided by local Women's Aid refuges, which are funded by local authorities.

As the person who replied to that debate, I can assure Ms Hyslop that the Scottish partnership on domestic violence, which is currently charged with devising a work plan and a long-term strategy, will report on the consistency and quality of provision across Scotland.

I join others in congratulating Maureen Macmillan on securing today's end-of-business debate and for raising such an important topic early in the life of the Scottish Parliament. I am disappointed, however, that the usually packed press galleries are virtually empty-not least because of the quality of the debate, but considering the seriousness and importance of the issue that is being debated.  All of us continue to be shocked at the extent of domestic abuse and the real and disturbing effect that it has on children who are caught up in such violence, as Cathy has vividly described. Domestic abuse is not peculiar to Scotland, nor is it a modern-day phenomenon. Sadly, the problem has been rooted in society for centuries and has an international dimension. We have an opportunity-a responsibility-to create a climate in Scotland that will not tolerate violence, particularly within the family circle.  I am grateful to Maureen for bringing to the attention of Parliament the existence of the Scottish Partnership on Domestic Violence and the draft work plan that it has prepared. The need for a multi-agency approach to domestic abuse was recognised in several recent reports, which is  why the Scottish Office adopted that approach in bringing together the key agencies nationally and establishing the partnership. We have a core group of policy advisers in the Scottish Executive that is working alongside experts in the provision of services to victims. That group includes the police, the judiciary, the prison service, the health service, local authorities and victims organisations. The partnership is chaired by Anne Smith QC, and includes representatives from Scottish Women's Aid, Scottish Rape Crisis and Victim Support Scotland.  I assure members that the Scottish Executive gives its full support to the work of the partnership, and believes that it will provide us with a model for making a significant impact on service provision to victims of domestic abuse. That model will allow us to deal better with the effect, but we must not lose sight of the need to do more to tackle the cause. Only then can we begin to turn round the situation and make Scotland a safer place for women.  The remit of the partnership should put us on that course. It has been asked specifically to develop an action plan that is firmly located in the Government's overall strategy on violence against women. It will, for example, recommend minimum levels of service for women who are experiencing domestic abuse, to provide a consistent delivery of service throughout Scotland. Particular regard will be given to the needs of women from rural areas-a point that was strongly made by Maureen Macmillan-as well as those from ethnic minorities and the disabled. It will also take into account the impact of domestic abuse on children and young people. Importantly, it will consider effective strategies to prevent male violence against female partners and their children. I am sure that all members will agree that that is a challenging and ambitious, but worthwhile, piece of work.  The partnership has submitted its work plan to Scottish ministers, which sets out the time scale for the discharge of its remit. Since then, the work plan has been issued as a consultation document. Responses are being analysed and will be considered by the partnership when it meets next on 27 September. I shall attend that meeting and I look forward to seeing the partnership in action. We anticipate that a revised work plan will be published towards the end of October.  The Scottish Executive is supporting the work of the partnership with a domestic abuse advertising campaign that will extend over a three-year period. The campaign began last Christmas, with a television advertisement that showed how domestic abuse can start insidiously with verbal abuse. It also showed the distressing effect that such abuse has on children. That has been  backed up with advertising on local and community radio as well as with press advertising.  I turn briefly to Malcolm's point. We recognise the value of Zero Tolerance Trust public awareness campaign. Members of that organisation have been invited to meet me tomorrow to discuss their forward work plan.  I now address the experience of women in rural areas, which was highlighted by Maureen Macmillan. It is clear that women in outlying islands and other remote areas face the greatest difficulty in gaining access to the services that are vital to their needs. I am aware that there is no Women's Aid provision in Orkney, and that therefore no refuge is available, although I am delighted that the council is making positive efforts. The nearest provision of such services requires victims to travel to Dingwall or Inverness. The picture is the same on Shetland and the Western Isles, specialist services being available only on the mainland.  We know there are gaps in provision and we also know there are inconsistencies in the way such services operate. That is why the work of the partnership is so important. In terms of service provision, the bases of statutory services are generally found at a range of locations throughout rural areas. Nevertheless, the very size of such areas means that many communities will be distant from outlying services. This makes access to emergency services very difficult for women experiencing abuse.  I know that in many rural areas few local services are provided and transport is clearly a major factor with low levels of service, high costs and lengthy journeys. Community issues such as lack of privacy and lack of confidentiality bring other difficulties. I am very concerned that in some of the remote and rural communities there is often an acceptance and tolerance of domestic abuse, often resulting in isolation and marginalisation of those attempting to address it.  I am pleased that the partnership will specifically address the very wide range of issues affecting women in rural as well as urban areas. I expect the recommendations they submit for consideration by Scottish ministers will be wide-ranging but practical. I am absolutely clear in my mind that it is incumbent on all of us-local authorities, the health service, voluntary organisations and the Scottish Executive-to get far better co-ordination and a level of provision that is consistent with the needs of the victims of domestic abuse.  The services provided by Women's Aid and other organisations are often an oasis in a desert of despair and hopelessness for many women seeking to escape. I echo the points made by  Maureen Macmillan and extend my support and thanks to those volunteers-and I know Maureen is one of them-who do such a marvellous job.  I share the concerns expressed by a number of members about funding and I am well aware that many women's groups experience difficulties. Women's Aid in particular have expressed their concern that there is no consistency of approach and therefore no security on offer to allow them to plan for the future and improve the quality of and expand the range of services they provide. Those are matters that will also be considered by the partnership, but I assure you that they also exercise my mind and I hope we can devise an acceptable arrangement to improve the current position.  The partnership is charged with devising a national strategy, and the issue of funding is implicit in that. However, it is worth pointing out that last year funding amounting to almost £370,000. A grant of £30,000 was also made to Victim Support Scotland to provide, in association with Women's Aid, a telephone counselling and advice service for those using the freephone helpline facility set up to support the domestic abuse advertising campaign.  In addition, Scottish Homes gave grant funding of £136,000 to three projects for households that had suffered domestic violence. That provided 20 units of 39 bed spaces, a long way short of what is needed, and I agree that is essential that those services and refuge spaces are there.  I welcome the opportunity provided by Maureen to demonstrate the level of priority and seriousness given by the Scottish Executive to the battle to eradicate violence against women. I am pleased to record publicly my gratitude to the members of the partnership for their efforts to date, and particularly my gratitude for the services provided by Women's Aid and other voluntary and statutory organisations in dealing with the victims of abuse. There is still much to do before Scotland can begin to have a feeling of pride in the way it has tackled domestic abuse. We have embarked on a challenging and ambitious future. I want this Parliament to make a difference.   Meeting closed at 17:59.

As announced on 29 June, the development of targets for social inclusion is being progressed by the ministerial task force on poverty and inclusion led by Wendy Alexander.

As ever, Mr Neil poses an interesting question.  The targets are currently being developed and, as Mr Neil will appreciate, there is no single definition of poverty. It is partly to do with low income, but includes wider issues such as lack of access to work, poor health, poor education and so on. We will develop a comprehensive set of targets that are appropriate for Scotland.

A new equality unit is being set up within the Scottish Executive. Its remit will include promotion of a greater awareness of the needs of people with disabilities in service planning and delivery.

I entirely agree with Karen Whitefield's earlier sentiments. In general terms, the regulations provided for by the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 to improve access to public service vehicles are being worked up. Specifically, we would all accept that shop mobility schemes can be an important help to the disabled. It is primarily for local authorities to develop those schemes at a local level, and I encourage them to do so with disability groups and with existing community transport schemes.

To help meet the needs of people with disabilities, we will encourage the development of local housing strategies that give priority to the provision of suitable housing adaptations. Views on how best that can be done have been sought in the housing green paper.

We are keen to make appropriate provision for all disabled people-including people with learning disabilities-in local housing strategies. Views on the matter have been sought in the housing green paper, and we will continue to keep it under consideration.

As Ms Hyslop will know, in the absence of a housing bill we can deal with certain issues without legislation, as it is not necessarily required.

The new warm deal will be introduced on 1 July. Householders in receipt of benefits, including disability benefits, will be eligible for a grant of up to £500 for home insulation. The annual budget will be £12 million. That is twice the amount that was spent in 1997.

The warm deal will benefit 25,000 people on low incomes. We are keen to  ensure that its benefits are widely received.

I support the motion in the name of Dr Sylvia Jackson. I shall  declare my interest at the outset, as other members have been inclined to do. I am the directly elected member of the Dumbarton constituency, which covers the eastern part of the proposed national park for Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. It is undoubtedly an area of outstanding natural beauty, enjoyed by people from across Scotland and from across the world.  Until the park authority is established as a legal entity, the interim committee is considering four key aims: to safeguard the cultural and natural heritage of the area; to promote the sustainable use of natural resources; to promote the social and economic well-being of local communities; and to provide for public enjoyment and understanding. I will focus briefly on the potential for economic development.  The constituents of Dumbarton and I are clear about the need for sustainable development. We must balance the need to protect the environment with the need to create employment opportunities. There is no doubt that that will be an extremely sensitive issue, but it is clear that where we can, and where it is appropriate, we should develop job opportunities.  Tourism continues to be important to the Scottish economy, contributing approximately £2.6 billion per annum and supporting 178,000 jobs. The potential to create tourism-related employment in the context of the national park is evident. We should encourage local agencies to work together to maximise the opportunities, and above all to connect people who are unemployed with those opportunities. That will provide added value to our efforts. Equally, there will be development potential in the supply chain, education services, park ranger services and general recreation, all of which should be exploited.  At the same time, we must ensure that our heritage and environment are protected. I believe that the national park authority for Loch Lomond and the Trossachs is the mechanism to promote sustainable development and to protect the environment. I therefore support the motion calling for the establishment of a national park for Loch Lomond and the Trossachs, and commend it to the Parliament.